Arrian

ἀπονώτατά τε καὶ μαλακώτατα τῆς Ἀσίας γένη
ἀντιτάξεσθαι· ἐπὶ δὲ Ἀλέξανδρον ἀντιστρατηγεῖν
6Δαρείῳ. ταῦτα μὲν οὖν ἐς πλεονεξίαν τοῦ ἀγῶνος
ἐπεξῄει. τὰ δὲ ἆθλα ὅτι μεγάλα ἔσται σφίσι τοῦ
κινδύνου ἐπεδείκνυεν. οὐ γὰρ τοὺς σατράπας τοὺς
Δαρείου ἐν τῷ τότε κρατήσειν, οὐδὲ τὴν ἵππον τὴν
ἐπὶ Γρανίκῳ ταχθεῖσαν, οὐδὲ τοὺς δισμυρίους
ξένους τοὺς μισθοφόρους, ἀλλὰ Περσῶν τε ὅ τι περ
ὄφελος καὶ Μήδων καὶ ὅσα ἄλλα ἔθνη Πέρσαις καὶ
Μήδοις ὑπήκοα ἐποικεῖ τὴν Ἀσίαν καὶ αὐτὸν μέγαν
βασιλέα παρόντα, καὶ ὡς οὐδὲν ὑπολειφθήσεταί
σφισιν ἐπὶ τῷδε τῷ ἀγῶνι ὅτι μὴ κρατεῖν τῆς
Ἀσίας ξυμπάσης καὶ πέρας τοῖς πολλοῖς πόνοις
7ἐπιθεῖναι. ἐπὶ τούτοις δὲ τῶν τε ἐς τὸ κοινὸν ξὺν
λαμπρότητι ἤδη πεπραγμένων ὑπεμίμνησκεν καὶ εἰ
δή τῳ ἰδίᾳ τι διαπρεπὲς ἐς κάλλος τετολμημένον,
ὀνομαστὶ ἕκαστον ἐπὶ τῷ ἔργῳ ἀνακαλῶν. καὶ τὸ
αὑτοῦ οὐκ ἀκίνδυνον ἐν ταῖς μάχαις ὡς ἀνεπαχθέστατα
8ἐπεξῄει. λέγεται δὲ καὶ Ξενοφῶντος καὶ
τῶν ἅμα Ξενοφῶντι μυρίων ἐς μνήμην ἐλθεῖν, ὡς
οὐδέν τι οὔτε κατὰ πλῆθος οὔτε κατὰ τὴν ἄλλην
ἀξίωσιν σφίσιν ἐπεοικότες, οὐδὲ ἱππέων αὐτοῖς
παρόντων Θεσσαλῶν, οὐδὲ Βοιωτῶν ἢ Πελοποννησίων,
οὐδὲ Μακεδόνων ἢ Θρᾳκῶν, οὐδὲ ὅση ἄλλη
σφίσιν ἵππος ξυντέτακται, οὐδὲ τοξοτῶν ἢ σφενδονητῶν,
ὅτι μὴ Κρητῶν ἢ Ῥοδίων ὀλίγων, καὶ
τούτων ἐν τῷ κινδύνῳ ὑπὸ Ξενοφῶντος αὐτοσχεδιασθέντων,
9οἱ δὲ βασιλέα τε ξὺν πάσῃ τῇ δυνάμει
πρὸς Βαβυλῶνι αὐτῇ ἐτρέψαντο καὶ ἔθνη ὅσα
κατιόντων ἐς τὸν Εὔξεινον πόντον καθ᾿ ὁδόν σφισιν
ἐπεγένετο νικῶντες ἐπῆλθον· ὅσα τε ἄλλα ἐν τῷ
τοιῷδε πρὸ τῶν κινδύνων ἐς παράκλησιν ἀνδράσιν
146Anabasis of Alexander II

will be ranged against the most indolent and softest 333 b.c. tribes of Asia. In addition you have Alexander commanding against Darius.’ Besides rehearsing6 these advantages they had in the contest, he pointed out the greatness of the rewards for which they were incurring danger. It was not Darius’ satraps whom they were now to overcome, nor the cavalry that lined the Granicus, nor the twenty thousand foreign mercenaries, but the flower of Medes and Persians and all their subject nations living in Asia; the Great King was there himself; nothing remained after this final struggle but to rule the whole of Asia and set an end to their long exertions. In7 addition, he reminded them of all they had already achieved with brilliant success for the common cause, and cited any noble act of personal daring, naming both the deed and the man; with the utmost delicacy he mentioned the dangers he himself had faced in battles. He is also said to have recalled48 that Xenophon and his Ten Thousand, though [401–400 b.c. they were not to be compared to themselves in number and other qualities, with no cavalry, Thessalian, Boeotian, Peloponnesian, Macedonian or Thracian, nor such other horse as they now had in their own ranks, no archers or slingers, save a few Cretans and Rhodians, and those hastily scraped together by Xenophon in the crisis. Yet the Ten Thousand9 routed the Great King with his whole power near Babylon itself, and victoriously attacked the various other tribes which barred their way as they descended to the Black Sea. He also told them of anything else which at such a time, before dangers, a brave general

4‘Vulgate’. Not necessarily false; Al. is likely to have read Xenophon. A’s source here in sections 8 f., as in 3–7, is apparently not that followed by QC, cf. 10, 2 n.147