Arrian

κατὰ πόλεμον εἰ δή τις διευτυχοίη ἔτι μᾶλλον ἢ
Ἀλέξανδρος, οὐδὲ εἰ τὴν Λιβύην τις πρὸς τῇ
Ἀσίᾳ, καθάπερ οὖν ἐπενόει ἐκεῖνος, ἐκπεριπλεύσας
κατάσχοι, οὐδὲ εἰ τὴν Εὐρώπην ἐπὶ τῇ Ἀσίᾳ τε καὶ
Λιβύῃ τρίτην, τούτων πάντων οὐδέν τι ὄφελος ἐς
εὐδαιμονίαν ἀνθρώπου, εἰ μὴ σωφρονεῖν ἐν ταὐτῷ
ὑπάρχοι τούτῳ τῷ ἀνθρώπῳ τῷ τὰ μεγάλα, ὡς
δοκεῖ, πράγματα πράξαντι.
8. Ἔνθα δὴ καὶ τὸ Κλείτου τοῦ Δρωπίδου
πάθημα καὶ τὴν Ἀλεξάνδρου ἐπ᾿ αὐτῷ ξυμφοράν,
εἰ καὶ ὀλίγον ὕστερον ἐπράχθη, οὐκ ἔξω τοῦ καιροῦ
ἀφηγήσομαι. εἶναι μὲν γὰρ ἡμέραν ἱερὰν τοῦ
Διονύσου Μακεδόσι καὶ θύειν Διονύσῳ ὅσα ἔτη ἐν
2αὐτῇ Ἀλέξανδρον· τὸν δὲ τοῦ Διονύσου μὲν ἐν τῷ
τότε ἀμελῆσαι λέγουσι, Διοσκούροιν δὲ θῦσαι, ἐξ
ὅτου δὴ ἐπιφρασθέντα τοῖν Διοσκούροιν τὴν θυσίαν·
πόρρω δὲ τοῦ πότου προϊόντος (καὶ γὰρ καὶ τὰ τῶν
πότων ἤδη Ἀλεξάνδρῳ ἐς τὸ βαρβαρικώτερον
νενεωτέριστο) ἀλλ᾿ ἔν γε τῷ πότῳ τότε ὑπὲρ τοῖν
Διοσκούροιν λόγους γίγνεσθαι, ὅπως ἐς Δία
ἀνηνέχθη αὐτοῖν ἡ γένεσις ἀφαιρεθεῖσα Τυνδάρεω.
3καί τινας τῶν παρόντων κολακείᾳ τῇ Ἀλεξάνδρου,
οἷοι δὴ ἄνδρες διέφθειράν τε ἀεὶ καὶ οὔποτε
παύσονται ἐπιτρίβοντες τὰ τῶν ἀεὶ βασιλέων
πράγματα, κατ᾿ οὐδὲν ἀξιοῦν συμβάλλειν Ἀλεξάνδρῳ
τε καὶ τοῖς Ἀλεξάνδρου ἔργοις τὸν Πολυδεύκην
καὶ τὸν Κάστορα. οἱ δὲ οὐδὲ τοῦ Ἡρακλέους
ἀπείχοντο ἐν τῷ πότῳ· ἀλλὰ τὸν φθόνον γὰρ
ἐμποδὼν ἵστασθαι τοῖς ζῶσι τὸ μὴ οὐ τὰς δικαίας
τιμὰς αὐτοῖς ἐκ τῶν ξυνόντων γίγνεσθαι.
362Anabasis Of Alexander IV

continuous good fortune in war, greater even than329–8 b.c. Alexander’s—no matter if a man were to sail out right round Libya as well as Asia and subdue them, as Alexander actually thought of doing, or were to make Europe, with Asia and Libya, a third part of his empire—that not one of all these things is any contribution to man’s happiness, unless the man whose achievements are apparently so great were to possess at the same time command of his own passions.
8. At this point it will be the moment for me to relate the tragedy of Clitus son of Dropides and the suffering it caused to Alexander, even though it actually occurred later.1 The story goes as follows. The Macedonians kept a day sacred to Dionysus and328 b.c. Alexander sacrificed to him yearly on that day; only2 on this particular occasion he neglected Dionysus but sacrificed to the Dioscuri; some reason had made him think of sacrificing to them. The drinking was prolonged (and, in fact, Alexander had already taken to new and more barbaric ways in drinking), and in the course of the drinking-bout talk occurred about the Dioscuri and how Tyndareus was robbed of their fatherhood which was now referred to Zeus. Some of3 the company (that type of men who have always and will always continue to injure the interests of kings)2 out of flattery to Alexander claimed that there was no comparison between Castor and Pollux and Alexander and Alexander’s achievements. In the bout others did not even leave Heracles untouched; it was only envy, they said, which stood in the way of living men and kept them from receiving their due honours from their fellows.
1Chronologically this comes after 16, 3.2Cf. ii 6, 4 and 6; vii 12, 5; 29, 1.363