Arrian

τοῖς ἔξω πολεμίοις προσφέροιντο. Ἀλέξανδρος δέ
—ἔτι γὰρ τοῖς Θηβαίοις διὰ φιλίας ἐλθεῖν μᾶλλόν τι
ἢ διὰ κινδύνου ἤθελε—διέτριβε πρὸς τῇ Καδμείᾳ
11κατεστρατοπεδευκώς. ἔνθα δὴ τῶν Θηβαίων οἱ
μὲν τὰ βέλτιστα ἐς τὸ κοινὸν γιγνώσκοντες ἐξελθεῖν
ὥρμηντο παρ᾿ Ἀλέξανδρον καὶ εὑρέσθαι συγγνώμην
τῷ πλήθει τῶν Θηβαίων τῆς ἀποστάσεως·
οἱ φυγάδες δὲ καὶ ὅσοι τοὺς φυγάδας ἐπικεκλημένοι
ἦσαν, οὐδενὸς φιλανθρώπου τυχεῖν ἂν παρ᾿ Ἀλεξάνδρου
ἀξιοῦντες, ἄλλως τε καὶ βοιωταρχοῦντες
ἔστιν οἳ αὐτῶν, παντάπασιν ἐνῆγον τὸ πλῆθος ἐς
τὸν πόλεμον. Ἀλέξανδρος δὲ οὐδ᾿ ὥς τῇ πόλει
προσέβαλλεν.
8. Ἀλλὰ λέγει Πτολεμαῖος ὁ Λάγου, ὅτι
Περδίκκας, προτεταγμένος τῆς φυλακῆς τοῦ
στρατοπέδου σὺν τῇ αὑτοῦ τάξει καὶ τοῦ χάρακος
τῶν πολεμίων οὐ πολὺ ἀφεστηκώς, οὐ προσμείνας
παρ᾿ Ἀλεξάνδρου τὸ ἐς τὴν μάχην ξύνθημα αὐτὸς
πρῶτος προσέμιξε τῷ χάρακι καὶ διασπάσας αὐτὸν
2ἐνέβαλεν ἐς τῶν Θηβαίων τὴν προφυλακήν. τούτῳ
δὲ ἑπόμενος Ἀμύντας ὁ Ἀνδρομένους, ὅτι καὶ
ξυντεταγμένος τῷ Περδίκκᾳ ἦν, ἐπήγαγε καὶ αὐτὸς
τὴν αὑτοῦ τάξιν, ὡς εἶδε τὸν Περδίκκαν προεληλυθότα
εἴσω τοῦ χάρακος. ταῦτα δὲ ἰδὼν
Ἀλέξανδρος, ὡς μὴ μόνοι ἀποληφθέντες πρὸς τῶν
Θηβαίων κινδυνεύσειαν, ἐπῆγε τὴν ἄλλην στρατιάν.
3καὶ τοὺς μὲν τοξότας καὶ τοὺς Ἀγριᾶνας ἐκδραμεῖν
ἐσήμηνεν εἴσω τοῦ χάρακος, τὸ δὲ ἄγημά τε καὶ
τοὺς ὑπασπιστὰς ἔτι ἔξω κατεῖχεν. ἔνθα δὴ
34Anabasis of Alexander I

harm the Thebans when engaged with their enemies 335 b.c. without. But Alexander still hoped to win Theban
friendship rather than to incur any danger and waited, encamped near the citadel. At this point11 those Thebans who best saw the city’s advantage were anxious to go out to Alexander and obtain pardon for the Theban people for their revolt; but the exiles and those who had called them in, not expecting to receive kind treatment from Alexander, especially some of them who were Boeotarchs, used every method of urging their countrymen to war. Yet even so Alexander did not attack.6
8. Ptolemy son of Lagus, however, says that Perdiccas, who was officer in charge of the camp guard with his own battalion and lay not far from the enemy palisade, did not await Alexander’s signal for battle, but himself first attacked the palisade and tearing it apart broke in upon the Theban advance guard.1 Amyntas son of Andromenes followed, as he was2 brigaded with Perdiccas, and led on his own battalion when he saw Perdiccas had advanced within the palisade. Seeing this, Alexander brought up the rest of the army, so that they might not be stranded and at the mercy of the Thebans. He ordered3 the archers and Agrianians to run out in advance


6Contrast D. 9, 6. Boeotarchs were magistrates of the federation of Boeotian cities, long dominated by Thebes. Some hold that Philip in 338 dissolved this federation, in which case Thebes on her revolt had sought to revive it.1Perdiccas (Berve no. 627 cf. Introd. 34), a figure of growing importance under Al., became virtual ruler of the empire outside Greece and Macedon, on his death. Pt., who played a large part in encompassing his ruin in 321, may have sought to shift any blame for the sack of Thebes from Al. (cf. 7, 7–11), on to his enemy’s unauthorized impetuosity; D. 12, 3 says that P. acted under orders. Cf 21, 1 f. for more indiscipline in his regiment.35