Arrian

δρόμῳ ἐς τὸν ποταμὸν ἐνέβαλον, ὡς τῇ τε ὀξύτητι
τῆς ἐφόδου ἐκπλῆξαι τοὺς Πέρσας καὶ τοῦ θᾶσσον
ἐς χεῖρας ἐλθόντας ὀλίγα πρὸς τῶν τοξοτῶν
βλάπτεσθαι. καὶ ξυνέβη ὅπως εἴκασεν Ἀλέξανδρος.
4εὐθὺς γὰρ ὡς ἐν χερσὶν ἡ μάχη ἐγένετο,
τρέπονται τοῦ Περσικοῦ στρατεύματος οἱ τῷ
ἀριστερῷ κέρᾳ ἐπιτεταγμένοι· καὶ ταύτῃ μὲν
λαμπρῶς ἐνίκα Ἀλέξανδρός τε καὶ οἱ ἀμφ᾿ αὐτόν.
οἱ δὲ Ἕλληνες οἱ μισθοφόροι οἱ ξὺν Δαρείῳ, ᾗ
διέσχε τῶν Μακεδόνων ἡ φάλαγξ ὡς ἐπὶ τὸ δεξιὸν
5κέρας παραρραγεῖσα, ὅτι Ἀλέξανδρος μὲν σπουδῇ
ἐς τὸν ποταμὸν ἐμβαλὼν καὶ ἐν χερσὶ τὴν μάχην
ποιήσας ἐξώθει ἤδη τοὺς ταύτῃ τεταγμένους τῶν
Περσῶν, οἱ δὲ κατὰ μέσον τῶν Μακεδόνων οὔτε
τῇ ἴσῃ σπουδῇ ἥψαντο τοῦ ἔργου καὶ πολλαχῇ
χρημνώδεσι ταῖς ὄχθαις ἐντυγχάνοντες τὸ μέτωπον
τῆς φάλαγγος οὐ δυνατοὶ ἐγένοντο ἐν τῇ αὐτῇ
τάξει διασώσασθαι, —ταύτῃ ἐμβάλλουσιν οἱ Ἕλληνες
τοῖς Μακεδόσιν ᾗ μάλιστα διεσπασμένην
6αὐτοῖς τὴν φάλαγγα κατεῖδον. καὶ τὸ ἔργον
ἐνταῦθα καρτερὸν ἦν, τῶν μὲν ἐς τὸν ποταμὸν
ἀπώσασθαι τοὺς Μακεδόνας καὶ τὴν νίκην τοῖς ἤδη
φεύγουσι σφῶν ἀνασώσασθαι, τῶν Μακεδόνων δὲ
τῆς τε Ἀλεξάνδρου ἤδη φαινομένης εὐπραγίας μὴ
λειφθῆναι καὶ τὴν δόξαν τῆς φάλαγγος, ὡς ἀμάχου
7δὴ ἐς τὸ τότε διαβεβοημένης, μὴ ἀφανίσαι. καί τι
καὶ τοῖς γένεσι τῷ τε Ἑλληνικῷ καὶ τῷ Μακεδονικῷ
φιλοτιμίας ἐνέπεσεν ἐς ἀλλήλους. καὶ
ἐνταῦθα πίπτει Πτολεμαῖός τε ὁ Σελεύκου, ἀνὴρ
ἀγαθὸς γενόμενος, καὶ ἄλλοι ἐς εἴκοσι μάλιστα καὶ
ἑκατὸν τῶν οὐκ ἠμελημένων Μακεδόνων.
11. Ἐν τούτῳ δὲ αἱ ἀπὸ τοῦ δεξιοῦ κέρως
158Anabasis of Alexander II

river, in order to strike panic into the Persians by 333 b.c.
e rapidity of the attack, and by coming more quickly to close quarters to reduce losses from the Persian archers. Everything happened as Alexander guessed. The moment the battle was joined4 hand-to-hand, the Persian left gave way; and here Alexander and his followers won a brilliant success. But Darius’ Greek mercenaries attacked the Macedonian phalanx, where a gap appeared as it broke formation on the right; while Alexander plunged5 impetuously into the river, came to close quarters with the Persians posted here, and was pushing them back, the Macedonian centre did not set to with equal impetus, and finding the river banks precipitous in many places, were unable to maintain their front in unbroken line; and the Greeks attacked where they saw that the phalanx had been particularly torn apart. There the action was severe, the Greeks6 tried to push off the Macedonians into the river and to restore victory to their own side who were already in flight, while the Macedonians sought to rival the success of Alexander, which was already apparent, and to preserve the reputation of the phalanx, whose sheer invincibility had hitherto been on everyone’s lips. There was also some emulation7 between antagonists of the Greek and Macedonian races.4 Here it was that Ptolemaeus son of Seleucus fell, after showing himself a brave man, and about a hundred and twenty Macedonians of note.
11. At this point the battalions on the right wing,

4Cf. Introd. n. 33.159