Arrian

σώματα καὶ μέγα ἐπὶ σφίσι φρονοῦντες· πάντες δὲ
φιλίας τῆς Ἀλεξάνδρου ἐφιέμενοι ἥκειν ἔφασαν.
7καὶ πᾶσιν ἔδωκε πίστεις Ἀλέξανδρος καὶ ἔλαβε·
τοὺς Κελτοὺς δὲ καὶ ἤρετο, ὅ τι μάλιστα δεδίττεται
αὐτοὺς τῶν ἀνθρωπίνων, ἐλπίσας ὅτι μέγα ὄνομα τὸ
αὐτοῦ καὶ ἐς Κελτοὺς καὶ ἔτι προσωτέρω ἥκει καί
8ὅτι αὐτὸν μάλιστα πάντων δεδιέναι φήσουσι. τῷ
δὲ παρ᾿ ἐλπίδα ξυνέβη τῶν Κελτῶν ἡ ἀπόκρισις.
οἷα γὰρ πόρρω τε ᾠκισμένοι Ἀλεξάνδρου καὶ
χωρία δύσπορα οἰκοῦντες καὶ Ἀλεξάνδρου ἐς ἄλλα
τὴν ὁρμὴν ὁρῶντες ἔφασαν δεδιέναι μήποτε ὁ
οὐρανὸς αὐτοῖς ἐμπέσοι, Ἀλέξανδρόν τε ἀγασθέντες
οὔτε δέει οὔτε κατ᾿ ὠφέλειαν πρεσβεῦσαι παρ᾿
αὐτόν. καὶ τούτους φίλους τε ὀνομάσας καὶ
ξυμμάχους ποιησάμενος ὀπίσω ἀπέπεμψε, τοσοῦτον
ὑπειπὼν ὅτι ἀλαζόνες Κελτοί εἰσιν.
5. Αὐτὸς δὲ ἐπ᾿ Ἀγριάνων καὶ Παιόνων προὐχώρει.
ἔνθα δὴ ἄγγελοι ἀφίκοντο αὐτῷ Κλεῖτόν τε
τὸν Βαρδύλεω ἀφεστάναι ἀγγέλλοντες καὶ Γλαυκίαν
προσκεχωρηκέναι αὐτῷ τὸν Ταυλαντίων
βασιλέα· οἱ δὲ καὶ τοὺς Αὐταριάτας ἐπιθήσεσθαι
αὐτῷ κατὰ τὴν πορείαν ἐξήγγελλον· ὧν δὴ ἕνεκα
2κατὰ σπουδὴν ἐδόκει ἀναζευγνύναι. Λάγγαρος δὲ
ὁ τῶν Ἀγριάνων βασιλεὺς ἤδη μὲν καὶ Φιλίππου
ζῶντος ἀσπαζόμενος Ἀλέξανδρον δῆλος ἦν καὶ
ἰδίᾳ ἐπρέσβευσε παρ᾿ αὐτόν, τότε δὲ παρῆν αὐτῷ
μετὰ τῶν ὑπασπιστῶν, ὅσους τε καλλίστους καὶ



18Anabasis of Alexander I

The Celts were of great height and had a high conceit 335 b.c. of themselves; but all professed to have come in desire for Alexander’s friendship, and with all he7 exchanged pledges. Of the Celts he enquired what mortal thing they most dreaded, hoping that his own great name had reached the Celts and gone still farther, and that they would say that they dreaded him more than anything else. Their8 answer, however, was not what he expected, for, living in difficult country far from Alexander, and seeing that his aim lay elsewhere, they said that their greatest dread was that the sky would fall upon them, and that, while they admired Alexander, neither fear nor interest had prompted their embassy.2 He declared them his friends, made them his allies and sent them home, only remarking, ‘What braggarts Celts are!’
5. He then advanced towards the Agrianians and Paeonians.1 There messengers reached him with the news that Clitus, son of Bardylis, was in revolt, and that Glaucias, king of the Taulantians, had joined him.2 They also told him that the Autariates were going to attack him on his march. For these reasons he decided to move rapidly. Langarus,2 king of the Agrianians, had shown his regard for Alexander even in Philip’s lifetime, had been on an embassy to him personally, and was now in attendance on him with the finest and best-armed hypaspists


1Striking SW for the upper Strymon (Struma) and Axius
(Vardar) valleys. For chapters 5 and 6 in general see N. G.
L. Hammond, JHS 1974, with full topographic discussion, which I was able to see in typescript, but which is too complex to summarize here.2Bardylis is presumably ‘the Illyrian king’ decisively beaten by Philip in 358 (D. xvi 4); Hammond argues that he and Clitus were kings of the Dardanians on the upper Vardar and White Drin, and that the Taulantii dwelt round Tiranë in Albania (Annual of British School at Athens 1966, 243 ff.). The Autariatae are placed on the upper Neretsa (Naron).19