Arrian

τῶν Θηβαίων τὸ πάθος, Ἀρκάδες μὲν, ὅσοι
βοηθήσοντες Θηβαίοις ἀπὸ τῆς οἰκείας ὡρμήθησαν,
θάνατον κατεψηφίσαντο τῶν ἐπαράντων σφᾶς ἐς
τὴν βοήθειαν· Ἠλεῖοι δὲ τοὺς φυγάδας σφῶν
κατεδέξαντο, ὅτι ἐπιτήδειοι Ἀλεξάνδρῳ ἦσαν·
2Αἰτωλοὶ δὲ πρεσβείας σφῶν κατὰ ἔθνη πέμψαντες
ξυγγνώμης τυχεῖν ἐδέοντο, ὅτι καὶ αὐτοί τι πρὸς τὰ
παρὰ τῶν Θηβαίων ἀπαγγελθέντα ἐνεωτέρισαν·
Ἀθηναῖοι δέ, μυστηρίων τῶν μεγάλων ἀγομένων
ὡς ἧκόν τινες τῶν Θηβαίων ἐξ αὐτοῦ τοῦ ἔργου, τὰ
μὲν μυστήρια ἐκπλαγέντες ἐξέλιπον, ἐκ δὲ τῶν
3ἀγρῶν ἐσκευαγώγουν ἐς τὴν πόλιν. ὁ δῆμος δὲ ἐς
ἐκκλησίαν συνελθὼν Δημάδου γράψαντος δέκα
πρέσβεις ἐκ πάντων Ἀθηναίων ἐπιλεξάμενος
πέμπει παρὰ Ἀλέξανδρον, οὕστινας ἐπιτηδειοτάτους
Ἀλεξάνδρῳ ἐγίγνωσκον, ὅτι τε σῶος ἐξ
Ἰλλυριῶν καὶ Τριβαλλῶν ἐπανῆλθε χαίρειν τὸν
δῆμον τῶν Ἀθηναίων οὐκ ἐν καιρῷ ἀπαγγελοῦντας
καὶ ὅτι Θηβαίους τοῦ νεωτερισμοῦ ἐτιμωρήσατο.
4ὁ δὲ τὰ μὲν ἄλλα φιλανθρώπως πρὸς τὴν
πρεσβείαν ἀπεκρίνατο, ἐπιστολὴν δὲ γράψας πρὸς
τὸν δῆμον ἐξῇτει τοὺς ἀμφὶ Δημοσθένην καὶ
Λυκοῦργον· καὶ Ὑπερείδην δὲ ἐξῄτει καὶ Πολύευκτον
καὶ Χάρητα καὶ Χαρίδημον καὶ Ἐφιάλτην
5καὶ Διότιμον καὶ Μοιροκλέα· τούτους γὰρ
αἰτίους εἶναι τῆς τε ἐν Χαιρωνείᾳ ξυμφορᾶς τῇ
πόλει γενομένης καὶ τῶν ὕστερον ἐπὶ τῇ Φιλίππου





44Anabasis of Alexander I

other Greeks, the Arcadians who had left home to 335 b.c. help Thebes condemned to death those who had persuaded them to take this step, while the Eleans restored their own exiles, as they were persons ready to serve Alexander.1 The Aetolians sent2 embassies, tribe by tribe, and begged forgiveness for revolting on the news brought from Thebes. The Athenians, who were celebrating their great mysteries2 when some of the Thebans arrived hot foot from the action, abandoned the mysteries in consternation and began to get in their belongings from the country into the city. The people met in3 an assembly, and on the motion of Demades chose ten ambassadors from the whole body of citizens, men known to be most acceptable to Alexander, and sent them to him bearing the city’s rather belated congratulations on his safe return from the Illyrians and Triballians and on his punishment of the Theban revolt. Alexander replied in a friendly way to the4 embassy, except that he wrote a letter to the city demanding the surrender of Demosthenes and Lycurgus, as well as Hyperides, Polyceutas, Chares, Charidemus, Ephialtes, Diotimus and Moerocles,3 whom he held responsible for the city’s disaster at5 Chaeronea and for the wrongs later committed, [338 b.c.]
1Introd. 37.2Early Oct. 335.3Plut. Dem. 23 says that Idomeneus and Duris (thirdcentury
writers) gave 10 names (cf. D. 15, 1, perhaps those in Suidas s.v. Antipatros), but that the majority and best of the sources gave eight, which he lists; he then reports a mot of Demosthenes from Ar. (F. 3). If P. had read Ar., it follows that Ar. either gave no names, or the eight P. lists, which exclude Hyperides, Chares, Diotimus and Moerocles and include two not listed by A. In that case, as A. does not cite the ‘vulgate’, he must be following Pt., without mentioning the discrepancy with Ar. A’s list agrees with that in Suidas, if Thrasybulus has dropped out of A’s manuscripts and if we amend Patrocles to Moerocles in Suidas. See also Introd. n. 69.45