Arrian

ἐς τὰ ἐρύματα καταπεφευγότας τῶν βαρβάρων
ἔκτεινεν, ὅτι ξυνεπιθέσθαι ἐξηγγέλλοντο καὶ αὐτοὶ
τοῖς Μακεδόσι· καὶ ἐπῆλθε πᾶσαν τὴν χώραν ὅσην
ὁ ποταμὸς ὁ Πολυτίμητος ἐπάρδων ἐπέρχεται.
6ἵνα δὲ ἀφανίζεται τῷ ποταμῷ τὸ ὕδωρ, ἐντεῦθεν
ἤδη τὸ ἐπέκεινα ἔρημος ἡ χώρα ἐστίν· ἀφανίζεται
δὲ καίπερ πολλοῦ ὢν ὕδατος ἐς τὴν ψάμμον. καὶ
ἄλλοι ποταμοὶ ὡσαύτως ἐκεῖ ἀφανίζονται μεγάλοι
καὶ ἀέ[ν]ναοι, ὅ τε Ἔπαρδος, ὃς ῥέει διὰ Μάρδων
τῆς χώρας, καὶ Ἄρειος, ὅτου ἐπώνυμος ἡ τῶν
Ἀρείων γῆ ἐστιν, καὶ Ἐτύμανδρος, ὃς δι᾿ Εὐεργετῶν
7ῥέει. καὶ εἰσὶ ξύμπαντες οὗτοι τηλικοῦτοι
ποταμοὶ ὥστε οὐδεὶς αὐτῶν μείων ἐστὶ τοῦ
Πηνειοῦ τοῦ Θεσσαλικοῦ ποταμοῦ, ὃς διὰ τῶν
Τεμπῶν ῥέων ἐκδιδοῖ ἐς θάλασσαν· ὁ δὲ Πολυτίμητος
πολὺ ἔτι μείζων ἢ κατὰ τὸν Πηνειὸν ποταμόν ἐστι.
7. Ταῦτα δὲ διαπραξάμενος ἐς Ζαρίασπα ἀφίκετο·
καὶ αὐτοῦ κατέμενεν ἔστε παρελθεῖν τὸ
ἀκμαῖον τοῦ χειμῶνος. ἐν τούτῳ δὲ ἀφίκοντο παρ᾿
αὐτὸν Φραταφέρνης τε ὁ Παρθυαίων σατράπης καὶ
Στασάνωρ ὁ ἐς Ἀρείους ἀποπεμφθεὶς ὡς Ἀρσάκην
ξυλληψόμενος, τόν τε Ἀρσάκην δεδεμένον ἄγοντες
καὶ Βραζάνην, ὅντινα Βῆσσος τῆς Παρθυαίων
σατράπην κατέστησε, καί τινας ἄλλους τῶν τότε
2ξὺν Βήσσῳ ἀποστάντων. ἧκον δὲ ἐν τῷ αὐτῷ
Ἐπόκιλλος καὶ Μελαμνίδας καὶ Πτολεμαῖος ὁ τῶν
Θρᾳκῶν στρατηγὸς ἀπὸ θαλάσσης, οἳ τά τε
χρήματα <τὰ> ξὺν Μένητι πεμφθέντα καὶ τοὺς
ξυμμάχους ὡς ἐπὶ θάλασσαν κατήγαγον. καὶ
Ἄσανδρος δὲ ἐν τούτῳ ἧκεν καὶ Νέαρχος, στρατιὰν
Ἑλλήνων μισθοφόρων ἄγοντες, καὶ †Βῆσσός τε ὁ
358Anabasis Of Alexander IV

ravaged the country and killed the barbarians who329 b.c. had taken refuge in the forts, because they too were reported to have joined in the attack on the Macedonians. He traversed the entire country the river Polytimetus [Zeravshan] waters; at the very point 6 where the stream disappears there is nothing but desert: the stream, though it carries much water, disappears into the sand. Other rivers, though great and perennial, disappear there in the same way; the Epardus, which runs through the Mardian country, the Areius, which gives its name to the country Areia, and the Etymandrus, which runs through the country of the All these rivers are so great that7 none is inferior to the Peneius, the river of Thessaly which runs through Tempe and then discharges into the sea; the Polytimetus is out of all comparison larger than the river Peneius.
7. After Alexander had carried out these measures,329–8 b.c. he arrived at Zariaspa, and remained there till the depth of winter was past.1 At this time Phrataphernes the satrap of Parthyaea came to him with Stasanor who had been sent to Areia to arrest Arsaces, bringing him in chains along with Brazanes, whom Bessus had made satrap of Parthyaea, and others who had revolted with Bessus.2 He was2 joined at the same time from the seacoast by Epocillus, Melamnidas and Ptolemaeus the commander of the Thracians who had escorted the treasure sent with Menes and the allies down to the sea. Asander and Nearchus also arrived at this time with a Greek mercenary force, as did ‘Bessus’, the satrap of Syria,


1Winter 329/8 b.c. Zariaspa: App. VIII 13. Cf. QC. vii 10, 10 for his leaving Peucolaus with 3,000 men in Sogdiana.2Ignored in QC., perhaps rightly, cf. 18, 3 n.359