Arrian

καὶ νεῶν τῶν πολλῶν παραδόσει καὶ στερήσει τῆς
ἀρχῆς ἐς ταπεινότητα ἀφικομένη τό τε σχῆμα τὸ
πάτριον ὅμως ἐφύλαξε καὶ τὴν δύναμιν οὐ διὰ
μακροῦ τὴν πάλαι ἀνέλαβεν, ὡς τά τε μακρὰ τείχη
ἐκτειχίσαι καὶ τῆς θαλάσσης αὖθις ἐπικρατῆσαι καὶ
τοὺς τότε φοβερούς σφισι Λακεδαιμονίους καὶ παρ᾿
ὀλίγον ἐλθόντας ἀφανίσαι τὴν πόλιν αὐτοὺς ἐν τῷ
μέρει ἐκ τῶν ἐσχάτων κινδύνων διασώσασθαι.
4Λακεδαιμονίων τε αὖ τὸ κατὰ Λεῦκτρα καὶ
Μαντίνειαν πταῖσμα τῷ παραλόγῳ μᾶλλόν τι τῆς
ξυμφορᾶς ἤ τῷ πλήθει τῶν [τε] ἀπολομένων τοὺς
Λακεδαιμονίους ἐξέπληξεν· ἥ τε ξὺν Ἐπαμεινώνδᾳ
Βοιωτῶν καὶ Ἀρκάδων γενομένη προσβολὴ πρὸς
τὴν Σπάρτην καὶ αὐτὴ τῷ ἀήθει τῆς ὄψεως μᾶλλον
ἢ τῇ ἀκριβείᾳ τοῦ κινδύνου αὐτούς τε τοὺς Λακεδαιμονίους
καὶ τοὺς ξυμμετασχόντας αὐτοῖς τῶν τότε
5πραγμάτων ἐφόβησεν. ἡ δὲ δὴ Πλαταιῶν ἅλωσις
τῆς πόλεως τῇ σμικρότητι . . . τῶν ἐγκαταληφθέντων,
ὅτι οἱ πολλοὶ αὐτῶν διαπεφεύγεσαν
πάλαι ἐς τὰς Ἀθήνας, οὐ μέγα πάθημα ἐγένετο.
καὶ ἡ Μήλου καὶ Σκιώνης ἅλωσις, νησιωτικά τε
πολίσματα ἦν καὶ τοῖς δράσασιν αἰσχύνην μᾶλλόν
τι προσέβαλεν ἢ ἐς τὸ ξύμπαν Ἑλληνικὸν μέγαν
τὸν παράλογον παρέσχε.
6Θηβαίοις δὲ τὰ τῆς ἀποστάσεως ὀξέα καὶ ξὺν
οὐδενὶ λογισμῷ γενόμενα, καὶ ἡ ἅλωσις δι᾿ ὀλίγου
τε καὶ οὐ ξὺν πόνῳ τῶν ἑλόντων ξυνενεχθεῖσα, καὶ
ὁ φόνος <ὁ> πολύς, οἷα δὴ ἐξ ὁμοφύλων τε καὶ
παλαιὰς ἀπεχθείας ἐπεξιόντων, καὶ ὁ τῆς πόλεως
παντελὴς ἀνδραποδισμός, δυνάμει τε καὶ δόξῃ ἐς
τὰ πολέμια τῶν τότε προεχούσης ἐν τοῖς Ἕλλησιν,
οὐκ ἔξω τοῦ εἰκότος ἐς μῆνιν τὴν ἀπὸ τοῦ θείου
40Anabasis of Alexander I

destruction of its long walls, the surrender of most of 335 b.c. its ships, and the loss of its empire, it retained its ancestral form, and soon recovered its old strength; the Athenians rebuilt their long walls, recovered [393 b.c.] dominion on the sea, and themselves in turn saved from the most extreme danger the Lacedaemonians, who had inspired such terror and had come so near to annihilating Athens. The defeat of the Lacedaemonians4 themselves at Leuctra and Mantinea [371, 362 b.c.] came as a great shock to them rather by the unexpectedness of the disaster than by the number of the dead, while the onslaught of Epaminondas with [370–369 b.c.] his Boeotians and Arcadians on Sparta scared the Spartans and their then allies rather by the strangeness of such a sight than by the measure of the danger. The capture, again, of Plataea was no5 [427 b.c.] great tragedy because of the smallness of the city and . . .2 of those captured in the city—the greater number having fled long before to Athens. Finally, the capture of Melos and Scione, which were little [416, 421 b.c.] island towns, brought more shame to the perpetrators than any great shock to the whole Greek world.
With Thebes, on the other hand, the hastiness6 and lack of consideration in the revolt, her sudden capture, with so little trouble to the victors, the great massacre, a natural act to kindred people working off old feuds, the complete enslavement of the city, then foremost in Greece for power and military prestige, were quite naturally set down to divine wrath: Thebes, men said, had thus paid the price,

2The lacuna presumably mentioned the small number of prisoners.41