Arrian

Πέρσαις ἐπενόει τὴν πόλιν. Νικάνωρ δὲ τὸ
Ἑλληνικὸν ναυτικὸν ἄγων ὑποφθάνει τοὺς Πέρσας
τρισὶν ἡμέραις πρότερος καταπλεύσας ἢ τοὺς
Πέρσας Μιλήτῳ προσχεῖν, καὶ ὁρμίζεται ναυσὶν
ἑξήκοντα καὶ ἑκατὸν ἐν τῇ νήσῳ τῇ Λάδῃ· κεῖται
5δὲ αὕτη ἐπὶ τῇ Μιλήτῳ. αἱ δὲ τῶν Περσῶν νῆες
ὑστερήσασαι, ἐπειδὴ ἔμαθον οἱ ναύαρχοι τῶν ἀμφὶ
Νικάνορα τὴν ἐν τῇ Λάδῃ προκαταγωγήν, πρὸς τῇ
Μυκάλῃ τῷ ὄρει ὡρμίσθησαν. τὴν γὰρ Λάδην τὴν
νῆσον προκατειλήφει Ἀλέξανδρος, οὐ τῶν νεῶν
μόνον τῇ ἐγκαθορμίσει, ἀλλὰ καὶ τοὺς Θρᾷκας καὶ
τῶν ἄλλων ξένων ἐς τετρακισχιλίους διαβιβάσας ἐς
αὐτήν. ἦσαν δὲ τῶν βαρβάρων αἱ νῆες ἀμφὶ τὰς
τετρακοσίας.
6Παρμενίων μὲν δὴ καὶ ὣς παρῄνει Ἀλεξάνδρῳ
ναυμαχεῖν, τά τε ἄλλα κρατήσειν τῷ ναυτικῷ τοὺς
Ἕλληνας ἐπελπίζων καί τι καὶ θεῖον ἀνέπειθεν
αὐτόν, ὅτι ἀετὸς ὤφθη καθήμενος ἐπὶ τοῦ αἰγιαλοῦ
κατὰ πρύμναν τῶν Ἀλεξάνδρου νεῶν. καὶ γὰρ δὴ
νικήσαντας μὲν μεγάλα ὠφεληθήσεσθαι ἐς τὰ ὅλα,
νικηθεῖσι δὲ οὐ παρὰ μέγα ἔσεσθαι τὸ πταῖσμα·
καὶ ὣς γὰρ θαλασσοκρατεῖν τοὺς Πέρσας. καὶ
αὐτὸς δὲ ἔφη ἐπιβῆναι ἐθέλειν τῶν νεῶν καὶ τοῦ
7κινδύνου μετέχειν. Ἀλέξανδρος δὲ τῇ τε γνώμῃ
ἁμαρτάνειν ἔφη Παρμενίωνα καὶ τοῦ σημείου τῇ οὐ
κατὰ τὸ εἰκὸς ξυμβλήσει· ὀλίγαις τε γὰρ ναυσὶ
πρὸς πολλῷ πλείους ξὺν οὐδενὶ λογισμῷ ναυμαχήσειν
καὶ οὐ μεμελετηκότι τῷ σφῶν ναυτικῷ
<πρὸς> προησκημένον τὸ τῶν Κυπρίων τε καὶ
8Φοινίκων· τήν τε ἐμπειρίαν τῶν Μακεδόνων καὶ
τὴν τόλμαν ἐν ἀβεβαίῳ χωρίῳ οὐκ ἐθέλειν παραδοῦναι
τοῖς βαρβάροις· καὶ ἡττηθεῖσι τῇ ναυμαχίᾳ οὐ
76Anabasis of Alexander I

away; his intention was now to save the city for Persia. 334 b.c. Nicanor, however, brought up the Greek fleet,3 reached Miletus by sea three days before the Persians put in, and anchored with 160 ships at the island of Lade off Miletus. The Persian fleet were too5 late, and when their commanders learnt that Nicanor had already put in at Lade, they anchored under Mount Mycale. For by seizing Lade Alexander had forestalled them, not only anchoring his fleet there, but also transporting the Thracians and about 4000 of the other mercenaries to the island. The barbarians had about 400 ships.
Parmenio, notwithstanding, urged Alexander to6 fight by sea; he expected the Greeks to win with their fleet for various reasons, and in particular he used an omen to persuade him: an eagle had been seen perching on the shore astern of Alexander’s ships. If they won, he argued, it would be of great advantage to the expedition generally, whereas a defeat would not be very serious; for even as things were the Persians held supremacy at sea. He said that he was willing even to embark himself and share the peril. Alexander, however, said that Parmenio’s7 judgment was at fault, and his interpretation of the omen improbable; it would be wholly irrational to fight a much greater fleet with an inferior one, and face the trained Cyprian and Phoenician fleet with his own, which was unpractised. He would not risk8 sacrificing the experience and daring of the Macedonians to the barbarians on so uncertain an element;

3Of. § 6; 19, 7. Evidently the fleet was mainly provided by the Greek allies (cf. QC. iii 1, 20), since A. is careful to distinguish Greeks from Macedonians (Introd. n. 33), though Macedonians would presumably serve as marines in a battle (§ 8). Numbers of Greek and Persian ships: App. II 1. Cf. Introd. 44.77