Arrian

χωννύναι, ὡς πλείονας δέξασθαι πύργους, καὶ τοὺς
μηχανοποιοὺς μηχανὰς ἄλλας κατασκευάζειν ἐκέλευσεν.
ὡς δὲ ταῦτα παρεσκευάζετο, αὐτὸς τούς τε
ὑπασπιστὰς ἀναλαβὼν καὶ τοὺς Ἀγριᾶνας ἐπὶ
Σιδῶνος ἐστάλη, ὡς ἀθροίσων ἐκεῖ ὅσαι ἤδη ἦσαν
αὐτῷ τριήρεις, ὅτι ἀπορώτερα τὰ τῆς πολιορκίας
ἐφαίνετο θαλασσοκρατούντων τῶν Τυρίων.
20. Ἐν τούτῳ δὲ Γηρόστρατός τε ὁ Ἀράδου
βασιλεὺς καὶ Ἔνυλος ὁ Βύβλου ὡς ἔμαθον τὰς
πόλεις σφῶν ὑπ᾿ Ἀλεξάνδρου ἐχομένας, ἀπολιπόντες
Αὐτοφραδάτην τε καὶ τὰς ξὺν αὐτῷ νέας παρ᾿
Ἀλέξανδρον ξὺν τῷ ναυτικῷ τῷ σφετέρῳ ἀφίκοντο
καὶ αἱ τῶν Σιδωνίων τριήρεις σὺν αὐτοῖς, ὥστε
Φοινίκων μὲν νῆες ὀγδοήκοντα μάλιστα αὐτῷ
2παρεγένοντο. ἧκον δὲ ἐν ταῖς αὐταῖς ἡμέραις καὶ
ἐκ Ῥόδου τριήρεις ἥ τε περίπολος καλουμένη καὶ
ξὺν ταύτῃ ἄλλαι ἐννέα, καὶ ἐκ Σόλων καὶ Μαλλοῦ
τρεῖς καὶ Λύκιαι δέκα, ἐκ Μακεδονίας δὲ πεντηκόντορος,
ἐφ᾿ ἧς Πρωτέας ὁ Ἀνδρονίκου ἐπέπλει.
3οὐ πολλῷ δὲ ὕστερον καὶ οἱ τῆς Κύπρου βασιλεῖς
ἐς τὴν Σιδῶνα κατέσχον ναυσὶν ἑκατὸν μάλιστα καὶ
εἴκοσιν, ἐπειδὴ τήν τε ἧσσαν τὴν κατ᾿ Ἰσσὸν
Δαρείου ἐπύθοντο καὶ ἡ Φοινίκη πᾶσα ἐχομένη ἤδη
ὑπὸ Ἀλεξάνδρου ἐφόβει αὐτούς. καὶ τούτοις
πᾶσιν ἔδωκεν Ἀλέξανδρος ἄδειαν τῶν πρόσθεν,
ὅτι ὑπ᾿ ἀνάγκης μᾶλλόν τι ἢ κατὰ γνώμην τὴν
σφῶν ἐδόκουν ξυνταχθῆναι τοῖς Πέρσαις ἐς τὸ
ναυτικόν.
4Ἐν ᾧ δὲ αἵ τε μηχαναὶ αὐτῷ ξυνεπήγνυντο καὶ αἱ
νῆες ὡς εἰς ἐπίπλουν τε καὶ ναυμαχίας ἀπόπειραν
ἐξηρτύοντο, ἐν τούτῳ δὲ ἀναλαβὼν τῶν τε ἱππέων
ἴλας ἔστιν ἃς καὶ τοὺς ὑπασπιστὰς καὶ τοὺς
192Anabasis of Alexander II

broader starting from the mainland, so as to hold 332 b.c. more towers, and the engineers to construct new engines.2 While these were being got ready, he made for Sidon with the hypaspists and the Agrianians, to collect all the triremes he already had there, since the siege seemed unlikely to succeed as long as the Tyrians were masters of the sea.3
20. At this time Gerostratus king of Aradus and Enylus of Byblus, on learning that Alexander held their cities, left Autophradates and his ships and joined Alexander with their own fleet, along with the Sidonian triremes; thus some eighty Phoenician sail came over to him. In the same days nine2 triremes came from Rhodes, in addition to their state guardship, three from Soli and Mallus and ten from Lycia, and a fifty-oar ship from Macedon, its captain being Proteus son of Andronicus. Soon3 afterwards the kings of Cyprus put in at Sidon with about 120 sail; they had learnt of Darius’ defeat at Issus, and were alarmed at the whole of Phoenicia being already in Alexander’s power.1 To all of them Alexander let bygones be bygones, supposing that it was rather from necessity than their own choice that they had contributed to the Persian fleet.
While his engines were being fitted together, and4 his ships were being equipped for attack and for trying the issue of a naval battle, Alexander marched with some of the cavalry squadrons, the hypaspists,



2QC. 3, 8 ff.3Omitted in other accounts.1QC. 3, 11 notes only the arrival of 120 ships from Cyprus; D. 42, 3 presupposes, without explaining, Al’s later command of the sea.193