Arrian

ἐς κύκλους, ὡς πρόσθεν ἔτι· ὁμοῦ μὲν γὰρ
ἡ ἵππος προσέκειτο αὐτοῖς, ὁμοῦ δὲ οἱ ψιλοὶ
ἀναμεμιγμένοι τοῖς ἱππεῦσιν οὐκ εἴων τὰς ἐπιστροφὰς
ἀσφαλεῖς ποιεῖσθαι. ἔνθα λαμπρὰ ἤδη
8φυγὴ τῶν Σκυθῶν ἦν· καὶ πίπτουσι μὲν αὐτῶν ἐς
χιλίους καὶ εἷς τῶν ἡγεμόνων, Σατράκης, ἑάλωσαν
δὲ ἐς ἑκατὸν καὶ πεντήκοντα. ὡς δὲ ἡ δίωξις
ὀξεῖά τε καὶ διὰ καύματος πολλοῦ ταλαιπώρως
ἐγίνετο, δίψει τε ἡ στρατιὰ πᾶσα εἴχετο καὶ αὐτὸς
Ἀλέξανδρος ἐλαύνων πίνει ὁποῖον ἦν ὕδωρ ἐν τῇ γῇ
9ἐκείνῃ. καὶ ἦν γὰρ πονηρὸν τὸ ὕδωρ, ῥεῦμα
ἀθρόον κατασκήπτει αὐτῷ ἐς τὴν γαστέρα· καὶ
ἐπὶ τῷδε ἡ δίωξις οὐκ ἐπὶ πάντων Σκυθῶν ἐγένετο·
εἰ δὲ μή, δοκοῦσιν ἄν μοι καὶ πάντες διαφθαρῆναι
ἐν τῇ φυγῇ, εἰ μὴ Ἀλεξάνδρῳ τὸ σῶμα ἔκαμεν.
καὶ αὐτὸς ἐς ἔσχατον κινδύνου ἐλθὼν ἐκομίσθη
ὀπίσω ἐς τὸ στρατόπεδον. καὶ οὕτω ξυνέβη ἡ
μαντεία Ἀριστάνδρῳ.
5. Ὀλίγον δὲ ὕστερον παρὰ τοῦ Σκυθῶν βασιλέως
ἀφικνοῦνται παρ᾿ Ἀλέξανδρον πρέσβεις, ὑπὲρ
τῶν πραχθέντων ἐς ἀπολογίαν ἐκπεμφθέντες, ὅτι
οὐκ ἀπὸ <τοῦ> κοινοῦ τῶν Σκυθῶν ἐπράθη,
ἀλλὰ καθ᾿ ἁρπαγὴν λῃστρικῷ τρόπῳ σταλέντων,
καὶ αὐτὸς ὅτι ἐθέλοι ποιεῖν τὰ ἐπαγγελλόμενα.
καὶ τούτῳ φιλάνθρωπα ἐπιστέλλει Ἀλέξανδρος,
ὅτι οὔτε ἀπιστοῦντα μὴ ἐπεξιέναι καλὸν αὐτῷ
ἐφαίνετο, οὔτε κατὰ καιρὸν ἦν ἐν τῷ τότε
ἐπεξιέναι.
2Οἱ δὲ ἐν Μαρακάνδοις ἐν τῇ ἄκρᾳ φρουρούμενοι
Μακεδόνες προσβολῆς γενομένης τῇ ἄκρᾳ ἐκ Σπιταμένους
τε καὶ τῶν ἀμφ᾿ αὐτὸν ἐπεκδραμόντες
ἀπέκτεινάν τε τῶν πολεμίων ἔστιν οὓς καὶ ἀπώσαντο
350Anabasis Of Alexander IV

circles as they had been doing up till then; for the329 b.c. cavalry was now pressing them, and at the same moment the light troops, mingled with the cavalry, prevented their turning about safely. The Scythians were by now in open flight; about a thousand fell,8 with one of their commanders, Satraces, while about a hundred and fifty were captured. The pursuit was sharp and distressing because of the great heat, so that all the army was consumed by thirst, and Alexander himself, as he rode on, drank whatever kind of water there was in that country. The water was in9 fact bad, and so sudden diarrhoea attacked his stomach; for this reason the pursuit did not extend to all the Scythians. Otherwise I think they would all have perished in their flight, had not Alexander been taken ill. Personally he fell into serious danger, and was carried back into the camp. In this way Aristander’s prophecy came true.4
5. Soon afterwards envoys reached Alexander from the Scythian king;1 they had been sent to excuse what had occurred, on the ground that it had not been the action of the Scythian community, but only that of raiders and freebooters; the king himself was ready to do what was required of him. Alexander gave a kindly answer, since he thought it dishonourable not to press the attack, if he distrusted the king, and not the right moment to press it.2
The Macedonians who were blockaded in the2 citadel at Maracanda, when an assault was made on the citadel by Spitamenes and his troops, sallied out, killed some of the enemy, drove off the whole body,



4See Fuller 236 ff. QC. vii 7, 1–9, 16 has many divergencies. Cf. also Marsden (i 20, 8 n.) 97, 165 f.1QC. vii 9, 17 ff.2What follows is clearly from Pt. (cf. 6, 1). See App. VIII 12.351