Arrian

αἰχμαλωτισθεῖσαν καὶ τὴν γυναῖκα καὶ τοὺς παῖδας
ἐπεῖδεν· ἐπὶ τῷδε Φοινίκη τε ἀπώλετο καὶ
Αἴγυπτος πᾶσα· ἐπὶ δὲ αὐτὸς ἐν Ἀρβήλοις ἔφυγέ
τε ἐν πρώτοις αἰσχρῶς καὶ στρατιὰν πλείστην
5παντὸς τοῦ βαρβαρικοῦ γένους ἀπώλεσε· φυγάς τε
ἐκ τούτου τῆς αὑτοῦ ἀρχῆς πλανώμενος καὶ τελευτῶν
πρὸς τῶν ἀμφ᾿ αὑτὸν ἐς τὰ ἔσχατα προδοθείς,
βασιλεύς τε ἐν τῷ αὐτῷ καὶ δεσμώτης ξὺν ἀτιμίᾳ
ἀγόμενος, τέλος δὲ πρὸς τῶν οἰκειοτάτων ἐπιβουλευθεὶς
ἀπώλετο. ζῶντι μὲν Δαρείῳ τοιαῦτα
6ξυνηνέχθη, τελευτήσαντι δὲ ταφή τε ἡ βασιλικὴ καὶ
τῶν παίδων ὁποία καὶ βασιλεύοντος αὐτοῦ τροφή
τε <παρ᾿> Ἀλεξάνδρου καὶ παίδευσις, καὶ γαμβρὸς
Ἀλέξανδρος. ὁπότε δὲ ἐτελεύτα, ἐγεγόνει ἀμφὶ τὰ
πεντήκοντα ἔτη.
23. Ἀλέξανδρος δὲ τοὺς ὑπολειφθέντας ἐν τῇ
διώξει τῆς στρατιᾶς ἀναλαβὼν ἐς Ὑρκανίαν προὐχώρει.
κεῖται δὲ ἡ Ὑρκανία χώρα ἐν ἀριστερᾷ
τῆς ὁδοῦ τῆς ἐπὶ Βάκτρα φερούσης· καὶ τῇ μὲν
ὄρεσιν ἀπείργεται δασέσι καὶ ὑψηλοῖς, τὸ πεδίον δὲ
αὐτῆς καθήκει ἔστε ἐπὶ τὴν μεγάλην τὴν ταύτῃ
θάλασσαν. ταύτην δὲ ἦγεν, ὅτι ταύτῃ τοὺς ξένους
τοὺς ἀμφὶ Δαρεῖον διαπεφευγέναι ἐς τὰ τῶν
Ταπούρων ὄρη ἐπύθετο καὶ αὐτοὺς ἅμα τοὺς
2Ταπούρους χειρωσόμενος. τριχῇ δὴ διελὼν τὸν
στρατὸν αὐτὸς μὲν τὴν ἐπιτομωτάτην καὶ χαλεπωτάτην
ἡγήσατο, τὸ πλεῖστον καὶ ἅμα τὸ κουφότατον
τῆς δυνάμεως ἄγων· Κρατερὸν δὲ τήν τε
αὑτοῦ τάξιν ἔχοντα καὶ τὴν Ἀμύντου καὶ τῶν
τοξοτῶν ἔστιν οὓς καὶ ὀλίγους τῶν ἱππέων ἐπὶ
Ταπούρων ἔστειλεν· Ἐριγύϊον δὲ τούς τε ξένους
302Anabasis of Alexander III

with his wife and children taken prisoners; then 330 b.c. Phoenicia and all Egypt were lost; and then he himself
was among the first to flee dishonourably at Arbela, and lost the greatest army of the whole barbarian race; a fugitive from his own kingdom and5 a wanderer, he was at last betrayed by his own escort to the worst of fates, to be at once a king and prisoner carried off in dishonour; finally he perished by a conspiracy of his closest connections. These were the tragedies of Darius’ life. After death he had a royal6 burial and his children were brought up and educated by Alexander as if he were still on the throne, and Alexander married his daughter.4 At his death he was about fifty years old.
23. Alexander, taking over the troops left behind in the pursuit, advanced into Hyrcania, which lies on the left of the road leading to Bactria;1 on one side it is bounded by high, wooded mountains, but its plain stretches to the Great Sea [Caspian] in those parts. Alexander marched this way because he had learned that the mercenaries with Darius had escaped to the Tapurian mountains [Elburz]; besides, he intended to subdue the Tapurians themselves. He2 divided his army into three parts, and himself took the shortest and hardest road with the largest part and lightest armed of his force; he sent Craterus with his own battalion and that of Amyntas, some of the archers, and a few horsemen, against the Tapurians, and Erigyius was ordered to take the mercenaries and


4In 324, vii 4, 4; she was murdered after Al’s death by Roxane (P. 77). Education: D. 67, 1; QC. v 2, 18 if.1Hyrcanian campaign: App. VIII 10; D. 75 f.; QC. vi 4 f.; P. 44; 46 f.; Strabo xi 7 (cf ii 1, 14) with citations from Ar. F 19 f., whose topographical material A. ignores. QC. vi 2, 15 ff (at Hecatompylos, cf. D. 74) and P. 47 (in Hyrcania) tell that Al. had to persuade the Macedonians to march on.303