Arrian

ξὺν δίκῃ τινάς, τοὺς μὲν κατ᾿ ἔχθραν, τοὺς δὲ κατὰ
ἁρπαγὴν χρημάτων ἀποκτενεῖ, ξυγχωρηθὲν αὐτῷ, ὁ
δῆμος. καὶ εἰ δή τῳ ἄλλῳ, καὶ τοῖς ἐν Ἐφέσῳ
πραχθεῖσιν Ἀλέξανδρος ἐν τῷ τότε εὐδοκίμει.
18. Ἐν τούτῳ δὲ ἐκ Μαγνησίας τε καὶ Τράλλεων
παρ᾿ αὐτὸν ἧκον ἐνδιδόντες τὰς πόλεις· καὶ
ὃς πέμπει Παρμενίωνα, δοὺς αὐτῷ δισχιλίους καὶ
πεντακοσίους πεζοὺς τῶν ξένων καὶ Μακεδόνας
παραπλησίους, ἱππέας δὲ τῶν ἑταίρων ἐς διακοσίους.
Ἀλκίμαχον δὲ τὸν Ἀγαθοκλέους ἐπὶ τὰς
Αἰολίδας τε πόλεις ξὺν δυνάμει οὐκ ἐλάττονι
ἐξέπεμψε καὶ ὅσαι Ἰωνικαὶ ὑπὸ τοῖς βαρβάροις ἔτι
2ἦσαν. καὶ τὰς μὲν ὀλιγαρχίας πανταχοῦ καταλύειν
ἐκέλευσεν, δημοκρατίας δὲ [τε] ἐγκαθιστάναι καὶ
τοὺς νόμους τοὺς σφῶν ἑκάστοις ἀποδοῦναι, καὶ
τοὺς φόρους ἀνεῖναι, ὅσους τοῖς βαρβάροις ἀπέφερον.
αὐτὸς δὲ ὑπομείνας ἐν Ἐφέσῳ θυσίαν τε
ἔθυσε τῇ Ἀρτέμιδι καὶ πομπὴν ἔπεμψε ξὺν τῇ
στρατιᾷ πάσῃ ὡπλισμένῃ τε καὶ ὡς ἐς μάχην
ξυντεταγμένῃ.
3Τῇ δὲ ὑστεραίᾳ ἀναλαβὼν τῶν τε πεζῶν τοὺς λοιποὺς
καὶ τοὺς τοξότας καὶ τοὺς Ἀγριᾶνας καὶ τοὺς
Θρᾷκας ἱππέας καὶ τῶν ἑταίρων τήν τε βασιλικὴν
ἴλην καὶ πρὸς ταύτῃ τρεῖς ἄλλας ἐπὶ Μιλήτου
ἐστέλλετο· καὶ τὴν μὲν ἔξω[δον] καλουμένην
πόλιν ἐξ ἐφόδου ἔλαβεν ἐκλιπούσης τῆς φυλακῆς·
ἐνταῦθα δὲ καταστρατοπεδεύσας ἔγνω ἀποτειχίζειν
4τὴν εἴσω πόλιν. Ἡγησίστρατος γάρ, ὅτῳ ἡ
φρουρὰ ἡ Μιλησίων ἐκ βασιλέως ἐπετέτραπτο,
πρόσθεν γράμματα παρ᾿ Ἀλέξανδρον ἔπεμπεν
ἐνδιδοὺς τὴν Μίλητον· τότε δὲ ἀναθαρρήσας ἐπὶ τῷ
Περσῶν στρατῷ οὐ μακρὰν ὄντι διασώζειν τοῖς
74Anabasis of Alexander I

men along with the guilty, from private hatred or in 334 b.c. order to seize their property. Seldom did Alexander win a higher reputation than he did on that occasion by his treatment of Ephesus.7
18. About this time representatives of Magnesia and Tralles came to Alexander to hand over their cities; so he sent Parmenio with 2,500 mercenary infantry and as many Macedonians, and 200 of the Companion horse. He sent also Alcimachus son of Agathocles, with at least an equal force, to the Aeolian cities and to any Ionian towns still subject to the barbarians. He ordered the oligarchies2 everywhere to be overthrown and democracies to be established; he restored its own laws to each city and remitted the tribute they used to pay to the barbarians.1 He himself remained in Ephesus and sacrificed to Artemis and held a great procession with his troops armed cap-à-pie in full battle order.
Next day he took the remainder of the infantry,3 the archers, the Agrianians, the Thracian horse, the royal squadron of the Companions and three others in addition, and marched against Miletus.2 He captured in his stride what they called the outer city, which the garrison had abandoned, and camping there, decided to invest the inner city. For Hegesistratus,4 to whom Darius had entrusted command of the Milesian garrison, had previously sent a letter to Alexander surrendering the city, but he had taken heart again, because the Persian force was no distance



7Al. and Ephesus: E. Badian, cited in Introd. n. 59.1Introd. 39 and last note.2D. 22 thinks Memnon was in command at Miletus. A. omits some description of Miletus in Ar. F. 6.75