Arrian

αὐτῷ καὶ οἱ ἀμφὶ Κρατερὸν ξὺν τῇ στρατιᾷ πεπραγμένων
σφίσι ξυμπάντων ὅσα ὑπὸ τοῦ βασιλέως
7ἐτέτακτο. ταύτην μὲν δὴ τὴν πόλιν, ὅτι ἐν
ἐπικαίρῳ χωρίῳ ἐδόκει ᾠκίσθαι, ἐκτειχίσαι τε
προστάσσει Κρατερῷ καὶ ξυνοικίσαι ἐς αὐτὴν τούς
τε προσχώρους ὅσοι ἐθελονταί καὶ εἰ δή τινες
ἀπόμαχοι τῆς στρατιᾶς. αὐτὸς δὲ προὐχώρει ἵνα
ξυμπεφευγέναι ἐπυνθάνετο τοὺς πολλοὺς τῶν ταύτῃ
βαρβάρων. ἐλθὼν δὲ πρός τι ὄρος κατεστρατοπέδευσεν
ὑπὸ ταῖς ὑπωρείαις τοῦ ὄρους.
8Καὶ ἐν τούτῳ Πτολεμαῖος ὁ Λάγου ἐκπεμφθεὶς
μὲν ὑπὸ Ἀλεξάνδρου ἐς προνομήν, προελθὼν δὲ
προσωτέρω αὐτὸς ξὺν ὀλίγοις ὡς ἐς κατασκοπήν,
ἀπαγγέλλει Ἀλεξάνδρῳ πυρὰ κατιδεῖν τῶν βαρβάρων
πλείονα ἢ ἐν τῷ Ἀλεξάνδρου στρατοπέδῳ.
9καὶ Ἀλέξανδρος τῷ μὲν πλήθει τῶν πυρῶν ἠπίστησεν,
εἶναι δέ τι ξυνεστηκὸς τῶν ταύτῃ βαρβάρων
αἰσθόμενος μέρος μὲν τῆς στρατιᾶς αὐτοῦ
καταλείπει πρὸς τῷ ὄρει ὡς εἶχον ἐστρατοπεδευμένους·
αὐτὸς δὲ ἀναλαβὼν ὅσοι ἀποχρῶντες ἐς τὰ
ἀπηγγελμένα ἐφαίνοντο, ὡς πλησίον ἤδη ἀφεώρων
10τὰ πυρά, τρίχα διανέμει τὴν στρατιάν. καὶ τῷ μὲν
ἑνὶ ἐπέταξε Λεοννάτον τὸν σωματοφύλακα, ξυντάξας
αὐτῷ τήν τε Ἀττάλου καὶ τὴν Βαλάκρου
τάξιν· τὴν δευτέραν δὲ μοῖραν Πτολεμαίῳ τῷ
Λάγου ἄγειν ἔδωκε, τῶν τε ὑπασπιστῶν τῶν βασιλικῶν
τὸ τρίτον μέρος καὶ τὴν Φιλίππου καὶ
Φιλώτα τάξιν καὶ δύο χιλιαρχίας τῶν τοξοτῶν καὶ
τοὺς Ἀγριᾶνας καὶ τῶν ἱππέων τοὺς ἡμίσεας· τὴν
δὲ τρίτην μοῖραν αὐτὸς ἦγεν ἵνα οἱ πλεῖστοι τῶν
βαρβάρων ἐφαίνοντο.
25. Οἱ δὲ ὡς ᾔσθοντο προσάγοντας τοὺς Μακεδόνας,
422Anabasis Of Alexander IV

fled. Here he was met by Craterus and his colleagues 327–6 b.c. with the army, after they had carried out all Alexander’s instructions.4 As this city seemed to be on7 a favourable site for a settlement, he instructed Craterus to fortify it and to bring into the place as settlers any volunteers from the neighbouring people and any soldiers unfit for service.5 He himself advanced where he was told most of the barbarians of the region had taken refuge; and reaching the mountain he camped there at its foot.
At this time Ptolemy son of Lagus,6 who had been8 sent foraging by Alexander, and had himself advanced further ahead with a few others to scout, reported to Alexander that he had sighted barbarian fires more numerous than in Alexander’s camp. Alexander was incredulous about the number of the9 fires, but realizing that there was a concentration of barbarians who belonged to this region, he left part of his army behind, encamped as they were by the hill, and himself taking what appeared to be a number sufficient in view of this report, divided his men into three parts as soon as they saw the fires close at hand. He put Leonnatus the bodyguard in10 command of one, assigning him the battalions of Attalus and Balacrus; the second, consisting of a third of the hypaspists, the battalions of Philip and Philotas, and two chiliarchies of archers, the Agrianians and half the cavalry, was placed under Ptolemy son of Lagus, while he himself led the third division, where the greatest number of the barbarians appeared to be.
25. When they saw the Macedonians approach,



4Cf. 23, 5.5Cf. iii 1, 5 n. Tarn ii 248 is perverse.6Pt. again the source at least till 25, 4.423