Arrian

ἠκροβολίζοντο, πλεονεκτούμενοι τῷ τε πλήθει καὶ
τοῦ χωρίου τῇ χαλεπότητι, ὅτι ἐξ ὑπερδεξίου τοῖς
πολεμίοις ἡ ἐπιδρομή τε καὶ ὁ ἀκροβολισμὸς
3ἐγίνετο. καὶ ἐν τούτῳ ἀντεκθέουσί τινες καὶ ἄλλοι
τῶν τοῦ Περδίκκου στρατιωτῶν, καὶ ἀπὸ τῆς
Ἁλικαρνασσοῦ ἄλλοι καὶ ξυμπίπτει μάχη καρτερὰ
πρὸς τῷ τείχει· καὶ κατακλείονται αὖθις πρὸς τῶν
Μακεδόνων εἴσω τῶν πυλῶν οἱ ἐπεκδραμόντες.
4παρ᾿ ὀλίγον δὲ ἦλθε καὶ ἁλῶναι ἡ πόλις. τά τε
γὰρ τείχη ἐν τῷ τότε οὐκ ἐν ἀκριβεῖ φυλακῇ ἦν καὶ
δύο πύργοι καὶ μεσοπύργιον ἐς ἔδαφος καταπεπτωκότα
οὐ χαλεπὴν ἂν τῷ στρατεύματι, εἰ ἅπαν προσήψατο
τοῦ ἔργου, τὴν ἐς τὸ τεῖχος πάροδον παρέσχε,
καὶ ὁ τρίτος πύργος κατασεσεισμένος οὐδὲ οὗτος
χαλεπῶς ἂν ἠρίφθη ὑπορυσσόμενος· ἀλλὰ ἔφθησαν
γὰρ ἀντὶ τοῦ πεπτωκότος τείχους ἔσωθεν πλίνθινον
μηνοειδὲς ἀντοικοδομησάμενοι οὐ χαλεπῶς ὑπὸ
πολυχειρίας.
5Καὶ τούτῳ ἐπῆγε τῇ ὑστεραίᾳ τὰς μηχανὰς
Ἀλέξανδρος· καὶ ἐκδρομὴ αὖθις γίγνεται τῶν ἐκ
τῆς πόλεως ἐπὶ τῷ ἐμπρῆσαι τὰς μηχανάς. καὶ
μέρος μέν τι τῶν πλησίον τοῦ τείχους γέρρων καὶ
ἑνὸς τῶν πύργων τῶν ξυλίνων κατεκαύθη, τὰ δὲ
ἄλλα διεφύλαξαν οἱ περὶ Φιλώταν τε καὶ Ἑλλάνικον,
οἷς ἡ φυλακὴ αὐτῶν ἐπετέτραπτο· ὡς δὲ καὶ
Ἀλέξανδρος ἐπεφάνη ἐν τῇ ἐκδρομῇ, τάς τε δᾷδας,
ὅσας ἔχοντες ἐκβεβοηθήκεσαν, ἀφέντες καὶ τὰ ὅπλα
οἱ πολλοὶ αὐτῶν ῥίψαντες εἴσω τοῦ τείχους
6ἔφευγον. καίτοι τά γε πρῶτα τῇ φύσει τε τοῦ
χωρίου, ὑπερδεξίου ὄντος, ἐπεκράτουν καὶ οὐ κατὰ
μέτωπον μόνον ἠκροβολίζοντο ἐς τοὺς προμαχομένους
τῶν μηχανῶν, ἀλλὰ καὶ ἐκ τῶν πύργων, οἳ
90Anabasis of Alexander I

missiles at the more distant enemies, though they334 b.c. were at a disadvantage in numbers and in the difficulty of the ground; the enemy could charge or volley on them from above. At this point more of Perdiccas’3 men hurried up, and others from the city too, and a stiff fight was joined near the wall. Once more the Macedonians drove the sallying force back inside the gates, and indeed the city was not far from being captured. For at the time the walls were not carefully4 guarded, and as two towers and one intervening curtain2 had fallen to their foundations, the approach to the wall would have been easy for the army, if all had applied themselves to the business. The third tower, moreover, had been badly shaken, and if undermined would itself easily have been brought down, but the besieged anticipated this by building on the inner side, in place of the wall where it had collapsed, a crescent-shaped brick structure;3 as they had many hands, this was easy work.
Next day Alexander brought up his engines against5 this wall; again a sally was made by those in the city to burn them. Part of the fence of mantlets near the walls and part of one of the wooden towers were burnt down; the rest was saved by Philotas and Hellanicus and their men, who had been entrusted with their protection. But when Alexander also appeared in the sally, they dropped the torches with which they had rushed out to attack, and most cast away their arms and escaped within the wall.4 Yet at first, from the nature of their commanding6 position, the besieged had the best of it, and they used to fire at the force protecting the engines not only from in front but also from the towers which



2D. 25, 5.3D. 26, 6.4Not in D.91