Arrian

ἥντινα ἀπολελοίπει Δαρεῖος, ἀλλὰ διαβαίνει τὸν
πόρον, χαλεπῶς μὲν δι᾿ ὀξύτητα τοῦ ῥοῦ, οὐδενὸς
δὲ εἴργοντος.
6Ἐνταῦθα ἀναπαύει τὸν στρατόν· καὶ τῆς
σελήνης τὸ πολὺ ἐκλιπὲς ἐγένετο· καὶ Ἀλέξανδρος
ἔθυε τῇ τε σελήνῃ καὶ τῷ ἡλίῳ καὶ τῇ γῇ, ὅτων τὸ
ἔργον τοῦτο λόγος εἶναι κατέχει. καὶ ἐδόκει
Ἀριστάνδρῳ πρὸς Μακεδόνων καὶ Ἀλεξάνδρου
εἶναι τῆς σελήνης τὸ πάθημα καὶ ἐκείνου τοῦ μηνὸς
ἔσεσθαι ἡ μάχη, καὶ ἐκ τῶν ἱερῶν νίκην σημαίνεσθαι
7Ἀλεξάνδρῳ. ἄρας δὲ ἀπὸ τοῦ Τίγρητος ᾔει
διὰ τῆς Ἀσσυρίας χώρας, ἐν ἀριστερᾷ μὲν ἔχων τὰ
Γορδυηνῶν ὄρη, ἐν δεξιᾷ δὲ αὐτὸν τὸν Τίγρητα.
τετάρτῃ δὲ ἡμέρᾳ ἀπὸ τῆς διαβάσεως οἱ πρόδρομοι
αὐτῷ ἐξαγγέλλουσιν, ὅτι ἱππεῖς ἐστιν οἳ1 πολέμιοι
ἀνὰ τὸ πεδίον φαίνονται, ὅσοι δέ, οὐκ ἔχειν
εἰκάσαι. ξυντάξας οὖν τὴν στρατιὰν προὐχώρει
ὡς ἐς μάχην· καὶ ἄλλοι αὖ τῶν προδρόμων προσελάσαντες
ἀκριβέστερον οὗτοι κατιδόντες ἔφασκον
δοκεῖν εἶναί σφισιν οὐ πλείους ἢ χιλίους τοὺς
ἱππέας.
8. Ἀναλαβὼν οὖν τήν τε βασιλικὴν ἴλην καὶ τῶν
ἑταίρων μίαν καὶ τῶν προδρόμων τοὺς Παίονας
ἤλαυνε σπουδῇ, τὴν δὲ ἄλλην στρατιὰν βάδην
ἕπεσθαι ἐκέλευσεν. οἱ δὲ τῶν Περσῶν ἱππεῖς
κατιδόντες τοὺς ἀμφ᾿ Ἀλέξανδρον ὀξέως ἐπάγοντας
ἔφευγον ἀνὰ κράτος. καὶ Ἀλέξανδρος διώκων
2ἐνέκειτο· καὶ οἱ μὲν πολλοὶ ἀπέφυγον, τοὺς δέ
τινας καὶ ἀπέκτειναν, ὅσοις οἱ ἵπποι ἐν τῇ φυγῇ
ἔκαμον, τοὺς δὲ καὶ ζῶντας αὐτοῖς ἵπποις ἔλαβον·

1ἐστιν οἳ Schmieder. Roos kept the MS οὗτοι.244Anabasis of Alexander III

behind, and crossed the river; this was difficult 331 b.c. because of the swiftness of the current, but there was no opposition.4
There he gave his army a rest. There was an6 almost total eclipse of the moon, and Alexander sacrificed [20–21 Sept.] to the Moon, Sun and Earth, who are all said to cause an eclipse. Aristander thought that the eclipse was favourable to the Macedonians and Alexander, that the battle would take place that month, and that the sacrifices portended victory to Alexander.5 Starting7 from the Tigris, Alexander passed through the Assyrian land with the Gordyenian mountains on his left,6 and the Tigris on his right. On the fourth day after the crossing,7 the prodromoi reported that some enemy cavalry were to be seen over the plain, but they could not guess their numbers. So he drew up his force and advanced as to battle; then other prodromoi rode in, who had made a more accurate inspection, and reported that they estimated the cavalry at no more than a thousand.
8. Alexander then took with him the royal squadron, one squadron of Companions and the Paeonian prodromoi and moved on rapidly, ordering the rest of the army to follow at marching pace. But the Persian cavalry, observing the troops with Alexander coming up rapidly, lost no time in flight. Alexander pressed the pursuit, and though the greater number2 of them got away, some whose horses wearied in the flight were killed and others captured alive with their




4D. 55, 3 ff.; QC. 9, 15 ff. make much of the difficulty of fording the river; QC. 9, 23 has Mazaeus attack immediately afterwards.5App. VIII 5. D. 55, 6 is worthless.6QC. 10, 8.7The place, not the day, of the crossing, to fit the timetable; the Greek word is ambiguous.245