Appendices

not make clear the full extent of their success and minimizes Greek support; while he is no doubt right in making out that island cities went over to them only as a result of treachery or force majeure, too little is said of the effects in Greece, cf. App. VI. Presumably the Spartan and Athenian envoys to Darius captured after Issus (ii 15, 2) had been sent off at this time. The Persian admirals would surely have done better to waste no time in the islands, and to have kept Antipater pre-occupied by threatening the Macedonian coast with part of their fleet, while taking the rest at once to Greece and raising revolts there; this criticism affects M., whose merits are commonly exaggerated, no less than his successors. Of course it was Darius who made the major error in withdrawing the mercenaries and putting everything to the test of battle with Al.
4. As no reliance could be placed on Athens, Hegelochus was able to do no more in 333 than defeat a Persian squadron in the Hellespont (QC. iv 1, 36) and perhaps then regain Tenedos (A. iii 2, 3); only after Issus, when Greek cities despaired of Persian victory, could he once more mobilize 160 ships; his successes contemporary with the siege of Tyre (perhaps Feb.-Aug. 332) are described in some detail by QC. iv 5, 14 ff., cf. A. iii 2, who characteristically relates them in connection with the report he made in person to Al. in Egypt (cf. iii 2, 3 n.), and with decisions Al. then took, cf. QC. iv 8, 11–14. Here again A. stresses that the Greeks of the islands really favoured Macedon throughout, and says nothing of sentiments on the mainland. No doubt this represents the line taken by Pt. and Ar. For Eresus and Chios Tod 191 f. supply further data.
456Appendices
Appendix III
Issus
1. This appendix is concerned principally with the relation of A’s account to that of Callisthenes (henceforth C.), which in my judgement was the basis of those A. found in his sources. For an account of the battle and previous manoeuvres see Fuller 154 f. Like most other modern discussions this rests on the topographical investigations of Col. Janke (Auf Alexanders des Grossen Pfaden, 1904, cf. Klio X 137 ff.), whose findings are summarized by F. W. Walbank in his commentary on Polybius XII 17–22; they are rejected by Lane Fox. Maps are supplied by e.g. Fuller and Walbank.
2. In describing military operations ancient writers were in a difficulty in that they and their readers normally had no relevant maps. The best they could do was to provide a verbal description of the terrain. This was what C. attempted, but in some points his description was false or misleading. We do not know if Pt. or Ar. repeated or corrected his topographical account; certainly A. failed to do so; likewise QC., whose story seems in part to derive from the same ultimate source and sometimes supplements what A. tells us, at any rate for events before the battle itself. Probably neither of them understood the topography better than P., who thought that the two armies ‘missed one another in the night’ (20, 3). Certainly their accounts of the marches before the battle must have been obscure to any reader not possessed of the kind of information Janke supplied.
457