Appendices

of Zeus’ than ‘descendent of Zeus’ (which Al. was officially, through Heracles), and in the light of C’s own account of what the prophet at Siwah had said, that is surely what C. intended to convey. Thus he represents Al. as accepting that he was a son of Zeus. Doubts may still arise: Al’s true formulation in the prayer may have been more ambiguous. There is no clear confirmation of the statements of QC. iv 7, 30 and vi 11, 23 (implicitly contradicted in viii 5, 5) that he officially ordered his divine filiation to be acknowledged, while still in Egypt, or at any time. His wish for such recognition, however, consistently appears in ‘vulgate’ accounts of opposition to Al. among his own followers, in the trial of Philotas (QC. vi 10, 26 f.), in connection with Clitus’ murder (A iv 8, 2; QC. viii 1, 42; P. 50,6) and with proscynesis (A. iv 9, 9; QC. viii 5, 5) and in the trial of Hermolaus (QC. viii 7, 12; 8, 14; 10, 1 and 29). Ephippus of Olynthus, a contemporary (Pearson, LH 61), albeit hostile, averred that he dressed up as Ammon (but also as Artemis and Hermes) and that Gorgos. who was at least a historic person (Pearson 64), crowned him as son of Ammon. More important, A. tells on the authority of one or both of his main sources that the Oxydracae had heard that Al. was son of a god (vi 14, 2, reading θεοῦ; see note ad loc.) and that at Opis the mutinous troops gibed at his supposed claim to be son of Ammon (vii 8, 3). The story in vii 2, 3 and Strabo xv 1, 68 also presupposes that Al. was claiming in 326 to be son of Zeus; Strabo’s version comes from Megasthenes, a contemporary who was familiar with Sibyrtius, one of Al’s satraps, but A’s may perhaps be derived from Nearchus (cf. note ad loc.); in any event the authority is good. At Athens in 324 Demosthenes could allude contemptuously
476Appendices

to Al’s desire to be son of Zeus or Posidon (Hyperides, contra Dem. 31).
9. Tarn and others hold that as Pharaoh Al. was son of Amun-Ra in a mystic sense that did not exclude Philip’s paternity, and that the meaning of his mystic relation to the god was privately explained to him by the prophet at Siwah. Such a private interview remains possible, even if there were other responses which his companions overheard, and this theory gives a good sense to ‘in part’ in 3, 2. Yet, as on Tarn’s view Al. never divulged what he had been told (supra), there is necessarily no direct evidence for his hypothesis. Equally, it cannot be refuted by Al’s supposed denial in a letter to the Samians that Philip was his father (P. 28); the fact that this letter corresponds in other respects to what we know to be true does not prove its authenticity, and it should be rejected, not because it does not fit Tarn’s case, but on general grounds (Introd. 15). It is only one of many texts that show how men took Al. to be claiming that he was son of Zeus in the same sense as Heracles. A. himself clearly adopted this view (vii 29, 3). So presumably did the mutineers at Opis (vii 8, 3). Tarn concedes this and says that the misunderstanding provoked Al. to fury. But his indignation is equally easy to explain, if the men understood him perfectly
well: he was angry because they were ridiculing
its absurdity. On the other hand we cannot call in as proof that they were right the stories (possibly
true) that Olympias herself put it about that she had been impregnated by a snake, sacred to Ammon and disguising the god (P. 2 etc., cf. A. iv
10, 2 from the ‘vulgate’), for we do not know that Al. himself favoured them.
477