Appendices

conceal that part of his conduct which could command sympathy even among Macedonians. A. himself was worried by the disagreement of Pt. and Ar. on his fate (14, 4), and was not certain about his guilt (12, 7; 14, 1). But it was not such disquiet that obliged him to forsake his chief authorities; here they had too little, or nothing, to say about stories that ‘were notable and not wholly incredible’, and he had to turn to some other writer or writers, who probably did not follow a strictly chronological plan; it was then beyond A’s skill to insert their account or accounts at the right temporal point.
5. The story in 12, 3–5 comes from the contemporary, Chares (cf. P. 54); the slight differences in the two versions, in particular the mention of the hearth in P., omitted by A., illustrates how in transmission details could be added or subtracted. We do not know of course that either A. or P. read Chares for himself, nor (as often assumed) that Chares was an eye-witness. However, his account may well be true, whereas the story of the debate in 10, 5–12, 2, told with significant variations in QC. viii 5, 5 ff., where Agis and Cleo replace Anaxarchus, must be false (cf. § 7 ff. below). Not even the statement in 12, 1 (cf. QC. viii 5, 21), that Al. gave up the attempt to impose proscynesis on the Macedonians can be trusted in itself; it is incompatible with another tale from the ‘vulgate’ in 14, 2. The anecdote about Leonnatus in 12, 2 finds parallels (and differences) in stories of Polyperchon in QC. viii 5, 22 and (in a later context) of Cassander in P. 74, 1; whether true or false, all have some value in illustrating the repugnance Macedonians felt for proscynesis, but for which they would not even have been invented; it is noteworthy
536Appendices

that it does not feature among the Oriental practices of which the Macedonians complained at Opis in 324 (vii 6, 3 ff.; 8, 2 f.); and this does make it probable that Al. had ceased to demand it of his western followers. It is plain that the ‘vulgate’, whether or not the term be used to include Chares, of whose general reliability we may have our doubts (cf. § 13 below and ii 11, 4 n.), consists of a variety of traditions or fictions, cf. also 9, 2; 14, 4.
6. A’s account of the murder of Clitus can be compared with those of QC. vii 1, 19 ff. and P. 50 f. All know of the official version that the neglect of Dionysus’ rites was to blame (cf. also the table of contents in D.). A. has it that the quarrel started with men talking in a way that implied that Al. was son of Zeus (8, 2 cf. 9, 9), and QC. 1, 42 and P. 50, 5 make Clitus gibe at his claim to be son of Ammon (cf. App. V 6). P. 51, 1–3 makes him complain of A’s Orientalizing, and one would guess that this was in A’s source, to explain his inserting the story after 7, 4 ff., though he forgets to bring the point out in his own narrative. In all accounts Clitus depreciates Al’s achievements in comparison with those of Philip and the Macedonians. There are also many minor divergencies. It would be unrewarding to analyse them. Even if all our sources went back to one basically reliable witness, his testimony could easily have been carelessly transmitted or deliberately altered by later writers; or equally, if there was more than one such witness, we could expect confused and contradictory recollections of a drunken brawl. The exact truth cannot be recovered. For the sequel QC. viii 2, 1–12 and P. 52 again show both similarities with and differences from the ‘vulgate’ in A., one of many
537