Arrian
9μηχανῶν, αἷς κατασείειν ἐπενόει τὸ τεῖχος. καὶ ἥ
τε τάφρος αὐτῷ ἐχώσθη οὐ χαλεπῶς καὶ οἱ πύργοι
προσήγοντο ἤδη. οἱ δὲ ἐκ τῆς Ἁλικαρνασσοῦ
νυκτὸς ἐκδραμόντες, ὡς ἐμπρῆσαι τούς τε πύργους
καὶ ὅσαι ἄλλαι μηχαναὶ προσηγμέναι ἢ οὐ πόρρω
τοῦ προ<σ>άγεσθαι ἦσαν, ὑπὸ τῶν φυλακῶν τε
τῶν Μακεδόνων καὶ ὅσοι ἐν αὐτῷ τῷ ἔργῳ
ἐξεγερθέντες παρεβοήθησαν οὐ χαλεπῶς κατεκλείσθησαν
10ἐς τὰ τείχη αὖθις. καὶ ἀπέθανον αὐτῶν
ἄλλοι τε ἐς ἑβδομήκοντα καὶ ἑκατὸν καὶ Νεοπτόλεμος
ὁ Ἀρραβαίου, τοῦ Ἀμύντου ἀδελφός, τῶν
παρὰ Δαρεῖον αὐτομολησάντων· τῶν δὲ Ἀλεξάνδρου
στρατιωτῶν ἀπέθανον μὲν ἐς ἑκκαίδεκα,
τραυματίαι δὲ ἐγένοντο ἐς τριακοσίους, ὅτι ἐν νυκτὶ
γενομένης τῆς ἐκδρομῆς ἀφυλακτότεροι ἐς τὸ
τιτρώσκεσθαι ἦσαν.
21. Οὐ πολλαῖς δὲ ἡμέραις ὕστερον δύο τῶν
Μακεδόνων ὁπλῖται ἐκ τῆς [ὕστερον] Περδίκκου
τάξεως ξυσκηνοῦντές τε καὶ ἅμα ξυμπίνοντες
αὑτόν τε καὶ τὰ αὑτοῦ ἑκάτερος ἐπὶ μέγα τῷ λόγῳ
ἦγεν. ἔνθα δὴ φιλοτιμία τε ἐσπίπτει αὐτοῖς, καί τι
καὶ ὁ οἶνος ὑπεθέρμαινεν, ὥστε ὁπλισάμενοι αὐτοὶ
ἐπὶ σφῶν προσβάλλουσι τῷ τείχει κατὰ τὴν ἄκραν
τὴν πρὸς Μύλασα μάλιστα τετραμμένην, ὡς
ἐπίδειξιν τῆς σφῶν ῥώμης μᾶλλόν τι ἢ πρὸς
πολεμίους μετὰ κινδύνου τὸν ἀγῶνα ποιησόμενοι.
2καὶ τούτους κατιδόντες τινὲς τῶν ἐκ τῆς πόλεως
δύο τε ὄντας καὶ οὐ ξὺν λογισμῷ προσφερομένους
τῷ τείχει ἐπεκθέουσιν. οἱ δὲ τοὺς μὲν ἐγγὺς πελάσαντας
ἀπέκτειναν, πρὸς δὲ τοὺς ἀφεστηκότας


88Anabasis of Alexander I

which he designed to batter down the wall.5 The9 334 b.c. ditch was filled up by him without difficulty and he began at once to bring up the towers. The garrison of Halicarnassus, however, made a night sally, to burn the towers and the other engines which had been brought up, or were nearly in position. But they were easily enclosed again in their city walls by the Macedonian guards and others who were aroused in the course of the action itself and rushed to their help. They lost up to 170 men, including10 Neoptolemus son of Arrabaeus, brother of Amyntas, one of those who had deserted to Darius: up to sixteen of Alexander’s troops fell, but three hundred were wounded, since the sally was at night and they were less protected against wounds.6
21. Not many days after, two Macedonian men-at-arms of Perdiccas’ battalion, who were bivouacked and drinking together, were each boasting of his own prowess and actions: rivalry arose, assisted by the heating fumes of wine; so they armed themselves and attacked the wall by the height which looks chiefly towards Mylasa, their idea being to exhibit their strength rather than to force a perilous encounter with the enemy.1 Some of those in the2
city sighted them, only two men rashly approaching the wall, and made a dash out at them. But they killed those who came up close and discharged


5See E. W. Marsden, Greek and Roman Artillery, esp. ch. II and p. 101. For plan see Fuller 201.6D. 24, 4–25, 5 supplements § 7–10, but makes Neoptolemus fall on the Macedonian side, rightly according to Welles ad loc. since Amyntas remained in Al’s favour; but he is last mentioned in 28, 4, and Alexander the Lyncestian was still employed after his brothers had been executed for treason (25); an error in A’s Macedonian sources is less likely than a careless assumption by D. that a Macedonian notable must have fought for Alexander.1D. 25, 5 f.89