Arrian

αἴρει ἀπὸ τοῦ ὄρους ἔνθεν ὀφθήσεσθαι ὑπὸ Ἀλεξάνδρου
ἔμελλεν. καὶ ὤφθη τε ἅμα ἡ φλὸξ καὶ
Ἀλέξανδρος ἐπῆγε τῇ ὑστεραίᾳ τὴν στρατιάν·
ἀμυνομένων δὲ τῶν βαρβάρων οὐδὲν πλέον αὐτῷ
3ὑπὸ δυσχωρίας ἐγίγνετο. ὡς δὲ Ἀλεξάνδρῳ
ἄπορον τὴν προσβολὴν κατέμαθον οἱ βάρβαροι,
ἀναστρέψαντες τοῖς ἀμφὶ Πτολεμαῖον αὐτοὶ προσέβαλλον·
καὶ γίγνεται αὐτῶν τε καὶ τῶν Μακεδόνων
μάχη καρτερά, τῶν μὲν διασπάσαι τὸν
χάρακα σπουδὴν ποιουμένων, τῶν Ἰνδῶν, Πτολεμαίου
δὲ διαφυλάξαι τὸ χωρίον· καὶ μεῖον
σχόντες οἱ βάρβαροι ἐν τῷ ἀκροβολισμῷ νυκτὸς
ἐπιγενομένης ἀπεχώρησαν.
4Ἀλέξανδρος δὲ τῶν Ἰνδῶν τινα τῶν αὐτομόλων
πιστόν τε ἄλλως καὶ τῶν χωρίων δαήμονα ἐπιλεξάμενος
πέμπει παρὰ Πτολεμαῖον τῆς νυκτὸς,
γράμματα φέροντα [τὸν Ἰνδόν],1 ἵνα ἐνεγέγραπτο,
ἐπειδὰν αὐτὸς προσβάλλῃ τῇ πέτρᾳ, τὸν δὲ ἐπιέναι
τοῖς βαρβάροις κατὰ τὸ ὄρος μηδὲ ἀγαπᾶν ἐν
φυλακῇ ἔχοντα τὸ χωρίον, ὡς ἀμφοτέρωθεν βαλλομένους
5τοὺς Ἰνδοὺς ἀμφιβόλους γίγνεσθαι. καὶ
αὐτὸς ἅμα τῇ ἡμέρᾳ ἄρας ἐκ τοῦ στρατοπέδου
προσῆγε τὴν στρατιὰν κατὰ τὴν πρόσβασιν, ᾗ
Πτολεμαῖος λαθὼν ἀνέβη, γνώμην ποιούμενος,
ὡς, εἰ ταύτῃ βιασάμενος ξυμμίξει τοῖς ἀμφὶ
Πτολεμαῖον, οὐ χαλεπὸν ἔτι ἐσόμενον αὐτῷ τὸ
6ἔργον. καὶ ξυνέβη οὕτως. ἔστε μὲν γὰρ ἐπὶ
μεσημβρίαν ξυνειστήκει καρτερὰ μάχη τοῖς τε
Ἰνδοῖς καὶ τοῖς Μακεδόσιν, τῶν μὲν ἐκβιαζομένων
ἐς τὴν πρόσβασιν, τῶν δὲ βαλλόντων ἀνιόντας· ὡς
δὲ οὐκ ἀνίεσαν οἱ Μακεδόνες, ἄλλοι ἐπ᾿ ἄλλοις

1Deleted by Polak.440Anabasis Of Alexander IV

Alexander was likely to see it. The flare was seen326 b.c. at once, and next day Alexander brought up his army; the barbarians offered opposition and he had no success, owing to difficulties of terrain. But as3 soon as the barbarians realized that Alexander’s advance was impracticable, they turned and attacked Ptolemy and his troops, and a fierce battle took place between them and the Macedonians, the Indians trying strenuously to pull down the stockade, Ptolemy to keep his hold on the position; the barbarians had the worst of the exchange of missiles, and withdrew at nightfall.
Alexander selected a deserter from the Indians,4 whom he trusted and who also had exact knowledge of the locality, and sent him by night to Ptolemy with a letter directing him, as soon as Alexander himself approached the rock, to attack the barbarians from the height and not to content himself with merely defending the position; the Indians would then not know which way to turn, when they were fired on from both sides. At dawn Alexander himself5 moved from his camp and brought his army to the approach by which Ptolemy had secretly ascended, reckoning that if he could force his way in this direction and join Ptolemy’s force, he would have no more difficulty in the task. That was what happened. Until midday there was a fierce battle between the6 Indians and the Macedonians, who tried to force the approach, while the Indians volleyed at them as they climbed up. But as the Macedonians kept constantly coming up, one detachment after another, while their
441