Arrian
ΒΙΒΛΙΟΝ ΤΡΙΤΟΝ
1. Ἀλέξανδρος δὲ ἐπ᾿ Αἰγύπτου, ἵναπερ τὸ
πρῶτον ὡρμήθη, ἐστέλλετο, καὶ ἑβδόμῃ ἡμέρᾳ
ἀπό τῆς Γάζης ἐλαύνων ἧκεν εἰς Πηλούσιον τῆς
Αἰγύπτου. ὁ δὲ ναυτικὸς στρατὸς παρέπλει αὐτῷ
ἐκ Φοινίκης ὡς ἐπ᾿ Αἴγυπτον· καὶ καταλαμβάνει
2τὰς ναῦς ἐν Πηλουσίῳ ὁρμούσας. Μαζάκης δὲ ὁ
Πέρσης, ὃς ἦν σατράπης Αἰγύπτου ἐκ Δαρείου
καθεστηκώς, τήν τε ἐν Ἰσσῷ μάχην ὅπως συνέβη
πεπυσμένος καὶ Δαρεῖον ὅτι αἰσχρᾷ φυγῇ ἔφυγεν,
καὶ Φοινίκην τε καὶ Συρίαν καὶ τῆς Ἀραβίας τὰ
πολλὰ ὑπὸ Ἀλεξάνδρου ἐχόμενα, αὐτῷ τε οὐκ
οὔσης δυνάμεως Περσικῆς, ἐδέχετο ταῖς τε πόλεσι
3φιλίως καὶ τῇ χώρᾳ Ἀλέξανδρον. ὁ δὲ εἰς μὲν
Πηλούσιον φυλακὴν εἰσήγαγε, τοὺς δὲ ἐπὶ τῶν
νεῶν ἀναπλεῖν κατὰ τὸν ποταμὸν κελεύσας ἔστε ἐπὶ
Μέμφιν πόλιν αὐτὸς ἐφ᾿ Ἡλιουπόλεως ᾔει,
ἐν δεξιᾷ ἔχων τὸν ποταμὸν τὸν Νεῖλον, καὶ ὅσα
καθ᾿ ὁδὸν χωρία ἐνδιδόντων τῶν ἐνοικούντων
κατασχὼν διὰ τῆς ἐρήμου ἀφίκετο ἐς Ἡλιούπολιν·
4ἐκεῖθεν δὲ διαβὰς τὸν πόρον ἧκεν ἐς Μέμφιν· καὶ
θύει ἐκεῖ τοῖς τε ἄλλοις θεοῖς καὶ τῷ Ἄπιδι καὶ
ἀγῶνα ἐποίησε γυμνικόν τε καὶ μουσικόν· ἧκον δὲ
αὐτῷ οἱ ἀμφὶ ταῦτα τεχνῖται ἐκ τῆς Ἑλλάδος οἱ



222Anabasis of Alexander III


Book III
1. Alexander now set out for Egypt, his original 332–1 b.c. goal, and marching from Gaza arrived after six days at Pelusium in Egypt.1 His fleet coasted along with him from Phoenicia towards Egypt; and he found them already at anchor at Pelusium. Mazaces the2 Persian, who had been appointed satrap of Egypt by Darius, on learning how the battle of Issus had gone, of the shameful flight of Darius, and that Phoenicia, Syria, and the greater part of Arabia were in Alexander’s hands, and being without any Persian force, 2 received Alexander in a friendly way into the cities and the country.3 Alexander put a garrison into3 Pelusium, told the officers of his fleet to sail up the river as far as Memphis and went in person towards Heliopolis, with the river Nile on his right; he took over all the districts on his route through the surrender of the inhabitants, and traversed the desert to reach Heliopolis. Thence he crossed the river and4 went to Memphis, where he sacrificed to the gods, especially Apis, and held athletic and musical games; the most famous performers in both athletics

1Nov. 332 b. c., cf. ii 26, 1 n., the right season for invading Egypt.2The Persian garrison had presumably been removed to fight at Issus under the satrap, Sauaces, ii 11, 8.3D. 49, 1 f. and QC. iv 7, 1 ff. rightly stress that the Egyptians, who had been independent of Persia between 405 b.c. and the imperfect reconquest by Artaxerxes Ochus in 343/2 b.c. and again in 338–6 b.c. (F. K. Kienitz, Die politische Gesch. Aegyptens vom 7. bis zum 4. Jahrhundert 102 ff.; A. T. Olmstead,
Hist. of Persian Empire 440 f.; 491 ff.), welcomed the enemy of Persia (cf. also ii 13, 3 n.), especially no doubt as he, unlike Ochus, was careful to honour Egyptian gods (§ 4 f.).223