Arrian

χωρίον διέσχεν ὀλίγον ἐς πλάτος, παρήγαγε τοὺς
ἱππέας, τούς τε ἑταίρους καλουμένους καὶ τοὺς
Θεσσαλοὺς καὶ τοὺς Μακεδόνας.1 καὶ τούτους μὲν
ἐπὶ τῷ δεξιῷ κέρᾳ ἅμα οἷ ἔταξε, τοὺς δὲ ἐκ
Πελοποννήσου καὶ τὸ ἄλλο τὸ συμμαχικὸν ἐπὶ τὸ
εὐώνυμον πέμπει ὡς Παρμενίωνα.
10Δαρεῖος δέ, ὡς συντεταγμένη ἤδη ἦν αὐτῷ ἡ
φάλαγξ, τοὺς ἱππέας, οὕστινας πρὸ τοῦ ποταμοῦ
ἐπὶ τῷδε προτετάχει ὅπως ἀσφαλῶς αὐτῷ ἡ
ἔκταξις τῆς στρατιᾶς γένοιτο, ἀνεκάλεσεν ἀπὸ
ξυνθήματος. καὶ τούτων τοὺς μὲν πολλοὺς ἐπὶ τῷ
δεξιῷ κέρατι πρὸς τῇ θαλάσσῃ κατὰ Παρμενίωνα
ἔταξεν, ὅτι ταύτῃ μᾶλλόν τι ἱππάσιμα ἦν, μέρος δέ
τι αὐτῶν καὶ ἐπὶ τὸ εὐώνυμον πρὸς τὰ ὄρη παρήγαγεν.
11ὡς δὲ ἀχρεῖοι ἐνταῦθα διὰ στενότητα
τῶν χωρίων ἐφαίνοντο, καὶ τούτων τοὺς πολλοὺς
παριππεῦσαι ἐπὶ τὸ δεξιὸν κέρας σφῶν ἐκέλευσεν.
αὐτὸς δὲ Δαρεῖος τὸ μέσον τῆς πάσης τάξεως
ἐπεῖχεν, καθάπερ νόμος τοῖς Περσῶν βασιλεῦσι
τετάχθαι· καὶ τὸν νοῦν τῆς τάξεως ταύτης
Ξενοφῶν ὁ τοῦ Γρύλλου ἀναγέγραφεν.
9. Ἐν τούτῳ δὲ Ἀλέξανδρος κατιδὼν ὀλίγου
πᾶσαν τὴν τῶν Περσῶν ἵππον μετακεχωρηκυῖαν
ἐπὶ τὸ εὐώνυμον τὸ ἑαυτοῦ ὡς πρὸς τὴν θάλασσαν,
αὑτῷ δὲ τοὺς Πελοποννησίους μόνους καὶ τοὺς
ἄλλους τῶν ξυμμάχων ἱππέας ταύτῃ τεταγμένους,
πέμπει κατὰ τάχος τοὺς Θεσσαλοὺς ἱππέας ἐπὶ τὸ
εὐώνυμον, κελεύσας μὴ πρὸ τοῦ μετώπου τῆς
πάσης τάξεως παριππεῦσαι, τοῦ μὴ καταφανεῖς
τοῖς πολεμίοις γενέσθαι μεταχωροῦντας, ἀλλὰ

1See historical note.152Anabasis of Alexander II

outwards a little as he went forward, brought into 333 b.c. line his cavalry, the so-called Companions, the Thessalians and the . . . whom he posted with himself on the right wing while the Peloponnesians and other allies were sent to Parmenio on the left.6
His phalanx once in due order, Darius recalled by10 signal the cavalry he had placed in front of the river7 to cover the deployment of the army and posted most of them opposite Parmenio on the right wing by the sea, because it was rather better ground for cavalry, though some were sent to the left wing near the hills. But as they appeared useless there for want11 of space, he ordered most of them too to ride round to their right wing. Darius himself held the centre of his whole host, the customary position for Persian kings; Xenophon son of Gryllus has recorded the purpose of the arrangement.8
9. At this Alexander, observing that nearly all the Persian cavalry had been transferred to his left, resting on the sea, while he had only the Peloponnesians and the other allied horse on this side, despatched the Thessalian cavalry at full speed to the left, with orders not to ride in front of the line, so that their change of position might not be sighted by the enemy, but to pass unobserved behind the



6QC. 9, 8. I have marked a lacuna where the MSS read ‘Macedonians’; some other cavalry units must be meant, perhaps prodromoi (9, 2).7QC. 8, 27 f. confuses this force with the outflanking force on the Persian left.8Xen., Anab. i 8, 21 f. Contrast QC. 9, 4.153