Arrian
3Ἀθηναίων ἑάλωσαν. τὰ δὲ ἐν Πελοποννήσῳ ὅτι
αὐτῷ νενεωτερίσθαι ἀπήγγελτο, Ἀμφοτερὸν πέμπει
βοηθεῖν Πελοποννησίων ὅσοι ἔς τε τὸν Περσικὸν
πόλεμον βέβαιοι ἦσαν καὶ Λακεδαιμονίων οὐ
κατήκουον. Φοίνιξι δὲ καὶ Κυπρίοις προσετάχθη
ἑκατὸν ναῦς ἄλλας πρὸς αἷς ἔχοντα Ἀμφοτερὸν
ἔπεμπε στέλλειν ἐπὶ Πελοποννήσου.
4Αὐτὸς δὲ ἤδη ἄνω ὡρμᾶτο ὡς ἐπὶ Θάψακόν τε
καὶ τὸν Εὐφράτην ποταμόν, ἐν Φοινίκῃ μὲν ἐπὶ τῶν
φόρων τῇ ξυλλογῇ καταστήσας Κοίρανον Βεροιαῖον,
Φιλόξενον δὲ τῆς Ἀσίας τὰ ἐπὶ τάδε τοῦ Ταύρου
ἐκλέγειν. τῶν ξὺν αὑτῷ δὲ χρημάτων τὴν φυλακὴν
ἀντὶ τούτων ἐπέτρεψεν Ἁρπάλῳ τῷ Μαχάτα ἄρτι
5ἐκ τῆς φυγῆς ἥκοντι. Ἅρπαλος γὰρ τὰ μὲν
πρῶτα ἔφυγε, Φιλίππου ἔτι βασιλεύοντος, ὅτι
πιστὸς ἦν <Ἀλεξάνδρῳ1>, καὶ Πτολεμαῖος ὁ
Λάγου ἐπὶ τῷ αὐτῷ ἔφυγε καὶ Νέαρχος ὁ Ἀνδροτίμου
καὶ Ἐριγύϊος ὁ Λαρίχου καὶ Λαομέδων ὁ
τούτου ἀδελφός, ὅτι ὕποπτα ἦν Ἀλεξάνδρῳ ἐς
Φίλιππον, ἐπειδὴ Εὐρυδίκην γυναῖκα ἠγάγετο
Φίλιππος, Ὀλυμπιάδα δὲ τὴν Ἀλεξάνδρου μητέρα
6ἠτίμασε. τελευτήσαντος δὲ Φιλίππου κατελθόντας
ἀπὸ τῆς φυγῆς ὅσοι δι᾿ αὐτὸν ἔφευγον Πτολεμαῖον
μὲν σωματοφύλακα κατέστησεν, Ἅρπαλον δὲ ἐπὶ
τῶν χρημάτων, ὅτι αὐτῷ τὸ σῶμα ἐς τὰ πολέμια
ἀχρεῖον ἦν, Ἐριγύϊον δὲ ἱππάρχην τῶν ξυμμάχων,
Λαομέδοντα δὲ τὸν τούτου ἀδελφόν, ὅτι δίγλωσσος
ἦν [ἐς τὰ βαρβαρικὰ γράμματα],2 ἐπὶ τοῖς αἰχμαλώτοις
βαρβάροις, Νέαρχον δὲ σατραπεύειν Λυκίας


1I have followed a suggestion of Roos and inserted Ἀλεξάνδρῳ. Arrian’s style always favours absolute explicitness.2[ἐς . . . γράμματα]. Surely a gloss.238Anabasis of Alexander III

captured at the Granicus.3 On learning that there3 331 b.c. was a movement of revolt against him in the Peloponnese, he sent Amphoterus to help the Peloponnesians who were loyal in regard to the Persian war and were not giving ear to the Lacedaemonians. Orders were also given to the Phoenicians and Cyprians to send to the Peloponnese a hundred ships in addition to those he was despatching under command of Amphoterus.
Alexander himself was already starting inland4 towards Thapsacus and the river Euphrates, after appointing Coeranus, a Beroean, to collect taxes in Phoenicia, and Philoxenus to be collector in Asia this side of the Taurus.4 In their place he entrusted the custody of the moneys with him to Harpalus son of Machatas, who had just returned from exile; Harpalus had first been sent into exile while Philip5 was still on the throne, because he was loyal to Alexander; Ptolemy son of Lagos was exiled on the same account, with Nearchus son of Androtimus, Erigyius son of Larichus and Laomedon his brother, since there was a lack of confidence between Alexander and Philip after Philip took Eurydice to wife, and disgraced Olympias the mother of Alexander.5 On Philip’s death those who had been banished on6 Alexander’s account returned, Ptolemy was appointed one of the bodyguards, Harpalus treasurer, since his physique made him unfit for fighting, Erigyius commander of the allied cavalry, Laomedon his brother, since he was bilingual,6 officer in charge of the barbarian captives, and Nearchus satrap of




3Cf. i 29, 5; on § 3 f. see App. VI.4See Badian, GR 1965, 168 f.; Ancient Society and Institutions (Studies presented to V. L. Ehrenberg) 54 ff.5Introd. § 47; for the name Eurydice cf. Berve no. 434.6Presumably meaning that he knew Persian or Aramaic.239