Arrian

δοκιμώτατοι. ἐκ δὲ Μέμφιος κατέπλει κατὰ τὸν
ποταμὸν ὡς ἐπὶ θάλασσαν τούς τε ὑπασπιστὰς ἐπὶ
τῶν νεῶν λαβὼν καὶ τοὺς τοξότας καὶ τοὺς
Ἀγριᾶνας καὶ τῶν ἱππέων τὴν βασιλικὴν ἴλην τὴν
5τῶν ἑταίρων. ἐλθὼν δὲ ἐς Κάνωβον καὶ κατὰ τὴν
λίμνην τὴν Μαρίαν περιπλεύσας ἀποβαίνει, ὅπου
νῦν Ἀλεξάνδρεια πόλις ᾤκισται, Ἀλεξάνδρου
ἐπώνυμος. καὶ ἔδοξεν αὐτῷ ὁ χῶρος κάλλιστος
κτίσαι ἐν αὐτῷ πόλιν καὶ γενέσθαι ἂν εὐδαίμονα
τὴν πόλιν. πόθος οὖν λαμβάνει αὐτὸν τοῦ ἔργου,
καὶ αὐτὸς τὰ σημεῖα τῇ πόλει ἔθηκεν, ἵνα τε
ἀγορὰν ἐν αὐτῇ δείμασθαι ἔδει καὶ ἱερὰ ὅσα καὶ
θεῶν ὧντινων, τῶν μὲν Ἑλληνικῶν, Ἴσιδος δὲ
Αἰγυπτίας, καὶ τὸ τεῖχος ᾗ περιβεβλῆσθαι. καὶ
ἐπὶ τούτοις ἐθύετο, καὶ τὰ ἱερὰ καλὰ ἐφαίνετο.
2. Λέγεται δέ τις καὶ τοιόσδε λόγος, οὐκ ἄπιστος
ἔμοιγε· ἐθέλειν μὲν Ἀλέξανδρον καταλείπειν
αὐτὸν τὰ σημεῖα τοῦ τειχισμοῦ τοῖς τέκτοσιν, οὐκ
εἶναι δὲ ὅτῳ τὴν γῆν ἐπιγράψουσιν· τῶν δὴ τεκτόνων
τινὰ ἐπιφρασθέντα, ὅσα ἐν τεύχεσιν ἄλφιτα οἱ
στρατιῶται ἐκόμιζον ξυναγαγόντα ἐπιβάλλειν τῇ
γῇ, ἵναπερ ὁ βασιλεὺς ὑφηγεῖτο, καὶ τὸν κύκλον
οὕτω περιγραφῆναι τοῦ περιτειχισμοῦ, ὅντινα τῇ
2πόλει ἐποίει. τοῦτο δὲ ἐπιλεξαμένους τοὺς μάντεις
καὶ μάλιστα δὴ Ἀρίστανδρον τὸν Τελμισσέα, ὃς δὴ


224Anabasis of Alexander III

and music came to him there from Greece. From 332–1 b.c. Memphis he sailed downstream towards the sea, taking on board the hypaspists, archers and Agrianians, and from the cavalry the royal squadron of the Companions. When he had reached Canobus and5 sailed round Lake Mareotis, he went ashore where the city of Alexandria, named after him, is now situated. It struck him that the position was admirable for founding a city there and that it would prosper.4 A longing for the work therefore seized him;5 he himself marked out where the city’s marketplace was to be built, how many temples there were to be and the gods, some Greek, and Isis the Egyptian, for whom they were to be erected, and where the wall was to be built round it. With this in view he offered sacrifice, and the sacrifice proved favourable.
2. A story of the following sort is told,1 and personally I do not disbelieve it; Alexander desired to leave the builders outlines of the fortification, but had no means of marking the ground. One of the builders, however, had the happy thought of collecting the meal which the soldiers carried in vessels, and of dropping it on the ground wherever the king indicated. In this way was the circle of the surrounding wall which he proposed to make for the city marked out. The soothsayers, and especially Aristander2 the Telmissian, who was reported to have



4Cf. P. 26; D. 52, QC. iv 8, 1 f. and 5 f. and J. xi 11, 3
put the foundation of Alexandria after the visit to Siwah,
cf. App. V 1. Site: Strabo xvii 1, 6 f.; P. M. Fraser, Ptolemaic
Alexandria ch. 1. Strabo says that the settlers were natives
(cf. QC. iv 8, 5), mercenaries and Greeks; for parallels: A. iv 4, 1; 22, 5; 24, 7; v 29, 3; vii 21, 7. Al’s motives for founding cities: iv 1, 3 f.; 24, 7; vi 15, 2; 21, 5; 22, 3; vii 21, 7. He inherited from Philip the practice of commemorating his own name in such foundations, cf. Philippi, Philippopolis.5App. V 3.1‘Vulgate’, cf. QC. iv 8, 6; P. 26. For A’s comment, cf. his preface.225