Arrian

ἐγκλίνουσι ταύτῃ πρῶτον, ᾗ Ἀλέξανδρος
προεκινδύνευεν. ὡς δὲ τὸ μέσον ἐνεδεδώκει αὐτοῖς,
παρερρήγνυτο δὴ καὶ τὰ ἐφ᾿ ἑκάτερα τῆς ἵππου,
2καὶ ἦν δὴ φυγὴ καρτερά. τῶν μὲν δὴ ἱππέων τῶν
Περσῶν ἀπέθανον εἰς χιλίους. οὐ γὰρ πολλὴ ἡ
δίωξις ἐγένετο, ὅτι ἐξετράπη Ἀλέξανδρος ἐπὶ τοὺς
ξένους τοὺς μισθοφόρους· ὧν τὸ στῖφος, ᾗ τὸ
πρῶτον ἐτάχθη, ἐκπλήξει μᾶλλόν τι τοῦ παραλόγου
ἢ λογισμῷ βεβαίῳ ἔμενεν· καὶ τούτοις τήν τε
φάλαγγα ἐπαγαγὼν καὶ τοὺς ἱππέας πάντῃ προσπεσεῖν
κελεύσας ἐν μέσῳ δι᾿ ὀλίγου κατακόπτει
αὐτούς, ὥστε διέφυγε μὲν οὐδείς, ὅτι μὴ διέλαθέ
τις ἐν τοῖς νεκροῖς, ἐζωγρήθησαν δὲ ἀμφὶ τοὺς
3δισχιλίους. ἔπεσον δὲ καὶ ἡγεμόνες τῶν Περσῶν
Νιφάτης τε καὶ Πετήνης καὶ Σπιθριδάτης ὁ
Λυδίας σατράπης καὶ ὁ τῶν Καππαδοκῶν ὕπαρχος
Μιθροβουζάνης καὶ Μιθριδάτης ὁ Δαρείου γαμβρὸς
καὶ Ἀρβουπάλης ὁ Δαρείου τοῦ Ἀρτοξέρξου
παῖς καὶ Φαρνάκης, ἀδελφὸς οὗτος τῆς Δαρείου
γυναικός, καὶ ὁ τῶν ξένων ἡγεμὼν Ὠμάρης.
Ἀρσίτης δὲ ἐκ μὲν τῆς μάχης φεύγει ἐς Φρυγίαν,
ἐκεῖ δὲ ἀποθνήσκει αὐτὸς πρὸς αὑτοῦ, ὡς λόγος,
ὅτι αἴτιος ἐδόκει Πέρσαις γενέσθαι τοῦ ἐν τῷ τότε
πταίσματος.
4Μακεδόνων δὲ τῶν μὲν ἑταίρων ἀμφὶ τοὺς εἴκοσι
καὶ πέντε ἐν τῇ πρώτῃ προσβολῇ ἀπέθανον· καὶ
τούτων χαλκαῖ εἰκόνες ἐν Δίῳ ἐστᾶσιν, Ἀλεξάνδρου
κελεύσαντος Λύσιππον ποιῆσαι, ὅσπερ καὶ
Ἀλέξανδρον μόνος προκριθεὶς ἐποίει· τῶν δὲ
ἄλλων ἱππέων ὑπὲρ τοὺς ἑξήκοντα, πεζοὶ δὲ ἐς τοὺς
66Anabasis of Alexander I

the light troops, who had intermingled with the 333 b.c. cavalry, and so they began to give way, first at the point where Alexander was in the front of the line. But when their centre had given way, then the cavalry wings also were broken, and they really turned to flight in earnest. About a thousand2 Persian horsemen perished; there was not a long-pursuit, since Alexander turned against the foreign mercenary troops. Their serried ranks stood where they had been first drawn up, not so much from steadiness based on calculation as because they were stunned by the unexpectedness of the situation. Bringing his phalanx to bear on them and bidding the cavalry fall on them from all quarters, he hemmed them in and soon massacred them; not one got away except by escaping notice among the dead, and some two thousand were taken prisoners. Of Persian3 commanders there fell Niphates, Petenes, Spithri-dates, satrap of Lydia, Mithrobuzanes the Cappa-docian hyparch, Mithridates, son-in-law of Darius, Arbupales son of Darius who was son of Artaxerxes,1 Pharnaces, brother of Darius’ wife, and Omares, commander of the mercenaries. Arsites fled from the battle into Phrygia, but there died by his own hand, it is said because the blame of the present blunder seemed to the Persians to lie at his door.
On the Macedonian side about twenty-five of the4 Companions fell in the first shock. There are brazen statues of them set up at Dium; Alexander gave the order to Lysippus,2 the only sculptor he would select to portray himself. Of the rest of the cavalry more


1i.e. king Artaxerxes II (404-358 b.c.).2Lysippus was the greatest sculptor of the day. A. is unaware that the statues had been removed to Borne in 146 b.c., cf. A. B. Bosworth, CQ 1972, 173 (giving 148 b.c.).67