Arrian

σφίσι κατὰ συμμαχίαν ἥκοντας ἀπελθεῖν, Μιτυληναίους
δὲ καθελεῖν μὲν τὰς πρὸς Ἀλέξανδρόν
σφισι γενομένας στήλας, ξυμμάχους δὲ εἶναι
Δαρείου κατὰ τὴν εἰρήνην τὴν ἐπ᾿ Ἀνταλκίδου
γενομένην πρὸς βασιλέα [Δαρεῖον],1 τοὺς φυγάδας
δὲ αὐτῶν κατιέναι ἐπὶ τοῖς ἡμίσεσι τῶν τότε
5ὄντων, ὅτε ἔφευγον. ἐπὶ τούτοις μὲν δὴ ἡ ξύμβασις
τοῖς Μιτυληναίοις πρὸς τοὺς Πέρσας ξυνέβη.
Φαρνάβαζος δὲ καὶ Αὐτοφραδάτης, ὡς παρῆλθον
ἅπαξ εἴσω τῆς πόλεως, φρουράν τε ἐς αὐτὴν
εἰσήγαγον καὶ φρούραρχον ἐπ᾿ αὐτῇ Λυκομήδην
Ῥόδιον, καὶ τύραννον ἐγκατέστησαν τῇ πόλει
Διογένην, ἕνα τῶν φυγάδων, χρήματά τε εἰσέπραξαν
τοὺς Μιτυληναίους τὰ μὲν βίᾳ ἀφελόμενοι τοὺς
ἔχοντας, τὰ δὲ ἐς τὸ κοινὸν ἐπιβαλόντες.
2. Ταῦτα δὲ διαπραξάμενοι Φαρνάβαζος μὲν
ἔπλει ἐπὶ Λυκίας ἄγων τοὺς ξένους τοὺς μισθοφόρους,
Αὐτοφραδάτης δὲ ἐπὶ τὰς ἄλλας νήσους.
καὶ ἐν τούτῳ καταπέμπει Δαρεῖος Θυμώνδαν τὸν
Μέντορος, αὐτὸν μὲν τοὺς ξένους παρὰ Φαρναβάζου
παραληψόμενον καὶ ἀνάξοντα παρὰ βασιλέα, Φαρναβάζῳ
<δὲ> ἐροῦντα ἄρχειν ὅσων Μέμνων
2ἦρχεν· καὶ παραδοὺς τούτῳ τοὺς ξένους Φαρνάβαζος
ἔπλει παρ᾿ Αὐτοφραδάτην ἐπὶ τὰς ναῦς.
ὡς δὲ ὁμοῦ ἐγένοντο, δέκα μὲν ναῦς στέλλουσιν ἐπὶ
τὰς Κυκλάδας νήσους Δατάμην ἄνδρα Πέρσην
ἄγοντα, αὐτοὶ δὲ ναυσὶν ἑκατὸν ἐπὶ Τενέδου




1Δαρεῖον, a gloss, unless an error by Arrian (cf. also ch. 2, 2); the king concerned was Artaxerxes.124Anabasis of Alexander II

despatched to fight for them under their alliance,333b.c.
destroy the pillars on which their agreement with Alexander was inscribed, and become allies of Darius on the basis of the peace of Antalcidas with (the Persian) king [Darius];2 the exiles were to return with possession of half the property they had held at the time of their exile. Though these were5 the terms of the Mitylenean agreement with the Persians, Pharnabazus and Autophradates, once within the city, put in a garrison under the command of Lycomedes of Rhodes, and made Diogenes, one of the exiles, tyrant over the city: they also exacted money from Mitylene, taking part from the rich citizens by force and the rest by imposing a levy on the community.3
2. After this success Pharnabazus sailed for Lycia with the foreign mercenaries, Autophradates to the other islands. At this juncture Darius sent Thymondas son of Mentor1 to take over himself the mercenaries from Pharnabazus and lead them up-country
to Darius, and to instruct Pharnabazus to take over Memnon’s command.2 Pharnabazus2 handed over the mercenaries, and sailed to join Autophradates and the fleet. Once together, they sent ten ships to the Cyclades under Datames, a Persian, while they themselves proceeded with a




2See Introd. 38. A. should have written ‘agreement with
Alexander and the Greeks’, cf. 2, 2. Here as in 2. 2, Darius is
an error (perhaps a scribal gloss) for Artaxerxes II, the king reigning in 387 b.c. In fact, the Peace of Antalcidas left island cities, like Mitylene and Tenedos, free of Persian control; no doubt the Persian commanders deliberately misconstrued its terms. Cf. QC. iii 3, 1. D. 30–31, 1 and QC. iii 2 report with variants Darius’ mobilization and decision to light Al. in person.3Cf. iii 2, 6; for other Lesbian cities iii 2, 4; QC. iv 5, 19 ff.; Tod 191.1Memnon’s deceased brother.125