Arrian

ἄλλα οἱ πείθεσθαι ὅσα ἐπαγγέλλοιτο· σωθήσεσθαι
11γὰρ πειθόμενον. καὶ τὸν μὲν καθαρθῆναί τε καὶ
ῥαΐσαι αὐτῷ τὸ νόσημα, Φιλίππῳ δὲ ἐπιδεῖξαι, ὅτι
πιστός ἐστιν αὐτῷ φίλος, καὶ τοῖς ἄλλοις δὲ τοῖς
ἀμφ᾿ αὐτὸν, ὅτι αὐτοῖς τε τοῖς φίλοις βέβαιος εἰς τὸ
ἀνύποπτον τυγχάνει ὢν καὶ πρὸς τὸ ἀποθανεῖν
ἐρρωμένος.
5. Ἐκ δὲ τούτου Παρμενίωνα μὲν πέμπει ἐπὶ
τὰς ἄλλας πύλας, αἳ δὴ ὁρίζουσι τὴν Κιλίκων τε
καὶ Ἀσσυρίων χώραν, προκαταλαβεῖν καὶ φυλάσσειν
τὴν πάροδον, δοὺς αὐτῷ τῶν τε ξυμμάχων
τοὺς πεζοὺς καὶ τοὺς Ἕλληνας τοὺς μισθοφόρους
καὶ τοὺς Θρᾷκας, ὧν Σιτάλκης ἡγεῖτο, καὶ τοὺς
2ἱππέας δὲ τοὺς Θεσσαλούς. αὐτὸς δὲ ὕστερος ἄρας
ἐκ Ταρσοῦ τῇ μὲν πρώτῃ ἐς Ἀγχίαλον πόλιν
ἀφικνεῖται. ταύτην δὲ Σαρδανάπαλον κτίσαι τὸν
Ἀσσύριον λόγος· καὶ τῷ περιβόλῳ δὲ καὶ τοῖς
θεμελίοις τῶν τειχῶν δήλη ἐστὶ μεγάλη τε πόλις
3κτισθεῖσα καὶ ἐπὶ μέγα ἐλθοῦσα δυνάμεως. καὶ τὸ
μνῆμα τοῦ Σαρδαναπάλου ἐγγὺς ἦν τῶν τειχῶν τῆς
Ἀγχιάλου· καὶ αὐτὸς ἐφειστήκει ἐπ᾿ αὐτῷ Σαρδανάπαλος
συμβεβληκὼς τὰς χεῖρας ἀλλήλαις ὡς
μάλιστα ἐς κρότον συμβάλλονται, καὶ ἐπίγραμμα
4ἐπεγέγραπτο αὐτῷ Ἀσσύρια γράμματα· οἱ μὲν
Ἀσσύριοι καὶ μέτρον ἔφασκον ἐπεῖναι τῷ ἐπιγράμματι,
ὁ δὲ νοῦς ἦν αὐτῷ ὃν ἔφραζε τὰ ἔπη, ὅτι
Σαρδανάπαλος ὁ Ἀνακυνδαράξου παῖς Ἀγχίαλον
καὶ Ταρσὸν ἐν ἡμέρᾳ μιᾷ ἐδείματο. σὺ δέ, ὦ ξένε,
ἔσθιε καὶ πῖνε καὶ παῖζε, ὡς τἆλλα τὰ ἀνθρώπινα
οὐκ ὄντα τούτου ἄξια· τὸν ψόφον αἰνισσόμενος,
ὅνπερ αἱ χεῖρες ἐπὶ τῷ κρότῳ ποιοῦσι· καὶ τὸ
136Anabasis of Alexander II

any further instructions from him; if he did so, he 333 b.c.
would recover. The purge worked and eased the11 illness; and Alexander showed Philip that as his friend he trusted him, and his suite in general that he was resolute in refusing to suspect his friends and steadfast in the face of death.
5. Next he sent Parmenio to the other Gates which divide the Cilician and Assyrian lands, to seize the passage before the enemy and guard it, giving him the allied infantry, the Greek mercenaries, the Thracians under Sitalces and the Thessalian horse.1 Later on he left Tarsus and on the first day reached2 Anchialus, founded, as legend says, by Sardanapalus the Assyrian. The circumference and the foundations of the walls show that the city was large when founded, and grew to great power. Sardanapalus’3 monument was near the walls of Anchialus; over it stood Sardanapalus himself, his hands joined just as if to clap, and an epitaph was inscribed in the Assyrian script; the Assyrians said that it was in verse.4 In any case its meaning according to the words was: ‘Sardanapalus son of Anakyndaraxes built Anchialus and Tarsus in one day; you, stranger, eat, drink and be merry, since other human things are not worth this’—the riddle referring to the noise of a

1For Issus campaign see App. III and VIII 3. Nothing of value in J. xi 9, little in P. 20. I shall note parallels to A. in D. and QC. (book iii throughout) without pointing out all divergencies. Parmenio’s mission: QC. 7, 6 (put too late in D. 32, 2).137