Arrian

γέφυραν αὐτὴν ὑπὸ πλήθους ξυντρῖψαι καὶ πολλοὺς
αὐτῶν ἐς τὴν τάφρον ἐμπεσόντας τοὺς μὲν ὑπὸ
σφῶν καταπατηθέντας διαφθαρῆναι, τοὺς δὲ καὶ
6ἄνωθεν ὑπὸ τῶν Μακεδόνων βαλλομένους. ὁ
πλεῖστος δὲ φόνος περὶ ταῖς πύλαις αὐταῖς ξυνέβη,
ὅτι ἡ ξύγκλεισις τῶν πυλῶν φοβερά τε καὶ πρὸ τοῦ
καιροῦ γενομένη, δεισάντων μὴ συνεισπέσοιεν τοῖς
φεύγουσιν ἐχόμενοι αὐτῶν οἱ Μακεδόνες, πολλοὺς
καὶ τῶν φιλίων τῆς εἰσόδου ἀπέκλεισεν, οὓς πρὸς
7αὐτοῖς τοῖς τείχεσιν οἱ Μακεδόνες διέφθειραν. καὶ
παρ᾿ ὀλίγον ἧκεν ἁλῶναι ἡ πόλις, εἰ μὴ Ἀλέξανδρος
ἀνεκαλέσατο τὸ στράτευμα, ἔτι διασῶσαι ἐθέλων
τὴν Ἁλικαρνασσόν, εἴ τι φίλιον ἐνδοθείη ἐκ τῶν
Ἁλικαρνασσέων. ἀπέθανον δὲ τῶν μὲν ἐκ τῆς
πόλεως ἐς χιλίους, τῶν δὲ ξὺν Ἀλεξάνδρῳ ἀμφὶ
τοὺς τεσσαράκοντα, καὶ ἐν τούτοις Πτολεμαῖός τε
ὁ σωματοφύλαξ καὶ Κλέαρχος ὁ τοξάρχης καὶ
Ἀδαῖος <ὁ> χιλιάρχης, οὗτοι καὶ ἄλλοι τῶν οὐκ
ἠμελημένων Μακεδόνων.
23. Ἔνθα δὴ ξυνελθόντες οἱ ἡγεμόνες τῶν
Περσῶν, Ὀροντοβάτης τε καὶ Μέμνων, καὶ ἐκ τῶν
παρόντων γνόντες σφᾶς τε οὐ δυναμένους ἐπὶ πολὺ
ἀντέχειν τῇ πολιορκίᾳ καὶ τοῦ τείχους τὸ μέν τι
καταπεπτωκὸς ἤδη ὁρῶντες, τὸ δὲ καὶ κατασεσεισμένον,
πολλοὺς δὲ τῶν στρατιωτῶν ἐν ταῖς
ἐκδρομαῖς τοὺς μὲν διεφθαρμένους, τοὺς δὲ καὶ ὑπὸ
2τοῦ τετρῶσθαι ἀπομάχους ὄντας, ταῦτα ἐν νῷ
λαβόντες ἀμφὶ δευτέραν φυλακὴν τῆς νυκτὸς τόν τε
ξύλινον πύργον, ὃν αὐτοὶ ἀντῳκοδόμησαν ταῖς
μηχαναῖς τῶν πολεμίων, ἐμπιπρᾶσι καὶ τὰς στοάς,
ἐν αἷς τὰ βέλη αὐτοῖς ἀπέκειτο. ἐνέβαλον δὲ καὶ
3ταῖς οἰκίαις πῦρ ταῖς πλησίον τοῦ τείχους· τῶν δὲ
94Anabasis of Alexander I

many fell into the moat and some of them were334 b.c.
trampled to death by their comrades, and others shot down by the Macedonians from above. The greatest6 slaughter was round about the gates themselves; for they were shut prematurely in panic, as the defenders feared that the Macedonians also might enter, pressing hard upon the fugitives; thus many friends were shut out, to be destroyed by their foes close to the walls themselves. The city indeed7 came near to capture, had not Alexander sounded the retreat, in a desire even now to save Halicarnassus if the citizens would surrender amicably. About a thousand of the garrison perished and about forty of Alexander’s forces, including Ptolemaeus the bodyguard, Clearchus, the commander of the archers, Addaeus, a chiliarch, and other Macedonians of repute.
23. The leaders of the Persians, Orontobates and Memnon, now met and decided that as things were they could not long hold out against the siege, with part of the wall gone, as they saw, and part badly shaken, many soldiers lost in the sallies, many disabled by wounds. With all this in mind, about2 the second watch of the night they burned the wooden tower they themselves had built to oppose the enemy engines and the sheds in which their missiles were stored. They also fired all houses near the walls, while others caught alight from3
95