Appendices

first an account of the oracular procedure, that the priest’s statement that Al. was son of Zeus was his verbal interpretation of the nods and signs by which the god announced a question put by Al. (iii) The authenticity of a letter from Al. to Olympias (P. 27, 5), in which he referred to certain responses that he would reveal only to her on his return, should not be admitted (Introd. 16); but even if it were genuine, it would not show that he kept all the responses secret, and in fact he did make it public that the oracle had instructed him on the gods to whom he should sacrifice (vi 19, 4; Ind. 18, 11), perhaps in answer to an enquiry about his best hope of achieving victory (cf. Xen., Anabasis iii 1, 6). Al. naturally wanted guidance on his future actions and would not have kept silent on any responses that might encourage his men. (iv) It cannot be inferred from Strabo that C. recorded none of the responses; as to Pt. and Ar. see 5 below. (The argument from their silence proves too much, as they did not report here the response on sacrifices.) It should at least be clear that C. made out that the priest recognized Al. as son of Zeus, and he cannot have written what was either displeasing to Al. or susceptible of ready disproof.
5. According to A. one reason why Al. went to Siwah was that ‘he was tracing (ἀνέφερε) his genesis in part to Amnion, as the myths traced that of
Heracles and Perseus to Zeus.’ The word ‘genesis’ naturally means ‘birth’ and not descent (Lane Fox 524), and in the myths Heracles and Perseus were sons of Zeus. On becoming Pharaoh (as such, he sacrificed to the Egyptian gods, iii 1, 4), Al. was officially son of Amun-Ra, whom Al. would naturally have identified with Zeus (infra). To the new
472Appendices

Achilles the divine filiation must have been a
congenial and plausible notion, of which he was seeking confirmation from the oracle that could give him more accurate information about his ‘own affairs’ Kraft indeed has argued that that vague phrase does not refer to his sonship, for he went to Siwah in the conviction (Überzeugung) that he was son of Amnion. But this interpretation violates the logic of the Greek; the imperfect (ἀνέφερε) must mean that he was
‘seeking to trace his birth to Ammon’ and (γνώμη) must be rendered’ purpose’ and not ‘conviction’; for it would make no sense to say that Al. knew he was son of Ammon and therefore went to Siwah to find out about his (other) concerns. Thus A’s authorities imply that he intended to enquire about his paternity, and they also say that he himself claimed that he had heard what was to his heart’s desire (4, 5). This is oblique confirmation of C’s story. Al. was evidently fortified in the belief that he wished to hold that he was son of Ammon. Now, if the assurance were couched in the usual dark
ambiguities of an oracle, the construction C. and Al. himself preferred may not have been equally clear to everyone. One or both of A’s sources may have had this obscurity in mind when stating Al’s purpose as ‘to acquire more accurate information or to say that he had acquired it’ (3, 4), and the same attitude is shown, no doubt by the same writer, when he notes the king’s satisfaction with what he had heard, without telling us what this was. Both Pt. and Ar. were evidently reluctant to concede that Al. ever claimed to be son of a god with the alleged sanction of the oracle (cf. 10 f. below). As on other occasions (App. XIV), they resorted to deceptive reticence.
473