Arrian

Πέρσαις ἐμισθοφόρουν, καὶ Καλχηδονίων Ἡρακλείδην.
τὸν πρεσβευτὴν ἀφῆκεν· τοὺς δὲ ἄλλους
ξυστρατεύεσθαί οἱ ἐπὶ μισθῷ τῷ αὐτῷ ἐκέλευσε·
καὶ ἐπέταξεν αὐτοῖς Ἀνδρόνικον, ὅσπερ ἤγαγέ τε
αὐτοὺς καὶ ἔνδηλος γεγόνει οὐ φαῦλον ποιούμενος
σῶσαι τοὺς ἄνδρας.
25. Ταῦτα δὲ διαπραξάμενος ἦγεν ὡς ἐπὶ Ζαδράκαρτα,
τὴν μεγίστην πόλιν τῆς Ὑρκανίας, ἵνα
καὶ τὰ βασίλεια τοῖς Ὑρκανίοις ἦν. καὶ ἐνταῦθα
διατρίψας ἡμέρας πεντεκαίδεκα καὶ θύσας τοῖς
θεοῖς ὡς νόμος καὶ ἀγῶνα γυμνικὸν ποιήσας ὡς
ἐπὶ Παρθυαίους ἦγεν· ἐκεῖθεν δὲ ἐπὶ τὰ τῆς
Ἀρείας ὅρια καὶ Σουσίαν, πόλιν τῆς Ἀρείας, ἵνα
καὶ Σατιβαρζάνης ἧκε παρ᾿ αὐτὸν ὁ τῶν Ἀρείων
2σατράπης. τούτῳ μὲν δὴ τὴν σατραπείαν ἀποδοὺς
ξυμπέμπει αὐτῷ Ἀνάξιππον τῶν ἑταίρων δοὺς
αὐτῷ τῶν ἱππακοντιστῶν ἐς τεσσαράκοντα, ὡς
ἔχοι φύλακας καθιστάναι τῶν τόπων, τοῦ μὴ
ἀδικεῖσθαι τοὺς Ἀρείους πρὸς τῆς στρατιᾶς κατὰ
τὴν πάροδον.
3Ἐν τούτῳ δὲ ἀφικνοῦνται παρ᾿ αὐτὸν Περσῶν
τινες, οἳ ἤγγελλον Βῆσσον τήν τε τιάραν ὀρθὴν
ἔχειν καὶ τὴν Περσικὴν στολὴν φοροῦντα Ἀρτοξέρξην
τε καλεῖσθαι ἀντὶ Βήσσου καὶ βασιλέα
φάσκειν εἶναι τῆς Ἀσίας· ἔχειν τε ἀμφ᾿ αὑτὸν
Περσῶν τε τοὺς ἐς Βάκτρα διαφυγότας καὶ αὐτῶν
Βακτριανῶν πολλούς· προσδοκᾶσθαι δὲ ἥξειν
αὐτῷ καὶ Σκύθας ξυμμάχους.
310Anabasis of Alexander III

with the Macedonians,3 as well as Heraclides, the 330 b.c. envoy from Calchedon, and ordered the other Greeks to join his army for the same pay as they had been receiving, under the command of Andronicus, who had been their leader and had shown his anxiety to save their lives.4
25. After carrying all this out, he made for Zadracarta, the greatest city of Hyrcania, the place where the Hyrcanian palace was. There he spent fifteen days, and sacrificed to the gods as custom directed, and held an athletic contest,1 and then marched towards the Parthyaeans, and thence to the borders of Areia and to Susia, a city of Areia, where he was also met by Satibarzanes, the satrap of the Areians. Alexander confirmed him in his satrapy,2 and sent2 with him Anaxippus, one of the Companions, with about forty mounted javelin-men, so that he might have guards to set for various places, to prevent the Areians being injured by the army on its passage.
Meanwhile some Persians met Alexander and3 reported that Bessus was wearing his cap upright, dressing in Persian royal garb,3 calling himself Artaxerxes instead of Bessus, and giving out that he was King of Asia; he was attended by the Persians who had escaped to Bactria and by many of the Bactrians themselves; and he was expecting Scythian allies as well to join him.
3Cf. Introd. 38.4QC. v 9, 15 (cf. A. 16, 2) makes Patron their leader.
Andronicus, a Macedonian, replaced him.1D. 77; QC. vi 5, 24 ff.; J. xii 3 put here (P. 46 beyond Jaxartes) a visit from the queen of the Amazons, cf. Introd. 12. A. omits the denials of Pt. and Ar. Cf. iv 15, 4; vii 13. See also App. XII 1 f.2QC. 6, 13 makes him give Al. the news about Bessus; no mention of Anaxippus, but cf. D. 78, 1. For Al’s route, and for dates, covering chs 25–28 see App. VIII 11–14; his army, App. XIII.311