Arrian

ἀπὸ τῆς ὑπωρ<ε>ίας ἀνασταλέντες ἐς τὸ ἄκρον
ἀνέφυγον, ἔγνω καὶ τοῖς κατ᾿ αὐτοὺς τεταγμένοις
δυνατὸς ὢν χρήσασθαι ἐς ἀναπλήρωσιν τῆς φάλαγγος·
ἐκείνοις δὲ ἱππέας τρικοσίους ἐπιτάξαι
ἐξήρκεσεν.
10. Οὕτω δὴ τεταγμένους χρόνον μέν τινα
προῆγεν ἀναπαύων, ὥστε καὶ πάνυ ἔδοξε σχολαία
γενέσθαι αὐτῷ ἡ πρόσοδος· τοὺς γὰρ βαρβάρους,
ὅπως τὰ πρῶτα ἐτάχθησαν, οὐκέτι ἀντεπῆγε
Δαρεῖος, ἀλλ᾿ ἐπὶ τοῦ ποταμοῦ ταῖς ὄχθαις, πολλαχῇ
μὲν ἀποκρήμνοις οὔσαις, ἔστι δὲ ὅπου καὶ
χάρακα παρατείνας αὐταῖς ἵνα εὐεφοδώτερα ἐφαίνετο,
οὕτως ἔμενεν· καὶ ταύτῃ εὐθὺς δῆλος ἐγένετο
τοῖς ἀμφ᾿ Ἀλέξανδρον τῇ γνώμῃ δεδουλωμένος.
2ὡς δὲ ὁμοῦ ἤδη ἦν τὰ στρατόπεδα, ἐνταῦθα παριππεύων
πάντῃ Ἀλέξανδρος παρεκάλει ἄνδρας ἀγαθοὺς
γίγνεσθαι, οὐ τῶν ἡγεμόνων μόνον τὰ ὀνόματα
ξὺν τῷ πρέποντι κόσμῳ ἀνακαλῶν, ἀλλὰ καὶ
ἰλάρχας καὶ λοχαγοὺς ὀνομαστὶ καὶ τῶν ξένων τῶν
μισθοφόρων, ὅσοι κατ᾿ ἀξίωσιν ἤ τινα ἀρετὴν
γνωριμώτεροι ἦσαν· καὶ αὐτῷ πανταχόθεν βοὴ
ἐγίνετο μὴ διατρίβειν, ἀλλὰ ἐσβάλλειν ἐς τοὺς
3πολεμίους. ὁ δὲ ἦγεν ἐν τάξει ἔτι, τὰ μὲν πρῶτα,
καίπερ ἐν ἀπόπτῳ ἤδη ἔχων τὴν Δαρείου δύναμιν,
βάδην, τοῦ μὴ διασπασθῆναί τι ἐν τῇ ξυντονωτέρᾳ
πορείᾳ κυμῆναν τῆς φάλαγγος· ὡς δὲ ἐντὸς
βέλους ἐγίγνοντο, πρῶτοι δὴ οἱ κατὰ Ἀλέξανδρον
καὶ αὐτὸς Ἀλέξανδρος ἐπὶ τοῦ δεξιοῦ τεταγμένος



156Anabasis of Alexander II

and had fled to the summit,3 Alexander decided that 333 b.c. he could use those who had been posted to hold them in check to fill up his phalanx. To watch the hill-troops he reckoned it enough to tell off three hundred horsemen.
10. His forces thus marshalled, Alexander led them on for some time with halts, so that their advance seemed quite a leisurely affair. Once the barbarians had taken up their first positions, Darius made no further advance; he remained on the river bank, which was in many1 places precipitous, in some parts building up a stockade, where it appeared more accessible. This made it plain to Alexander and his staff that Darius was in spirit a beaten man. When2 the two armies were close, Alexander rode all along his front and bade them be good men and true, calling aloud with all proper distinctions the names not only of generals but even of commanders of squadrons and companies, as well as any of the mercenaries who were conspicuous for rank or for any brave action.2 An answering cry went up from all sides to delay no longer, but to charge the enemy.3He continued to lead on in line, at marching3 pace at first, though he now had Darius’ force in view, to avoid any part of the phalanx fluctuating in a more rapid advance and so breaking apart. Once within missile range, Alexander himself and his entourage were the first, stationed on the right, to charge in the

 

3QC. 9, 11 (put too early).1Not ‘many’, but some banks are 3–4 metres high, too
steep for the phalanx to have descended from them; they had
to go round; hence breaks in the line (§ 5).2QC. 10, 3–10 here interpolates a speech by Al., which seems to derive from a source common to J. xi 9, 3 ff., not followed in A. 6, 3 ff.157