Appendices

deviation into Hyrcania; this is hard to credit, and the truth may be that these men formed a rearguard who had not reached Ecbatana when Al. left, but were still bringing up the treasures from Persepolis.) Indeed his own army was at times divided, and perhaps more often than is recorded; iii 25, 2 implies that he expected it to march through Areia in detachments, not all under his own eye; 25, 4 refers to their reunion; 27, 3 to minor operations that he did not direct himself. A’s account is not precise or complete; it is a grave defect that he leaves us in constant ignorance of the forces at Al.’s disposal, ignorance that we can remedy only in part from the record, also incomplete, in D. and QC.
Appendix XIV
Arrian iv 7, 4–14, 4
1. The barbarity with which Al. treated Bessus evokes from A. disapproval of his adoption of Persian royal dress (contrast vii 29, 4). He evidently thought the matter important (cf. 9, 9), but does not say when Al. began the practice. D. 77, 4 ff.; QC. vi 6, 2 ff. and J. xii 3, 8 date it to his stay in Hyrcania, P. 45 in Parthyaea; the discrepancy is the less significant, if D. is right that he adopted Persian customs rather sparingly, to conciliate the Macedonians; in any case according to all these writers the date was summer 330, yet A. refers to it first in connection with an incident of summer 329. It seems evident that his main sources were silent as to the first occasion, though later they were bound to refer to Al’s
532Appendices

‘medism’ as a cause of the mutiny at Opis in 324, saying inexactly that it had offended the troops ‘during the whole expedition’ (vii 8, 2 f., cf. 6, 2 with notes); in addition Pt. alludes to it indirectly in vi 30, 2 f. (see note), and Ar. mentions the diadem ap. vii 22, 4. But clearly it embarrassed them that their hero had abandoned the style of a Macedonian king, and what they could not deny they did their best to veil, cf. App. V 9 f. A. had to turn to the ‘vulgate’, as we must, for fuller information.
2. The most complete descriptions of Persian royal dress, which was of Median origin (Herodotus i 135; vii 61 f.; Strabo xi 13, 9), are given by Xenophon, Cyropaedia viii 3, 13 and QC. iii 3, 17 ff.; see H-W. Ritter, Diadem und Königsherrschaft for much of what follows. Eratosthenes (Jacoby no. 241, F. 30 = P. 330 A) says that Al. did not assume the tiara, i.e. the stiff or ‘upright’ peaked cap which was the sole prerogative of the king (A. iii 25, 3; Xenophon, Anabasis ii 5, 23), and must be identified with the kitaris or kidaris, nor the kandys (a cloak of purple and gold) or the (scarlet) trousers, cf. also P. 45 and D. (with no mention of the tiara), while D. says that he did wear the diadem (cf. A. vii 22, 4), the chiton, a tunic of purple and white, and the belt (of gold). Ephippus, who was certainly a contemporary (Pearson 61), mentions the chiton, purple mantle and diadem bound round the kausia, a traditional Macedonian hat (Jacoby no. 126, F. 5). Writing from memory, A. iv 7, 4 is apparently mistaken about the tiara.
3. A’s excursus on dress leads him to describe out of chronological order (iv 8, 1; 14, 4) first the death of Clitus, second the proscynesis affair, and third the
533