Arrian

δ᾿ ἐς τὴν Μυκάλην Φιλώταν, ἄγοντα τούς τε
ἱππέας καὶ τῶν πεζῶν τάξεις τρεῖς, παραγγείλας
εἴργειν τῆς ἀποβάσεως τοὺς ἀπὸ τῶν νεῶν. οἱ δέ,
ὕδατός τε σπάνει καὶ τῶν ἄλλων ἐπιτηδείων οὐδὲν
ἄλλο ὅτι μὴ πολιορκούμενοι ἐν ταῖς ναυσίν, ἐς
Σάμον ἀπέπλευσαν. ἐκεῖθεν δὲ ἐπισιτισάμενοι
9αὖθις ἐπέπλεον τῇ Μιλήτῳ· καὶ τὰς μὲν πολλὰς
τῶν νεῶν πρὸ τοῦ λιμένος ἐν μετεώρῳ παρέταξαν,
εἴ πῃ ἐκκαλέσαιντο ἐς τὸ πέλαγος τοὺς Μακεδόνας,
πέντε δὲ αὐτῶν εἰσέπλευσαν ἐς τὸν μεταξὺ τῆς τε
Λάδης νήσου καὶ τοῦ στρατοπέδου λιμένα, ἐλπίσαντες
κενὰς καταλήψεσθαι τὰς Ἀλεξάνδρου ναῦς,
ὅτι τοὺς ναύτας ἀποσκεδάννυσθαι τὸ πολὺ ἀπὸ τῶν
νεῶν τοὺς μὲν ἐπὶ φρυγανισμῷ, τοὺς δὲ ἐπὶ
ξυγκομιδῇ τῶν ἐπιτηδείων, τοὺς δὲ καὶ ἐς προνομὰς
10ταττομένους, πεπυσμένοι ἦσαν. ἀλλὰ μέρος
μέν τι ἀπῆν τῶν ναυτῶν, ἐκ δὲ τῶν παρόντων
ξυμπληρώσας Ἀλέξανδρος δέκα ναῦς, ὡς προσπλεούσας
τὰς πέντε τῶν Περσῶν κατεῖδε, πέμπει
ἐπ᾿ αὐτὰς κατὰ σπουδήν, ἐμβάλλειν ἀντιπρώρους
κελεύσας. οἱ δὲ ἐν ταῖς πέντε ναυσὶ τῶν Περσῶν,
ὡς παρ᾿ ἐλπίδα ἀναγομένους τοὺς Μακεδόνας ἐπὶ
σφᾶς εἶδον, ὑποστρέψαντες ἐκ πολλοῦ ἔφευγον πρὸς
11τὸ ἄλλο ναυτικόν. καὶ ἡ μὲν Ἰασσέων ναῦς
ἁλίσκεται αὐτοῖς ἀνδράσιν ἐν τῇ φυγῇ, οὐ ταχυναυτοῦσα·
αἱ δὲ τέσσαρες ἔφθασαν καταφυγεῖν ἐς τὰς
οἰκείας τριήρεις. οὕτω μὲν δὴ ἀπέπλευσαν ἄπρακτοι
ἐκ Μιλήτου οἱ Πέρσαι.
20. Ἀλέξανδρος δὲ καταλῦσαι ἔγνω τὸ ναυτικὸν
χρημάτων τε ἐν τῷ τότε ἀπορίᾳ καὶ ἅμα οὐκ
ἀξιόμαχον ὁρῶν τὸ αὑτοῦ ναυτικὸν τῷ Περσικῷ,
οὔκουν ἐθέλων οὐδὲ μέρει τινὶ τῆς στρατιᾶς κινδυνεύειν.
82Anabasis of Alexander I

Mycale with the cavalry and three battalions of 334 b.c. infantry, instructing him to hinder the Persians from disembarking. So, from want of water and other necessities, they were as good as besieged in their ships, and sailed off to Samos; after provisioning there, they made for Miletus again. They9 drew up most of their ships in line out at sea opposite the harbour, hoping to provoke the Macedonians to action in the open water; but five ships slipped into the harbour between Lade and the camp, hoping to capture Alexander’s ships unmanned, as they had learned that most of the crews had scattered, away from the ships, under instructions to get firewood or collect provisions or fodder. But though a certain10 number of sailors were absent, Alexander had manned ten ships with the available hands, which he sent, when he sighted the five Persian ships bearing down, to meet them at full speed with orders to ram, head on. The crews of the five Persian ships, seeing the Macedonians making for them (the last thing they expected), doubled back, while still far off, and joined the main fleet. One ship (manned by11 Iassians) was captured with its crew in the retreat, as it was a slow sailer; the other four got safe to their own triremes. Hence the Persians sailed away from Miletus without success.2
20. Alexander now decided to disband his navy, as he was then short of money and also perceived that his fleet could not face an action with the Persian navy; he was unwilling to risk disaster with even part of his forces. Further, he reflected that as he now

2D. 22 is vague on operations at Miletus.83