Arrian

δὲ τὴν πόλιν μήτε τινὰ Περσῶν μήτε Μακεδόνων
δέχεσθαι, ὡς τοῦτο ἔς τε τὰ παρόντα τῷ λόγῳ
εὐπρεπέστατον καὶ ἐς τοῦ πολέμου τὴν κρίσιν,
ἄδηλον ἔτι οὖσαν, ἀσφαλέστατόν σφισι γνωσόμενοι.
8ὡς δὲ ἐξηγγέλθη Ἀλεξάνδρῳ τὰ ἐκ τῆς Τύρου,
τοὺς μὲν πρέσβεις πρὸς ὀργὴν ὀπίσω ἀπέπεμψεν,
αὐτὸς δὲ συναγαγὼν τούς τε ἑταίρους καὶ τοὺς
ἡγεμόνας τῆς στρατιᾶς καὶ ταξιάρχας καὶ ἰλάρχας
ἔλεξεν ὧδε.
17. Ἄνδρες φίλοι καὶ ξύμμαχοι, ἡμῖν οὔτε τὴν
ἐπ᾿ Αἰγύπτου πορείαν ἀσφαλῆ ὁρῶ θαλασσοκρατούντων
Περσῶν, Δαρεῖόν τε διώκειν ὑπολειπομένους
αὐτὴν τε ὀπίσω τὴν τῶν Τυρίων πόλιν
ἀμφίβολον καὶ Αἴγυπτον καὶ Κύπρον ἐχομένας
πρὸς Περσῶν, οὐδὲ τοῦτο ἀσφαλὲς ἔς τε τὰ ἄλλα
2καὶ μάλιστα δὴ ἐς τὰ Ἑλληνικὰ πράγματα, μή ποτε
ἄρα ἐπικρατήσαντες αὖθις τῶν ἐπὶ θαλάσσῃ χωρίων
οἱ Πέρσαι, προχωρησάντων ἡμῶν ξὺν τῇ δυνάμει
ὡς ἐπὶ Βαβυλῶνά τε καὶ Δαρεῖον, αὐτοὶ ξὺν
πλείονι στόλῳ μετ[αγ]άγοιεν τὸν πόλεμον ἐς τὴν
Ἑλλάδα, Λακεδαιμονίων μὲν ἐκ τοῦ εὐθέος ἡμῖν
πολεμούντων, τῆς δὲ Ἀθηναίων πόλεως φόβῳ
μᾶλλόν τι ἢ εὐνοίᾳ τῇ πρὸς ἡμᾶς πρὸς τὸ παρὸν
3κατεχομένης. ἐξαιρεθείσης δὲ Τύρου ἥ τε Φοινίκη
ἔχοιτο ἂν πᾶσα καὶ τὸ ναυτικὸν ὅπερ πλεῖστόν τε
καὶ κράτιστον τοῦ Περσικοῦ, τὸ Φοινίκων, παρ᾿
ἡμᾶς μεταχωρήσειν εἰκός· οὐ γὰρ ἀνέξονται οὔτε
οἱ ἐρέται οὔθ᾿ οἱ ἐπιβάται Φοίνικες ἐχομένων
σφίσι τῶν πόλεων αὐτοὶ ὑπὲρ ἄλλων πλέοντες
κινδυνεύειν· Κύπρος δὲ ἐπὶ τῷδε ἢ οὐ χαλεπῶς ἡμῖν
προσχωρήσει ἢ ἐξ ἐπίπλου εὐμαρῶς ληφθήσεται.
4καὶ ταῖς τε ἐκ Μακεδονίας ναυσὶ καὶ ταῖς Φοινίσσαις
184Anabasis of Alexander II

all Alexander’s other commands, but not to admit 332 b.c.
any Persians or Macedonians within their city, as this decision would be the easiest to excuse in the existing circumstances, and safest for the future and for the issue of the war, which was still obscure. When Alexander received this answer, he angrily sent back the envoys, and assembling the Companions and the generals of the army, with the battalion and squadron commanders, made the following speech.7
17. ‘My friends and allies, so long as Persia is supreme at sea I am aware that we cannot march in safety to Egypt. Nor, again, is it safe to pursue Darius, leaving in our rear the city of Tyre itself with its allegiance doubtful and Egypt and Cyprus still in Persia’s hands, especially in view of the state of Greek affairs; the Persians might again secure control2 of the coastal places, when we have advanced in full force against Babylon and Darius, and with a larger expedition transfer the war into Greece, where the Lacedaemonians are openly at war with us, while Athens is kept in control for the present by fear rather than goodwill towards us. But with Tyre3 once destroyed, Phoenicia would all be in our hands, and the best and strongest part of the Persian navy, the Phoenician, would probably come over to us. For if their cities are in our hands neither rowers nor marines from Phoenicia will tolerate dangers at sea for the sake of others. After this Cyprus will either readily come over to our side or be captured easily by naval attack. Then if we keep the sea with4
7The speech is apparently based on A’s main source(s); no mention of Heracles but an explanation of Al’s strategy (cf. i 18, 9; 20, 1; 24, 3; Introd. 44).185