Arrian

χωρία, ὥστε καὶ τὰ σφάγια αὐτῶν κατελήφθη ἔτι
κείμενα.
8Ταύτῃ μὲν δὴ τῇ ἡμέρᾳ κατακλείσας αὐτοὺς ἐς
τὴν πόλιν καὶ στρατοπεδευσάμενος πρὸς τῷ τείχει
ἐγνώκει περιτειχισμῷ ἀποκλεῖσαι αὐτούς· τῇ δὲ
ὑστεραίᾳ παρῆν μετὰ πολλῆς δυνάμεως Γλαυκίας ὁ
τῶν Ταυλαντίων βασιλεύς. ἔνθα δὴ Ἀλέξανδρος
τὴν μὲν πόλιν ἀπέγνω ἑλεῖν ἂν ξὺν τῇ παρούσῃ
δυνάμει, πολλῶν μὲν ἐς αὐτὴν καὶ μαχίμων ξυμπεφευγότων,
πολλῶν δὲ ἅμα τῷ Γλαυκίᾳ προσκεισομένων,
εἰ αὐτὸς τῷ τείχει προσμάχοιτο.
9Φιλώταν δὲ ἀναλαβόντα τῶν ἱππέων ὅσους ἐς
προφυλακὴν καὶ τὰ ὑποζύγια τὰ ἐκ τοῦ στρατοπέδου
ἐς ἐπισιτισμὸν ἔπεμπε. καὶ ὁ Γλαυκίας
μαθὼν τὴν ὁρμὴν τῶν ἀμφὶ Φιλώταν ἐξελαύνει ἐπ᾿
αὐτούς, καὶ καταλαμβάνει τὰ κύκλῳ ὄρη τοῦ
πεδίου, ὅθεν οἱ ξὺν Φιλώτᾳ ἐπισιτιεῖσθαι ἔμελλον.
10Ἀλέξανδρος δέ, ἐπειδὴ ἀπηγγέλθη αὐτῷ, ὅτι
κινδυνεύουσιν οἵ τε ἱππεῖς καὶ τὰ ὑποζύγια, εἰ νὺξ
αὐτοὺς καταλήψεται, αὐτὸς μὲν ἀναλαβὼν τούς τε
ὑπασπιστὰς καὶ τοὺς τοξότας καὶ τοὺς Ἀγριᾶνας
καὶ ἱππέας ἐς τετρακοσίους ἐβοήθει σπουδῇ· τὸ δὲ
ἄλλο στράτευμα πρὸς τῇ πόλει ἀπέλιπεν, ὡς μὴ
ἀποχωρήσαντος παντὸς τοῦ στρατοῦ καὶ οἱ ἐκ τῆς
πόλεως ἐπιδραμόντες τοῖς ἀμφὶ Γλαυκίαν συμμίξειαν.
11ἔνθα δὴ Γλαυκίας προσάγοντα Ἀλέξανδρον
αἰσθόμενος ἐκλείπει τὰ ὄρη· οἱ δὲ ξὺν
Φιλώτᾳ ἀσφαλῶς ἐπὶ τὸ στρατόπεδον διεσώθησαν.
ἐδόκουν δ᾿ ἔτι τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον ἐν δυσχωρίᾳ
12ἀπειληφέναι οἱ ἀμφὶ τὸν Κλεῖτον καὶ Γλαυκίαν· τά
τε γὰρ ὄρη τὰ ὑπερδέξια κατεῖχον πολλοῖς μὲν
ἱππεῦσι, πολλοῖς δὲ ἀκοντισταῖς καὶ σφενδονήταις
22Anabasis of Alexander I

positions they had occupied, strong as they were, 335 b.c. so that their victims were found still lying there.
On this day then Alexander shut them up in their8 city and camped by the wall, intending to cut them off by a circumvallation, but next day Glaucias, king of the Taulantians, appeared with a large force. Thereupon Alexander gave up the idea of taking the city with the forces at his disposal, as many fighting men had taken refuge inside, and Glaucias’ strong force would fall upon him, should he assault the wall. He sent Philotas to obtain food with as many horsemen9 as he needed for a screen, and all the baggage animals from the camp. Glaucias, on learning of this move of Philotas, set off to attack his troops, and occupied the heights encircling the plain where Philotas’ troops were to obtain food. When it was10 reported to Alexander that the cavalry and baggage animals would be in danger, if night overtook them, he himself went with the hypaspists, archers and Agrianians and some four hundred horsemen at full speed to their aid, leaving the rest of the army near the city, as there was a risk that, if the whole force had withdrawn, the enemy in the city might have sallied out and joined with Glaucias’ forces. As11 a result, on seeing Alexander’s approach, Glaucias abandoned the heights, and Philotas and his party got safe back to the camp. Clitus and Glaucias with their troops still appeared to have caught Alexander in a disadvantageous position; they held12 the commanding heights with many horsemen, javelin-men, and slingers, as well as a large number
23