Arrian

πλείους τῶν τρισμυρίων, ἱππέας δὲ ὑπὲρ τοὺς
πεντακισχιλίους. ἦν δὲ αὐτῷ ὁ στόλος παρὰ τὴν
λίμνην τὴν Κερκινῖτιν ὡς ἐπ᾿ Ἀμφίπολιν καὶ τοῦ
4Στρυμόνος ποταμοῦ τὰς ἐκβολάς. διαβὰς δὲ τὸν
Στρυμόνα παρήμειβε τὸ Πάγγαιον ὄρος τὴν ὡς ἐπ᾿
Ἄβδηρα καὶ Μαρώνειαν, πόλεις Ἑλληνίδας ἐπὶ
θαλάσσῃ ᾠκισμένας. ἔνθεν δὲ ἐπὶ τὸν Ἕβρον
ποταμὸν ἀφικόμενος διαβαίνει καὶ τὸν Ἕβρον
5εὐπετῶς. ἐκεῖθεν δὲ διὰ τῆς Παιτικῆς ἐπὶ τὸν
Μέλανα ποταμὸν ἔρχεται. διαβὰς δὲ καὶ τὸν
Μέλανα ἐς Σηστὸν ἀφικνεῖται ἐν εἴκοσι ταῖς
πάσαις ἡμέραις ἀπὸ τῆς οἴκοθεν ἐξορμήσεως.
ἐλθὼν δὲ ἐς Ἐλαιοῦντα θύει Πρωτεσιλάῳ ἐπὶ τῷ
τάφῳ τοῦ Πρωτεσιλάου, ὅτι καὶ Πρωτεσίλαος
πρῶτος ἐδόκει ἐκβῆναι ἐς τὴν Ἀσίαν τῶν Ἑλλήνων
τῶν ἅμα Ἀγαμέμνονι ἐς Ἴλιον στρατευσάντων.
καὶ ὁ νοῦς τῆς θυσίας ἦν ἐπιτυχεστέραν οἷ γενέσθαι
ἢ Πρωτεσιλάῳ τὴν ἀπόβασιν.
6Παρμενίων μὲν δὴ τῶν τε πεζῶν τοὺς πολλοὺς
καὶ τὴν ἵππον διαβιβάσαι ἐτάχθη ἐκ Σηστοῦ ἐς
Ἄβυδον· καὶ διέβησαν τριήρεσι μὲν ἑκατὸν καὶ
ἑξήκοντα πλοίοις δὲ ἄλλοις πολλοῖς στρογγύλοις.
Ἀλέξανδρον δὲ ἐξ Ἐλαιοῦντος ἐς τὸν Ἀχαιῶν
λιμένα κατᾶραι ὁ πλείων λόγος κατέχει, καὶ αὐτόν
τε κυβερνῶντα τὴν στρατηγίδα ναῦν διαβάλλειν
καὶ, ἐπειδὴ κατὰ μέσον τὸν πόρον τοῦ Ἑλλησπόντου
ἐγένετο, σφάξαντα ταῦρον τῷ Ποσειδῶνι
καὶ Νηρηίσι σπένδειν ἐκ χρυσῆς φιάλης ἐς τὸν
7πόντον. λέγουσι δὲ καὶ πρῶτον ἐκ τῆς νεὼς σὺν
τοῖς ὅπλοις ἐκβῆναι αὐτὸν ἐς τὴν γῆν τὴν Ἀσίαν



48Anabasis of Alexander I

sand, his cavalry over five thousand.2 His route was 334 b.c. past Lake Cercinitis in the direction of Amphipolis and the delta of the river Strymon [Struma]. He4 crossed the Strymon and passed Mount Pangaeum, on the way to Abdera and Maronea, Greek cities settled by the sea. Thence he reached the Hebrus [Maritza] and crossed it with ease; from there he5 went through Paetice to the Black River, crossed it, and reached Sestus twenty days in all after starting from home.3 Arriving at Elaeus, he sacrificed to Protesilaus at his tomb, since he was thought to be the first to disembark on Asian soil of the Greeks who fought with Agamemnon against Troy. The intention of the sacrifice was that his own landing on Asian soil might be luckier than that of Protesilaus.
Parmenio was appointed to see to the ferrying6 over from Sestus to Abydos of the cavalry and most of the infantry; they crossed in a hundred and sixty triremes4 and in a good number of cargo boats. According to the prevalent story5 Alexander made from Elaeus for the Achaean harbour, and steered the admiral’s ship himself when he crossed, sacrificing a bull to Posidon and the Nereids in the midst of the Hellespont strait, and pouring into the sea a drink offering from a golden bowl. They also say that he7 was the first to disembark on Asian soil armed capà-pie,




2Numbers: Introd. 56. Pt. and Ar. agreed as to the foot; A. ignores Ar’s variant (4,000) for horse, and his statement that he had only 70 Talents (contra vii 9, 6; for other variants, P. 15), though this deserved full treatment; initial costs were inevitably heavy; hence in 334 shortage of cash, cf. i 20; vii 9. 6; App. II 1.3Landing in Asia, D. 17–18, 1; P. 15. For § 5–8 see App. IV 1 f.4App. II 1.5‘Vulgate’ to end of ch.49