Arrian
4Περσῶν δὲ ἱππεῖς μὲν ἦσαν ἐς δισμυρίους, ξένοι
δὲ πεζοὶ μισθοφόροι ὀλίγον ἀποδέοντες δισμυρίων·
ἐτάχθησαν δὲ τὴν μὲν ἵππον παρατείναντες τῷ
ποταμῷ κατὰ τὴν ὄχθην ἐπὶ φάλαγγα μακράν, τοὺς
δὲ πεζοὺς κατόπιν τῶν ἱππέων· καὶ γὰρ ὑπερδέξια
ἦν τὰ ὑπὲρ τὴν ὄχθην χωρία. ᾗ δὲ Ἀλέξανδρον
αὐτὸν καθεώρων—δῆλος γὰρ ἦν τῶν τε ὅπλων τῇ
λαμπρότητι καὶ τῶν ἀμφ᾿ αὐτὸν τῇ σὺν ἐκπλήξει
θεραπείᾳ—κατὰ τὸ εὐώνυμον [μὲν] σφῶν ἐπέχοντα,
ταύτῃ πυκνὰς ἐπέταξαν τῇ ὄχθῃ τὰς ἴλας τῶν
ἱππέων.
5Χρόνον μὲν δὴ ἀμφότερα τὰ στρατεύματα ἐπ᾿
ἄκρου τοῦ ποταμοῦ ἐφεστῶτες ὑπὸ τοῦ τὸ μέλλον
ὀκνεῖν ἡσυχίαν ἦγον καὶ σιγὴ ἦν πολλὴ ἀφ᾿
ἑκατέρων. οἱ γὰρ Πέρσαι προσέμενον τοὺς Μακεδόνας,
ὁπότε ἐσβήσονται ἐς τὸν πόρον, ὡς ἐπικεισόμενοι
6ἐκβαίνουσιν· Ἀλέξανδρος δὲ ἀναπηδήσας
ἐπὶ τὸν ἵππον καὶ τοῖς ἀμφ᾿ αὑτὸν ἐγκελευσάμενος
ἕπεσθαί τε καὶ ἄνδρας ἀγαθοὺς γίγνεσθαι, τοὺς μὲν
προδρόμους ἱππέας καὶ μὴν καὶ τοὺς Παίονας
προεμβαλεῖν ἐς τὸν ποταμὸν ἔχοντα Ἀμύνταν τὸν
Ἀρραβαίου <ἔταξε> καὶ τῶν πεζῶν μίαν τάξιν, καὶ
πρὸ τούτων τὴν Σωκράτους ἴλην Πτολεμαῖον τὸν
Φιλίππου ἄγοντα, ἣ δὴ καὶ ἐτύγχανε τὴν ἡγεμονίαν
τοῦ ἱππικοῦ παντὸς ἔχουσα[ν] ἐκείνῃ τῇ ἡμέρᾳ·
7αὐτὸς δὲ ἄγων τὸ δεξιὸν κέρας ὑπὸ σαλπίγγων τε
καὶ τῷ Ἐνυαλίῳ ἀλαλάζοντας ἐμβαίνει ἐς τὸν
πόρον, λοξὴν ἀεὶ παρατείνων τὴν τάξιν, ᾗ παρεῖλκε
τὸ ῥεῦμα, ἵνα δὴ μὴ ἐκβαίνοντι αὐτῷ οἱ Πέρσαι
κατὰ κέρας προσπίπτοιεν, ἀλλὰ καὶ αὐτὸς ὡς
ἀνυστὸν τῇ φάλαγγι προσμίξῃ αὐτοῖς.
15. Οἱ δὲ Πέρσαι, ᾗ πρῶτοι οἱ ἀμφὶ Ἀμύνταν
60Anabasis of Alexander I
The Persians had about 20,000 cavalry, and little4 334 b.c. short of the same number of foreign mercenary infantry. They were drawn up with the cavalry in an extended phalanx, on the bank parallel to the river, the infantry behind them; the land above the bank was high and commanding. Where they observed Alexander himself—he was unmistakable, from the splendour of his equipment and the enthusiasm of the men in attendance round him—aiming at their left, they massed their cavalry squadrons on the bank there.
For some time the two forces on the river’s brink,5 dreading to precipitate the event, remained still and in deep silence on either side. For the Persians were waiting for the Macedonians, so as to fall on them emerging from the river, whenever they attempted the crossing; but Alexander leapt on his6 horse, and calling on his suite to follow and show themselves brave men and true, ordered the prodromoi and the Paeonians to plunge first into the stream, under command of Amyntas son of Arrabaeus, with one battalion of the infantry and in advance Socrates’ squadron under Ptolemy son of Philip (this was on the list as leading the whole cavalry on that day); then he himself, leading the right wing, with7 bugles sounding, and the battle cry going up to the God of Battles, went into the stream, continually extending his troops obliquely in the direction in which the current was pulling them, so that the Persians should not fall on him in column as he emerged, but that he himself might attack them, as far as might be, in deep formation.
15. At the point where the vanguard under Amyntas
61