Arrian
4Ἀλέξανδρος δὲ ὁμοῦ ἤδη ἔχων τὴν πᾶσαν
δύναμιν ᾔει ἐπὶ Βάκτρων, ἵνα καὶ Φίλιππος ὁ
Μενελάου παρ᾿ αὐτὸν ἀφίκετο ἐκ Μηδίας, ἔχων
τούς τε μισθοφόρους ἱππέας, ὧν ἡγεῖτο αὐτός, καὶ
Θεσσαλῶν τοὺς ἐθελοντὰς ὑπομείναντας καὶ τοὺς
ξένους τοὺς Ἀνδρομάχου. Νικάνωρ δὲ ὁ Παρμενίωνος
ὁ τῶν ὑπασπιστῶν ἄρχων τετελευτήκει ἤδη
5νόσῳ. ἰόντι δὲ Ἀλεξάνδρῳ τὴν ἐπὶ Βάκτρα
ἐξηγγέλθη Σατιβαρζάνης ὁ Ἀρείων σατράπης
Ἀνάξιππον μὲν καὶ τοὺς ἱππακοντιστὰς τοὺς ξὺν
αὐτῷ ἀπεκτονώς, ὁπλίζων δὲ τοὺς Ἀρείους καὶ
ξυνάγων εἰς Ἀρτακόανα πόλιν, ἵνα τὸ βασίλειον ἦν
τῶν Ἀρείων· ἐκεῖθεν δὲ ὅτι ἔγνωκεν, ἐπειδὰν
προκεχωρηκότα Ἀλέξανδρον πύθηται, ἰέναι ξὺν τῇ
δυνάμει παρὰ Βῆσσον, ὡς ξὺν ἐκείνῳ ἐπιθησόμενος
6ὅπῃ ἂν τύχῃ τοῖς Μακεδόσι. ταῦτα ὡς
ἐξηγγέλθη αὐτῷ, τὴν μὲν ἐπὶ Βάκτρα ὁδὸν οὐκ
ἦγεν, ἀναλαβὼν δὲ τούς τε ἑταίρους ἱππέας καὶ τοὺς
ἱππακοντιστὰς καὶ τοὺς τοξότας καὶ τοὺς Ἀγριᾶνας
καὶ τὴν Ἀμύντου τε καὶ Κοίνου τάξιν, τὴν δὲ
ἄλλην δύναμιν αὐτοῦ καταλιπὼν καὶ ἐπ᾿ αὐτῇ
Κρατερὸν ἡγεμόνα, σπουδῇ ἦγεν ὡς ἐπὶ Σατιβαρζάνην
τε καὶ τοὺς Ἀρείους καὶ διελθὼν ἐν δυσὶν
ἡμέραις σταδίους ἐς ἑξακοσίους πρὸς Ἀρτακόανα
ἧκεν.
7Σατιβαρζάνης μὲν οὖν, ὡς ἔγνω ἐγγὺς ὄντα
Ἀλέξανδρον, τῇ ὀξύτητι τῆς ἐφόδου ἐκπλαγεὶς ξὺν
ὀλίγοις ἱππεῦσι τῶν Ἀρείων ἔφυγε· πρὸς γὰρ τῶν
πολλῶν στρατιωτῶν κατελείφθη ἐν τῇ φυγῇ, ὡς
κἀκεῖνοι ἔμαθον προσάγοντα Ἀλέξανδρον. Αλέξανδρος
δέ, ὅσους ξυναιτίους τῆς ἀποστάσεως
κατέμαθε καὶ ἐν τῷ τότε ἀπολελοιπότας τὰς κώμας,
312Anabasis of Alexander III
With his whole force now reassembled Alexander4 330 b.c. was on his way towards Bactra when Philip son of Menelaus joined him from Media with the mercenary cavalry under his own command, the Thessalian volunteers who had remained in the army and Andromachus’ foreign corps. Nicanor son of Parmenio,
commander of the hypaspists, had already died of sickness.4 While Alexander was on his way5 to Bactra, news was brought that Satibarzanes, satrap of Areia, had massacred Anaxippus and his mounted javelin-men, was arming the Areians and leading them in a body to the city of Artacoana, where the Areian palace was, and that he had decided, on learning of Alexander’s advance, to go from there with his troops to Bessus and join him in attacking the Macedonians wherever opportunity offered. When6 this was reported to Alexander he did not continue on the road to Bactra, but took the Companion cavalry, the mounted javelin-men, archers, Agrianians, and Amyntas’ and Coenus’ battalions, and leaving behind there the rest of the army with Craterus in charge, advanced swiftly against Satibarzanes and the Areians; after covering about six hundred stades in two days, he arrived at Artacoana.5
Satibarzanes, on learning of Alexander’s proximity,7 was astounded at the speed of his approach, and fled with a few Areian horsemen; for in his flight he was deserted by most of his soldiers, as they too learnt that Alexander was approaching. Alexander pursued sharply all those he found to have had a hand



4QC. vi 6, 18 f., making Philip and others join Al. at Artacoana and with different forces, cf. App. XIII 4 f.5At or near Herat, App. VIII 11. Other tales in D. 78; QC. 6, 20–34.313