Arrian

ἑταίρων τινὰς ἀποπέμπει ὀπίσω ἐπὶ Ἰσσόν, κατασκεψομένους
εἰ τὰ ὄντα ἐξαγγέλλεται. οἱ δὲ
ἀναπλεύσαντες τῇ τριακοντόρῳ, ὅτι κολπώδης ἦν ἡ
ταύτῃ θάλασσα, μᾶλλόν τι εὐπετῶς κατέμαθον
αὐτοῦ στρατοπεδεύοντας τοὺς Πέρσας· καὶ ἀπαγγέλλουσιν
Ἀλεξάνδρῳ ἐν χερσὶν εἶναι Δαρεῖον.
3Ὁ δὲ συγκαλέσας στρατηγούς τε καὶ ἰλάρχας καὶ
τῶν ξυμμάχων τοὺς ἡγεμόνας παρεκάλει θαρρεῖν
μὲν ἐκ τῶν ἤδη σφίσι καλῶς κεκινδυνευμένων καὶ
ὅτι πρὸς νενικημένους ὁ ἀγὼν νενικηκόσιν αὐτοῖς
ἔσται καὶ ὅτι ὁ θεὸς ὑπὲρ σφῶν στρατηγεῖ ἄμεινον,
ἐπὶ νοῦν Δαρείῳ ἀγαγὼν καθεῖρξαι τὴν δύναμιν ἐκ
τῆς εὐρυχωρίας ἐς τὰ στενόπορα, ἵνα σφίσι μὲν
ξύμμετρον τὸ χωρίον ἀναπτύξαι τὴν φάλαγγα, τοῖς
δὲ ἀχρεῖον τὸ πλῆθος [ὅτι] ἔσται τῇ μάχῃ, οὔτε τὰ
4σώματα οὔτε τὰς γνώμας παραπλησίοις. Μακεδόνας
τε γὰρ Πέρσαις καὶ Μήδοις, ἐκ πάνυ πολλοῦ
τρυφῶσιν, αὐτοὺς ἐν τοῖς πόνοις τοῖς πολεμικοῖς
πάλαι ἤδη μετὰ κινδύνων ἀσκουμένους, ἄλλως τε
καὶ δούλοις ἀνθρώποις ἐλευθέρους, εἰς χεῖρας ἥξειν·
ὅσοι τε Ἕλληνες Ἕλλησιν, οὐχ ὑπὲρ τῶν αὐτῶν
μαχεῖσθαι, ἀλλὰ τοὺς μὲν ξὺν Δαρείῳ ἐπὶ μισθῷ
καὶ οὐδὲ τούτῳ πολλῷ κινδυνεύοντας, τοὺς δὲ ξὺν
σφίσιν ὑπὲρ τῆς Ἑλλάδος ἑκόντας ἀμυνομένους·
5βαρβάρων τε αὖ Θρᾷκας καὶ Παίονας καὶ Ἰλλυριοὺς
καὶ Ἀγριᾶνας τοὺς εὐρωστοτάτους τε τῶν
κατὰ τὴν Εὐρώπην καὶ μαχιμωτάτους πρὸς τὰ



144Anabasis of Alexander II

in a thirty-oared ship and sent them back to Issus, 333 b.c. to see if it was true. They discovered the more easily that the Persians were camped there, since the sea takes the form of a bay there, and reported to Alexander that Darius was at hand.2
Alexander summoned the generals, squadron3 leaders and officers of the allies3 and urged them to be confident in view of the dangers they had successfully surmounted in the past; already conquerors they were to fight men they had conquered, and God was a better strategist on their own side, putting it into Darius’ mind to bring his force out of the open country and hem it into the narrow pass, an area just the size for the deployment of their phalanx; in the battle the Persians would have no benefit from their numbers, while their physique and morale were no match for their own. ‘We Macedonians,’ he continued, ‘are to fight4 Medes and Persians, nations long steeped in luxury, while we have now long been inured to danger by the exertions of campaigning. Above all it will be a fight of free men against slaves. And so far as Greek will meet Greek, they will not be fighting for like causes; those with Darius will be risking their lives for pay, and poor pay too; the Greeks on our side will fight as volunteers in the cause of Greece. As for our barbarian5 troops, Thracians, Paeonians, Illyrians, Agrianians, the most robust and warlike races of Europe,


2Ib. 16–19.3Sections 3–7 are naturally taken as derived from a speech
in Pt. or Ar., contrast 8 f. The speech (3) takes their view of
the tactical situation (6, 3 but the ‘favour of God’ is also in D. 33, 1), makes their kind of distinction between Greeks and Macedonians (4 cf. 10, 7, but note iv 11, 8 from ‘vulgate’), stresses the value of the Balkan troops which they would have appreciated more than a later writer (5), and has their figure for mercenaries at the Granicus (6, cf. App. I 1). The suggestion in 7 that Issus would decide the war proved false, but could easily have been voiced at the time. QC. viii 20 f. alleges that Al. lost confidence at this juncture. Cf. 10, 2 n.145