Arrian

χῶμα πύργους ξυλίνους ἐπέστησαν, ὡς ἀπομάχεσθαι
ἀπ᾿ αὐτῶν, καὶ εἴ πῃ ἄλλῃ αἱ μηχαναὶ
προσήγοντο, βέλεσί τε ἠμύνοντο καὶ πυρφόροις
οἰστοῖς ἔβαλλον αὐτὰς τὰς ναῦς, ὥστε φόβον
4παρέχειν τοῖς Μακεδόσι πελάζειν τῷ τείχει. ἦν δὲ
αὐτοῖς καὶ τὰ τείχη τὰ κατὰ τὸ χῶμα τό τε ὕψος
εἰς πεντήκοντα καὶ ἑκατὸν μάλιστα πόδας καὶ ἐς
πλάτος ξύμμετρον λίθοις μεγάλοις ἐν γύψῳ κειμένοις
ξυμπεπηγότα. ταῖς δὲ ἱππαγωγοῖς τε καὶ ταῖς
τριήρεσι τῶν Μακεδόνων, ὅσαι τὰς μηχανὰς προσῆγον
τῷ τείχει, καὶ ταύτῃ οὐκ εὔπορον ἐγίγνετο
πελάζειν τῇ πόλει, ὅτι λίθοι πολλοὶ ἐς τὸ πέλαγος
προβεβλημένοι ἐξεῖργον αὐτῶν τὴν ἐγγὺς προσβολήν.
5καὶ τούτους Ἀλέξανδρος ἔγνω ἐξελκύσαι ἐκ
τῆς θαλάσσης· ἠνύετο δὲ χαλεπῶς τοῦτο τὸ ἔργον,
οἷα δὴ ἀπὸ νεῶν καὶ οὐκ ἀπὸ γῆς βεβαίου γιγνόμενον·
ἄλλως τε καὶ οἱ Τύριοι ναῦς καταφράξαντες
παρὰ τὰς ἀγκύρας ἐπῆγον τῶν τριήρων καὶ
ὑποτέμνοντες τὰς σχοίνους τῶν ἀγκυρῶν ἄπορον
τὴν προσόρμισιν ταῖς πολεμίαις ναυσὶν ἐποίουν.
6Ἀλέξανδρος δὲ τριακοντόρους πολλὰς ἐς τὸν αὐτὸν
τρόπον φράξας ἐπέστησεν ἐγκαρσίας πρὸ τῶν
ἀγκυρῶν, ὡς ἀπ᾿ αὐτῶν ἀναστέλλεσθαι τὸν
ἐπίπλουν τῶν νεῶν. ἀλλὰ καὶ ὣς ὕφαλοι κολυμβηταὶ
τὰς σχοίνους αὐτοῖς ὑπέτεμνον. οἱ δὲ
αλύσεσιν ἀντὶ σχοίνων εἰς τὰς ἀγκύρας χρώμενοι,
οἱ Μακεδόνες, καθίεσαν, ὥστε μηδὲν ἔτι πλέον τοῖς
7κολυμβηταῖς γίγνεσθαι. ἐξάπτοντες οὖν βρόχους
τῶν λίθων ἀπὸ τοῦ χώματος ἀνέσπων αὐτοὺς ἔξω
τῆς θαλάσσης, ἔπειτα μηχαναῖς μετεωρίσαντες κατὰ
βάθους ἀφίεσαν, ἵνα οὐκέτι προβεβλημένοι βλάψειν
ἔμελλον. ὅπου δὲ καθαρὸν πεποίητο τῶν προβόλων
198Anabasis of Alexander II

facing the mole, from which to fight; and wherever 332 b.c. else the engines were brought up, they defended themselves with missiles and shot fiery arrows at the ships themselves, so as to deter the Macedonians from an approach to the wall. The walls facing the4 mole were about 150 feet high and of corresponding breadth, constructed of big blocks of stone fitted in mortar. The Macedonian horse-transports and triremes, which were bringing up engines against the wall, found it hard to approach the city at this point, since heaps of stones cast into the sea in front of it prevented a close attack. Alexander determined5 to drag these stones out of the sea, but this work made slow progress as it was carried on from ships and not from firm land, especially as the Tyrians had protected some of their ships with armour and bore down on the anchors of the triremes and cut the cables, thus making it impossible for the enemy ships to lie near by. Alexander protected 6 several thirty-oar boats in the same way, and laid them athwart in front of the anchors to repel the attack of the Tyrian ships. Even so, divers would swim under the surface and cut the ropes. The Macedonians then substituted chains for ropes in anchoring, and lowered them, so that the divers had no further success. From the mole then they cast7 nooses round the stones, drew them out of the sea, and then lifting them on high with engines let them drop into deep water, where they were not likely to be in the way and do any more harm. Where they
199