Arrian

καὶ τῆς ἐχομένης Λυκίας χώρας ἔστε ἐπὶ τὸν
7Ταῦρον τὸ ὄρος. ὀλίγον δὲ πρόσθεν τῆς μάχης τῆς
ἐν Ἰσσῷ γενομένης ἀναπεισθεὶς πρὸς Ταυρίσκου
ἀνδρὸς κακοῦ Ἅρπαλος φεύγει ξὺν Ταυρίσκῳ.
καὶ ὁ μὲν Ταυρίσκος παρ᾿ Ἀλέξανδρον τὸν
Ἠπειρώτην ἐς Ἰταλίαν σταλεὶς ἐκεῖ ἐτελεύτησεν,
Ἁρπάλῳ δὲ ἐν τῇ Μεγαρίδι ἡ φυγὴ ἦν. ἀλλὰ
Ἀλέξανδρος πείθει αὐτὸν κατελθεῖν πίστεις δοὺς
οὐδέν οἱ μεῖον ἔσεσθαι ἐπὶ τῇ φυγῇ· οὐδὲ ἐγένετο
ἐπανελθόντι, ἀλλὰ ἐπὶ τῶν χρημάτων αὖθις ἐτάχθη
Ἅρπαλος. ἐς Λυδίαν δὲ σατράπην Μένανδρον
8ἐκπέμπει τῶν ἑταίρων· ἐπὶ δὲ τοῖς ξένοις, ὧν
ἡγεῖτο Μένανδρος, Κλέαρχος1 αὐτῷ ἐτάχθη.
ἀντὶ δὲ Ἀρίμμα1 σατράπην Συρίας Ἀσκληπιόδωρον
τὸν Εὐνίκου ἀπέδειξεν, ὅτι Ἀρίμμας βλακεῦσαι
ἐδόκει αὐτῷ ἐν τῇ παρασκευῇ, ἥντινα ἐτάχθη
παρασκευάσαι τῇ στρατιᾷ κατὰ τὴν ὁδὸν τὴν ἄνω.
7. Καὶ ἀφίκετο ἐς Θάψακον Ἀλέξανδρος μηνὸς
Ἑκατομβαιῶνος ἐπὶ ἄρχοντος Ἀθήνησιν Ἀριστοφάνους·
καὶ καταλαμβάνει δυοῖν γεφύραιν ἐζευγμένον





1See historical note.240Anabasis of Alexander III

Lycia and the country bordering on Lycia as far as 331 b.c. Mount Taurus. But not long before the battle of7 Issus Harpalus was led astray by Tauriscus, a scoundrel, and fled with him. Tauriscus made his way to Italy to Alexander (King) of Epirus,7 and died there; Harpalus took refuge in the Megarid. However, Alexander persuaded him to return, giving him assurances that he would not suffer for his flight; and in fact on his return he was again set in charge of the treasure. Alexander sent Menander, one of the Companions, to Lydia as satrap, appointing Clearchus88 to command the mercenaries of whom Menander had had charge. In place of Arimmas he made Asclepiodorus son of Eunicus satrap of Syria, since he considered Arimmas to have been slack in the preparations he had been instructed to make for the army in its march up country.9
7. Alexander arrived at Thapsacus in the month Hecatombaeon [July–Aug.] of the year in which Aristophanes was archon at Athens.1 There he


7Brother of Olympias, he was fighting for the Greek city of
Taras against her south Italian neighbours and perished in
331/30 b.c.8Probably an error, A’s or a scribe’s, for Cleander, cf. iii
12, 2; 26, 3; vi 27, 4.9Cf. ii 13, 7 n. If the text is right, Arimmas had succeeded
Menon for reasons unknown. Droysen, however, amended
‘Arimmas’ to ‘Menon, son of Cerdimmas’. The conjecture
is bold. QC. states (a) that after his capture of Damascus (A.
ii 11, 10 n.) Parmenio (not Menon) was put in charge of Hollow
Syria (iv 1, 4); (b) that after the capture of Tyre, where he
presumably rejoined Al. (cf. A. ii 25), Parmenio handed over Hollow Syria to Andromachus (iv 5, 9); (c) that Andromachus, whom Al. had put in charge of Syria, was burned alive by the Samaritans, that Al. personally avenged him by an expedition presumably from Tyre in 331, and appointed Memnon (editors ‘Menon’) in his place (iv 8, 9–11). As to (a) we can suppose that Parmenio was in general control of Syria, so long as he operated there with his expeditionary force (cf. his operations in Phrygia, A. i 24, 3), without prejudice to the appointment of Menon as permanent satrap and commander in north Syria; as to (b) that Andromachus’ province lay to the south of Menon’s province; as to (c) that Menon was transferred to this southern province on his death and himself replaced in the north by Arimmas. Cf. Bosworth, CQ 1975 with valuable discussion of the varied meanings of Hollow Syria.1Cf. for chs 7–10 D. 53–6; QC. iv 9–11 (analogies both with A. and variant tradition in D.); P. 31; J. xi 12; chronology, App. VIII 4 f.; route, App. VII.241