Arrian
3φοιτῶν. καὶ Φιλώταν μὲν κατακοντισθῆναι πρὸς
τῶν Μακεδόνων καὶ ὅσοι ἄλλοι μετέσχον αὐτῷ τῆς
ἐπιβουλῆς ἐπὶ Παρμενίωνα δὲ σταλῆναι Πολυδάμαντα,
ἕνα τῶν ἑταίρων, γράμματα φέροντα παρ᾿
Ἀλεξάνδρου πρὸς τοὺς στρατηγοὺς τοὺς ἐν Μηδίᾳ,
Κλέανδρόν τε καὶ Σιτάλκην καὶ Μεν[ν]ίδαν· οὗτοι
γὰρ ἐπὶ τῆς στρατιᾶς, ἧς Παρμενίων ἦρχε, τεταγμένοι
4ἦσαν· καὶ πρὸς τούτων ἀποθανεῖν Παρμενίωνα,
τυχὸν μὲν ὅτι οὐ πιστὸν ἐδόκει εἶναι Ἀλέξανδρος
Φιλώτα ἐπιβουλεύοντος μὴ ξυμμετασχεῖν
Παρμενίωνα τῷ παιδὶ τοῦ βουλεύματος, τυχὸν δὲ
ὅτι, εἰ καὶ μὴ ξυμμετέσχε, σφαλερὸς ἤδη ἦν περιὼν
Παρμενίων τοῦ παιδὸς αὐτοῦ ἀνῃρημένου, ἐν
τοσαύτῃ ὢν ἀξιώσει παρά τε αὐτῷ Ἀλεξάνδρῳ
καὶ ἐς τὸ ἄλλο στράτευμα, μὴ ὅτι τὸ Μακεδονικόν,
ἀλλα καὶ τῶν ἄλλων ξένων, ὧν πολλάκις καὶ ἐν
μέρει καὶ παρὰ τὸ μέρος κατὰ πρόσταξιν τὴν
Ἀλεξάνδρου ξὺν χάριτι ἐξηγεῖτο.
27. Λέγουσι δὲ καὶ Ἀμύνταν τὸν Ἀνδρομένους
κατὰ τὸν αὐτὸν χρόνον ὑπαχθῆναι ἐς κρίσιν καὶ
Πολέμωνα καὶ Ἄτταλον καὶ Σιμμίαν τοὺς
Ἀμύντου ἀδελφούς, ὡς ξυμμετασχόντας καὶ
αὐτοὺς τῆς ἐπιβουλῆς τῆς κατ᾿ Ἀλεξάνδρου κατὰ
2πίστιν τε καὶ ἑταιρίαν τὴν Φιλώτα. καὶ ἐδόκει
πιστοτέρα ἡ ἐπιβουλὴ ἐς τὸ πλῆθος, ὅτι Πολέμων,
εἷς τῶν ἀδελφῶν τῶν Ἀμύντου, ξυλληφθέντος
Φιλώτα ἔφυγεν ἐς τοὺς πολεμίους. ἀλλ᾿ Ἀμύντας
γε ξὺν τοῖς ἀδελφοῖς ὑπομείνας τὴν δίκην καὶ
ἀπολογησάμενος ἐν Μακεδόσι καρτερῶς ἀφίεται
τῆς αἰτίας· καὶ εὐθὺς ὡς ἀπέφυγεν ἐν τῇ ἐκκλησίᾳ
ἠξίωσεν ἐφεθῆναί οἱ ἐλθεῖν παρὰ τὸν ἀδελφὸν καὶ
3ἐπαναγαγεῖν αὐτὸν παρ᾿ Ἀλέξανδρον· καὶ οἱ
316Anabasis of Alexander III

visited Alexander’s tent twice daily. Philotas was3 330 b.c. shot down with javelins by the Macedonians, along with all his accomplices. As for action against Parmenio, Polydamas, one of the Companions, was sent with a letter from Alexander to the generals in Media, Cleander and Sitalces and Menidas, who had been posted to the force under Parmenio’s command.2 At their hands Parmenio perished, possibly because4 Alexander could not believe that when Philotas was conspiring, Parmenio had no share in his own son’s design, possibly because, even supposing he had no such share, it had now become a danger for Parmenio to survive his son’s execution, on account of the high honour which he enjoyed with Alexander himself and in the view of the army too—not only the Macedonian but the foreign troops also, whom he had often commanded with popularity both in and out of turn by Alexander’s order.
27. They also say that Amyntas son of Andromenes was brought to trial at the same time, together with Polemon, Attalus and Simmias, his brothers, on the charge that they too had joined in the conspiracy against Alexander as loyal comrades of Philotas. Moreover the conspiracy seemed more credible to the2 masses, because Polemon, one of Amyntas’ brothers, deserted to the enemy as soon as Philotas was arrested. However, Amyntas at least with his (other) brothers stood his trial, made a vigorous defence before the Macedonians, and was acquitted of the charge; and the moment he was acquitted, he asked leave to go and bring Polemon back again to Alexander; the Macedonians agreed. He departed that3
2For the ride across the central Persian desert Strabo xv 2, 10; D. 80, 3; QC. vii 2, 18.317