Arrian
13. Ἐν τούτῳ δὲ Ἀλέξανδρος προὐχώρει ἐπὶ τὸν
Γράνικον ποταμὸν συντεταγμένῳ τῷ στρατῷ,
διπλῆν μὲν τὴν φάλαγγα τῶν ὁπλιτῶν τάξας, τοὺς
δὲ ἱππέας κατὰ τὰ κέρατα ἄγων, τὰ σκευοφόρα δὲ
κατόπιν ἐπιτάξας ἕπεσθαι· τοὺς δὲ προκατασκεφομένους
τὰ τῶν πολεμίων ἦγεν αὐτῷ Ἡγέλοχος,
ἱππέας μὲν ἔχων τοὺς σαρισσοφόρους, τῶν
2δὲ ψιλῶν ἐς πεντακοσίους. καὶ Ἀλέξανδρός τε οὐ
πολὺ ἀπεῖχε τοῦ ποταμοῦ τοῦ Γρανίκου καὶ οἱ ἀπὸ
τῶν σκοπῶν σπουδῇ ἐλαύνοντες ἀπήγγελλον ἐπὶ τῷ
Γρανίκῳ πέραν τοὺς Πέρσας ἐφεστάναι τεταγμένους
ὡς ἐς μάχην. ἔνθα δὴ Ἀλέξανδρος μὲν τὴν
στρατιὰν πᾶσαν συνέταττεν ὡς μαχουμένους·
Παρμενίων δὲ προσελθὼν λέγει Ἀλεξάνδρῳ τάδε.
3“Ἐμοὶ δοκεῖ, βασιλεῦ, ἀγαθὸν εἶναι ἐν τῷ
παρόντι καταστρατοπεδεῦσαι ἐπὶ τοῦ ποταμοῦ τῇ
ὄχθῃ ὡς ἔχομεν. τοὺς γὰρ πολεμίους οὐ δοκῶ
τολμήσειν πολὺ τῷ πεζῷ λειπομένους πλησίον
ἡμῶν αὐλισθῆναι, καὶ ταύτῃ παρέξειν ἔωθεν
εὐπετῶς τῷ στρατῷ διαβαλεῖν τὸν πόρον· ὑποφθάσομεν
γὰρ αὐτοὶ περάσαντες πρὶν ἐκείνους ἐς
4τάξιν καθίστασθαι. νῦν δὲ οὐκ ἀκινδύνως μοι
δοκοῦμεν ἐπιχειρήσειν τῷ ἔργῳ, ὅτι οὐχ οἷόν τε ἐν
μετώπῳ διὰ τοῦ ποταμοῦ ἄγειν τὸν στρατόν.
πολλὰ μὲν γὰρ αὐτοῦ ὁρᾶται βαθέα, αἱ δὲ ὄχθαι
αὗται ὁρᾷς ὅτι ὑπερύψηλοι καὶ κρημνώδεις εἰσὶν αἳ
5αὐτῶν· ἀτάκτως τε οὖν καὶ κατὰ κέρας, ᾗπερ
ἀσθενέστατον, ἐκβαίνουσιν ἐπικείσονται ἐς φάλαγγα
ξυντεταγμένοι τῶν πολεμίων οἱ ἱππεῖς· καὶ τὸ
πρῶτον σφάλμα ἔς τε τὰ παρόντα χαλεπόν καὶ ἐς
τὴν ὑπὲρ παντὸς τοῦ πολέμου κρίσιν σφαλερόν.”
6Ἀλέξανδρος δέ, “ταῦτα μέν”, ἔφη, “ὦ Παρμενίων,
56Anabasis of Alexander I
13. Meanwhile, Alexander was advancing to the 334 b.c. river Granicus1 with his force all ready for battle, after drawing up his hoplites in two lines, with the cavalry on the wings, and ordering the baggage train to follow behind. The reconnoitring force was under the command of Hegelochus, with the lancers as cavalry, and five hundred light troops. Alexander2 was not far from the river Granicus, when some of the scouts, riding in at full speed, reported that the Persians were drawn up for battle on the farther bank of the Granicus. Alexander then formed the whole army for battle; but Parmenio came forward and said:
‘My view, sir, is that we should encamp at once3 on the river bank, as we are; the enemy outnumbered in infantry will, I believe, not dare to bivouac near us; and this will make it easy for the army to cross at dawn; we shall be across ourselves before they get into order. As things are, I feel that we should4 run great risk in taking action, since we cannot take the army across the river on a wide front, for one can see that many parts of it are deep; its banks, as you see, are very high, sometimes like cliffs. As we5 emerge in disorder and in column, the weakest of formations, the enemy cavalry in good solid order will charge: the initial disaster would be damaging at present, and most harmful for the general result of the war.’
Alexander, however, replied: ‘All this I know,6
1For chs 13–16 see App. I. The battle was fought in May-June.
The Granicus descends from Mt. Ida to the Propontis.57