Arrian

συμπηγνύναι ἐκέλευσεν. οἱ δὲ μηχανοποιοὶ γνώμην
ἀπεδείκνυντο ἄπορον εἶναι βίᾳ ἑλεῖν τὸ τεῖχος διὰ
3ὕψος τοῦ χώματος. ἀλλὰ Ἀλεξάνδρῳ αἱρετέον
ἐδόκει εἶναι ὅσῳ ἀπορώτερον· ἐκπλήξειν γὰρ τοὺς
πολεμίους τὸ ἔργον τῷ παραλόγῳ ἐπὶ μέγα, καὶ τὸ
μὴ ἑλεῖν αἰσχρὸν εἶναί οἱ λεγόμενον ἔς τε τοὺς
Ἕλληνας καὶ ἐς Δαρεῖον. ἐδόκει δὴ χῶμα ἐν
κύκλῳ τῆς πόλεως χωννύναι, ὡς ἐξ ἴσου ἀπὸ τοῦ
χωσθέντος ἐπάγεσθαι τὰς μηχανὰς τοῖς τείχεσι.
καὶ ἐχώννυτο κατὰ τὸ νότιον μάλιστα τῆς πόλεως
4τεῖχος, ἵνα ἐπιμαχώτερα ἐφαίνετο. ὡς δὲ ἐδόκει
ἐξῆρθαι συμμέτρως τὸ χῶμα, μηχανὰς ἐπιστήσαντες
οἱ Μακεδόνες ἐπῆγον ὡς ἐπὶ τὸ τεῖχος τῶν
Γαζαίων. καὶ ἐν τούτῳ θύοντι Ἀλεξάνδρῳ καὶ
ἐστεφανωμένῳ τε καὶ κατάρχεσθαι μέλλοντι τοῦ
πρώτου ἱερείου κατὰ νόμον τῶν τις σαρκοφάγων
ὀρνίθων ὑπερπετόμενος ὑπὲρ τοῦ βωμοῦ λίθον
ἐμβάλλει ἐς τὴν κεφαλήν, ὅντινα τοῖν ποδοῖν
ἔφερε. καὶ Ἀλέξανδρος ἤρετο Ἀρίστανδρον τὸν
μάντιν, ὅ τι νοοῖ ὁ οἰωνός. ὁ δὲ ἀποκρίνεται ὅτι·
ὦ βασιλεῦ, τὴν μὲν πόλιν αἱρήσεις, αὐτῷ δέ σοι
φυλακτέα ἐστὶν ἐπὶ τῇδε τῇ ἡμέρᾳ.
27. Ταῦτα ἀκούσας Ἀλέξανδρος τέως μὲν πρὸς
ταῖς μηχαναῖς ἔξω βέλους αὑτὸν εἶχεν· ὡς δὲ
ἐκδρομή τε ἐκ τῆς πόλεως καρτερὰ ἐγίγνετο καὶ
πῦρ τε ἐπέφερον ταῖς μηχαναῖς οἱ Ἄραβες καἰ τοὺς
Μακεδόνας ἀμυνομένους κάτωθεν αὐτοὶ ἐξ ὑπερδεξίου
τοῦ χωρίου ἔβαλλόν τε καὶ ὤθουν κατὰ τοῦ
ποιητοῦ χώματος, ἐνταῦθα ἢ ἑκὼν ἀπειθεῖ Ἀλέξανδρος
τῷ μάντει ἢ ἐκπλαγεὶς ἐν τῷ ἔργῳ οὐκ
ἐμνημόνευσε τῆς μαντείας, ἀλλ᾿ ἀναλαβὼν τοὺς
214Anabasis of Alexander II

The engineers, however, suggested that it was impracticable 332 b.c. to take the city by force owing to the height of the mound. Alexander thought, on the3 contrary, that the more impracticable it was, the more necessary was the capture; for the achievement would strike great terror into his enemies just because it was beyond calculation, while not to take it would be a blow to his prestige when reported to the Greeks and Darius.2 It was decided to raise a mound all round the city, and so bring up the engines against the walls, at an equal height on the earth heaped up. The mound was built chiefly against the city’s southern part of the wall, where the assault seemed most likely to succeed. When the Macedonians4 thought they had built the mound to the proper height, they set engines on it and brought them up against the city wall. Just at this time, as Alexander was sacrificing, wearing garlands, and just about to consecrate the first victim according to the ceremonial, a carnivorous bird, as it flew over the altar, dropped on his head a stone which it was carrying in its talons. Alexander asked Aristander the seer what the omen meant, and he answered, ‘Sire, you will capture the city; but today you must take care of your own person.’
27. On hearing this Alexander kept himself for a time by the engines, out of range; but then there was a vigorous sally from the city, the Arabs tried to set fire to the engines, pelting the Macedonians, who were resisting below, from a commanding position, and pushing them down the artificial mound, and Alexander disobeyed the seer on purpose, unless he lost control of himself in the action and forgot the prophecy, for he brought up the hypaspists

2Cf. i 4, 3; 13, 6 f.; ii 4, 4; iv 21, 3; vi 16, 2; vii 15, 3.215