Arrian

ἵππον καὶ τὴν ᾿Λμύντου τε καὶ Περδίκκου καὶ
Μελάγρου τάξιν τὴν πεζικὴν καὶ πρὸς τούτοις τοὺς
τοξότας καὶ τοὺς Ἀγριᾶνας περιῆλθε τῆς πόλεως
ἐς τὸ πρὸς Μύνδον μέρος, τό τε τεῖχος κατοψόμενος,
εἰ ταύτῃ ἐπιμαχώτερον τυγχάνει ὂν ἐς τὴν
προσβολὴν, καὶ ἅμα εἰ τὴν Μύνδον ἐξ ἐπιδρομῆς
δύναιτο λαθὼν κατασχεῖν· ἔσεσθαι γὰρ οὐ σμικρὰν
τὴν ὠφέλειαν ἐς τὴν τῆς Ἁλικαρνασσοῦ πολιορκίαν
τὴν Μύνδον οἰκείαν γενομένην· καί τι <καὶ>
ἐνεδίδοτο αὐτῷ ἐκ τῶν Μυνδίων, εἰ λάθοι νυκτὸς
6προσελθών. αὐτὸς μὲν δὴ κατὰ τὰ ξυγκείμενα
ἀμφὶ μέσας νύκτας προσῆλθε τῷ τείχει· ὡς δὲ
οὐδὲν ἐνεδίδοτο ἀπὸ τῶν ἔνδον, αἵ τε μηχαναὶ καὶ αἱ
κλίμακες αὐτῷ οὐ παρῆσαν, οἷα δὴ οὐκ ἐπὶ πολιορκίαν
σταλέντι, ἀλλ᾿ ὡς ἐπὶ προδοσίᾳ ἐνδιδομένης
τῆς πόλεως, προσήγαγε καὶ ὣς τῶν Μακεδόνων
τὴν φάλαγγα, ὑπορύττειν κελεύσας τὸ τεῖχος. καὶ
ἕνα γε πύργον κατέβαλον οἱ Μακεδόνες, οὐ μέντοι
7ἐγύμνωσέ γε τὸ τεῖχος πεσών· καὶ οἱ ἐκ τῆς
πόλεως ἅμα εὐρώστως ἀμυνόμενοι καὶ ἐκ τῆς
Ἁλικαρνασσοῦ κατὰ θάλασσαν πολλοὶ ἤδη παραβεβοηθηκότες
ἄπορον ἐποίησαν τῷ Ἀλεξάνδρῳ τὴν
αὐτοσχέδιόν τε καὶ ἐξ ἐπιδρομῆς κατάληψιν τῆς
Μύνδου. οὕτω μὲν δὴ ἐπανέρχεται Ἀλέξανδρος
οὐδὲν πράξας, ὧν ἕνεκα ὡρμήθη, καὶ τῇ πολιορκίᾳ
τῆς Ἁλικαρνασσοῦ αὖθις προσεῖχε.
8Καὶ πρῶτα μὲν τὴν τάφρον, ἣ πρὸ τῆς πόλεως
ὀρώρυκτο αὐτοῖς, πλάτος μὲν τριάκοντα μάλιστα
πηχῶν, τὸ δὲ βάθος ἐς πεντεκαίδεκα, ἐχώννυε, τοῦ
ῥᾳδίαν εἶναι τὴν προσαγωγὴν τῶν τε πύργων, ἀφ᾿
ὧν ἔμελλε τοὺς ἀκροβολισμοὺς ἐς τοὺς προμαχομένους
τοῦ τείχους ποιεῖσθαι, καὶ τῶν ἄλλων
86Anabasis of Alexander I

Amyntas, Perdiccas, and Meleager, with the archers334 b.c. also and the Agrianes, and went round the city to the side that lay towards Myndus,4 to reconnoitre the wall in case it should prove more open to an assault there, and also to see if perhaps he could capture Myndus by a sudden raid. The possession of Myndus, he thought, would be a great help to the siege of Halicarnassus. A proposal of surrender had been received from the Myndians, provided he could approach secretly by night. He therefore6 in person approached the wall about midnight, as agreed; but there was no sign of surrender from the people inside; his engines and ladders had been left behind, naturally enough, since he had not come for a siege, but to receive a treacherous surrender of the city. None the less he brought up the Macedonian phalanx with orders to sap the wall. They did bring down one tower, but its fall did not strip the wall; the citizens resisted stubbornly, and by this7
time numerous troops had sailed up from Halicarnassus and deprived Alexander of the means of rushing the capture of Myndus without preparation. So Alexander retreated without effecting his purpose, and concentrated once more on the siege of Halicarnassus.
First he began to fill up the moat they had dug8 before the city, about 30 cubits broad and 15 deep, so as to facilitate the approach of the siege-towers, from which he intended to shower missiles on the defenders of the wall, and of the other engines with

4A Carian town.87