Arrian

ἐθέλοι τὴν Δαρείου παῖδα, γῆμαι ἂν καὶ οὐ
διδόντος Δαρείου· ἐκέλευέ τε αὐτὸν ἥκειν, εἴ τι
εὑρέσθαι ἐθέλοι φιλάνθρωπον παρ᾿ αὑτοῦ. ταῦτα
ὡς ἤκουσε Δαρεῖος, τὰς μὲν ξυμβάσεις ἀπέγνω τὰς
πρὸς Ἀλέξανδρον, ἐν παρασκευῇ δὲ τοῦ πολέμου
αὖθις ἦν.
4Ἀλέξανδρος δὲ ἐπ᾿ Αἰγύπτου ἔγνω ποιεῖσθαι τὸν
στόλον. καὶ ἦν αὐτῷ τὰ μὲν ἄλλα τῆς Παλαιστίνης
καλουμένης Συρίας προσκεχωρηκότα ἤδη,
εὐνοῦχος δέ τις, ᾧ ὄνομα ἦν Βάτις, κρατῶν τῆς
Γαζαίων πόλεως, οὐ προσεῖχεν Ἀλεξάνδρῳ, ἀλλὰ
Ἄραβάς τε μισθωτοὺς ἐπαγαγόμενος καὶ σῖτον ἐκ
πολλοῦ παρεσκευακὼς διαρκῆ ἐς χρόνιον πολιορκίαν
καὶ τῷ χωρίῳ πιστεύων μήποτε ἂν βίᾳ
ἁλῶναι, ἔγνω μὴ δέχεσθαι τῇ πόλει Ἀλέξανδρον.
26. Ἀπέχει δὲ ἡ Γάζα τῆς μὲν θαλάσσης εἴκοσι
μάλιστα σταδίους, καὶ ἔστι ψαμμώδης καὶ βαθεῖα
ἐς αὐτὴν ἡ ἄνοδος καὶ ἡ θάλασσα ἡ κατὰ τὴν πόλιν
τεναγώδης πᾶσα. μεγάλη δὲ πόλις ἡ Γάζα ἦν καὶ
ἐπὶ χώματος ὑψηλοῦ ᾤκιστο καὶ τεῖχος περιεβέβλητο
αὐτῇ ὀχυρόν. ἐσχάτη δὲ ᾠκεῖτο ὡς ἐπ᾿
Αἴγυπτον ἐκ Φοινίκης ἰόντι ἐπὶ τῇ ἀρχῇ τῆς ἐρήμου.
2Ἀλέξανδρος δὲ ὡς ἀφίκετο πρὸς τὴν πόλιν, τῇ
μὲν πρώτῃ κατεστρατοπέδευσεν ᾗ μάλιστα ἐπίμαχον
αὐτῷ ἐφαίνετο τὸ τεῖχος, καὶ μηχανὰς


212Anabasis of Alexander II

Darius’ daughter, he would marry her, even if Darius 332 b.c. did not give her; and Darius must come to him, if he wished for favourable treatment at his hands. When Darius received this reply he despaired of making terms with Alexander and began to prepare again for war.1
Alexander now determined to make his expedition4 to Egypt.2 Palestinian Syria (as it is called) had already come over to him, except for a eunuch named Batis, who was master of the city of Gaza; he procured a force of Arab mercenaries, and some time before had got ready grain for a long siege; trusting that the place could never be taken by assault, he decided not to admit Alexander into the city.
26. Gaza is about 20 stades from the sea, and the way up to it is over deep sand, while the sea by the city is nothing but shoals. Gaza was a large city, built on a high mound, with a strong wall round it. It was the last town on the edge of the desert on the way from Phoenicia to Egypt.1
When Alexander reached the city, he encamped2 the first day where the wall seemed easiest to attack, and ordered siege engines to be fitted together.



1QC. 5, 1 ff. puts arrival of letter after siege, and now makes
Darius offer to surrender lands west of Halys, contrast D.,
cf. 14, 1 n. J. xi 12, 3 f. is vague, but D. 54, 1–6; QC. iv 11;
J. xi 12, 5 ff. put the offer A. records here (but with 30,000
Talents) just before Gaugamela, along with the exchange (rhetorically amplified by QC.) between Al. and Parmenio. § 2 appears to be from the ‘vulgate’. Siege of Gaza, D. 48, 7, two months long (Josephus, Jewish Antiquities xi 325), i.e. Sept.—Nov., cf. 24, 6 n.; QC. 5, 10; 6, 7 ff. (in many details different from A.); P. 25, 3 f. (Al’s wound).2D. 48 here interpolates the activity of Agis and Amyntas (13, 2–6; App. VI) and a decree of the Greek synedrion to send envoys to congratulate Al. on Issus; perhaps they reached Al. at Tyre, as QC. 5, 11 dates the decree to the Isthmia (early summer), but cf. iii 5, 1 n. QC. 5, 13 ff. inserts an account of operations by sea (App. II 3) and in Asia Minor, cf. 5, 9 for surrender of Rhodes, and gives certain appointments, see Berve nos. 76, 732 (for error by QC), 806, which were probably mentioned in A’s source(s) and omitted by him.213