Arrian
5τινα μᾶλλον ὠχύρουν. ξυνεπελάβοντο δὲ αὐτοῖς
τῆς ἀποστάσεως καὶ τῶν Σογδιανῶν οἱ πολλοί,
ἐπαρθέντες πρὸς τῶν ξυλλαβόντων Βῆσσον, ὥστε
καὶ τῶν Βακτριανῶν ἔστιν οὕς σφισιν οὗτοι
ξυναπέστησαν, εἴτε δὴ καὶ δείσαντες Ἀλέξανδρον,
εἴτε καὶ λόγον ἐπὶ τῇ ἀποστάσει διδόντες, ὅτι ἐς
ἕνα ξύλλογον ἐπηγγέλκει Ἀλέξανδρος ξυνελθεῖν
τοὺς ὑπάρχους τῆς χώρας ἐκείνης εἰς Ζαρίασπα,
τὴν μεγίστην πόλιν, ὡς ἐπ᾿ ἀγαθῷ οὐδενὶ τοῦ ξυλλόγου
γιγνομένου.
2. Ταῦτα ὡς ἀπηγγέλθη Ἀλεξάνδρῳ, παραγγείλας
τοῖς πεζοῖς κατὰ λόχους κλίμακας ποιεῖσθαι
ὅσα<ι> ἑκάστῳ λόχῳ ἐπηγγέλθησαν, αὐτὸς μὲν ἐπὶ
τὴν πρώτην ἀπὸ τοῦ στρατοπέδου ὁρμηθεὶς πόλιν
προὐχώρει, ᾗ ὄνομα ἦν Γάζα· ἐς γὰρ ἑπτὰ πόλεις
ξυμπεφευγέναι ἐλέγοντο οἱ ἐκ τῆς χώρας βάρβαροι·
2Κρατερὸν δὲ ἐκπέμπει πρὸς τὴν καλουμένην
Κυρούπολιν, ἥπερ μεγίστη πασῶν καὶ ἐς αὐτὴν οἱ
πλεῖστοι ξυνειλεγμένοι ἦσαν τῶν βαρβάρων. παρήγγελτο
δὲ αὐτῷ στρατοπεδεῦσαι πλησίον τῆς
πόλεως καὶ τάφρον τε ἐν κύκλῳ αὐτῆς ὀρύξαι καὶ
χάρακα περιβαλέσθαι καὶ τὰς μηχανὰς ὅσαις
χρῆσθαι ξυμπηγνύναι, ὡς πρὸς τοὺς ἀμφὶ Κρατερὸν
τὴν γνώμην τετραμμένοι οἱ ἐκ τῆς πόλεως ταύτης
ἀδύνατοι ὦσι ταῖς ἄλλαις πόλεσιν ἐπωφελεῖν.
3αὐτὸς δὲ ἐπὶ τὴν Γάζαν ἐπεὶ ἀφίκετο, ὡς εἶχεν ἐξ
ἐφόδου σημαίνει προσβάλλειν τῷ τείχει γηΐνῳ τε
καὶ οὐχ ὑψηλῷ ὄντι, προσθέντας ἐν κύκλῳ πάντοθεν
τὰς κλίμακας· οἱ δὲ σφενδονῆται αὐτῷ καὶ οἱ
τοξόται τε καὶ ἀκοντισταὶ ὁμοῦ τῇ ἐφόδῳ τῶν
πεζῶν ἐσηκόντιζον ἐς τοὺς προμαχομένους ἀπὸ τοῦ
338Anabasis Of Alexander IV

cities for their security. They were joined in the5 329 b.c. revolt by most of the Sogdianians, stirred up by the party which had arrested Bessus, so that they also drew into their revolt some of the Bactrians; it may be that they were really terrified of Alexander, or that it was a pretext they gave for revolt that Alexander had instructed the hyparchs of that country to come to a joint conference at Zariaspa, the greatest city, and that this conference was not for their benefit.3
2. When this was reported to Alexander, he ordered the infantry, company by company, to make ladders, each company a certain number; and he advanced himself to the first city on leaving the camp, called Gaza; the barbarians of the district were said to have taken refuge in seven cities. He sent2 Craterus to that called Cyropolis, the largest of them all, where the greatest number of barbarians had collected. Craterus was ordered to encamp near the city, to dig a ditch and throw a stockade round it, and to fit together as many siege engines as he required, so that the defenders of this city might have their minds fully occupied with Craterus and his troops and be unable to help those in the other cities. When3 Alexander himself arrived at Gaza, on his first approach without more ado he ordered his men to attack the wall, which was made of earth and of no great height, and to place their ladders against it on all sides; at the moment of the infantry attack his slingers, archers and javelin-men showered volleys

3For capture of rebel cities, QC. vii 6, 13–23.339