Arrian

Θρακῶν, Φιλίππους πόλιν ἐν ἀριστερᾷ ἔχοντα καὶ
τὸν Ὄρβηλον τὸ ὄρος. διαβὰς δὲ τὸν Νέστον
ποταμὸν λέγουσιν, ὅτι δεκαταῖος ἀφίκετο ἐπὶ τὸ
6ὄρος τὸν Αἷμον. καὶ ἐνταῦθα ἀπήντων αὐτῷ κατὰ
τὰ στενὰ τῆς ἀνόδου τῆς ἐπὶ τὸ ὄρος τῶν τε
†ἐμπόρων1 πολλοὶ ὡπλισμένοι καὶ οἱ Φρᾷκες οἱ
αὐτόνομοι, παρεσκευασμένοι εἴργειν τοῦ πρόσω
κατειληφότες τὴν ἄκραν τοῦ Αἵμου τὸν στόλον,
7παρ᾿ ἣν ἦν τῷ στρατεύματι ἡ πάροδος. ξυναγαγόντες
δὲ ἁμάξας καὶ προβαλόμενοι πρὸ σφῶν ἅμα
μὲν χάρακι ἐχρῶντο ταῖς ἁμάξαις ἐς τὸ ἀπομάχεσθαι
ἀπ᾿ αὐτῶν, εἰ βιάζοιντο, ἅμα δὲ ἐν νῷ εἶχον
ἐπαφιέναι ἀνιοῦσιν ᾗ ἀποτομώτατον τοῦ ὄρους ἐπὶ
τὴν φάλαγγα τῶν Μακεδόνων τὰς ἁμάξας. γνώμην
δὲ πεποίηντο ὅτι ὅσῳ πυκνοτέρᾳ τῇ φάλαγγι
καταφερόμεναι συμμίξουσιν αἱ ἅμαξαι, τοσῷδε
μᾶλλόν τι διασκεδάσουσιν αὐτὴν βίᾳ ἐμπεσοῦσαι.
8Ἀλεξάνδρῳ δὲ βουλὴ γίγνεται ὅπως ἀσφαλέστατα
ὑπερβαλεῖ τὸ ὄρος· καὶ ἐπειδὴ ἐδόκει
διακινδυνευτέα, οὐ γὰρ εἶναι ἄλλῃ τὴν πάροδον,
παραγγέλλει τοῖς ὁπλίταις, ὁπότε καταφέροιντο
κατὰ τοῦ ὀρθίου αἱ ἄμαξαι, ὅσοις μὲν ὁδὸς πλατεῖα
οὖσα παρέχοι λῦσαι τὴν τάξιν, τούτους δὲ διαχωρῆσαι,
9ὡς δι᾿ αὐτῶν ἐκπεσεῖν τὰς ἁμάξας· ὅσοι δὲ
περικαταλαμβάνοιντο, ξυννεύσαντας, τοὺς δὲ καὶ
πεσόντας ἐς γῆν, συγκλεῖσαι ἐς ἀκριβὲς τὰς ἀσπίδας,
τοῦ κατ᾿ αὐτῶν φερομένας τὰς ἁμάξας καὶ τῇ
ῥύμῃ κατὰ τὸ εἰκὸς ὑπερπηδώσας ἀβλαβῶς ἐπελθεῖν.

1corrupt. Editors have proposed βαρβάρων, ἐγχωρίων,
ἐμπείρων, ἐκ τῶν ὀρῶν, ὁμόρων, ὀρείων, ἐκεῖ ἐμπόρων.6Anabasis of Alexander I

Thracians,4 with Philippi and Mount Orbelus on his 335 b.c. left. Then he crossed the river Nestus and is said in ten days to have reached Mount Haemus [Great Balkan mountain], where he was met in the6 defile of the approach to the mountains by many of the . . .5 in arms and by the independent Thracians; prepared to bar his advance, they had occupied the height of Haemus on the line of the army’s march. They collected carts and set them up in their front as7 a stockade from which to put up a defence, if they were pressed; but it was also in their mind to launch the carts at the Macedonian phalanx as the troops mounted the slope just where the mountain was most precipitous. Their idea was that the closer packed the phalanx when the descending carts charged it, the more their violent descent would scatter it.
Alexander consulted how he could most safely8 cross the ridge; and since he saw that the risk must be run, for there was no way round, he sent orders to his hoplites that whenever the carts tumbled down the slope, those who were on level ground and could break formation were to part to right and left, leaving an avenue for the carts; those caught in the9 narrows were to crouch close together; and some were actually to fall to the ground and link their shields closely together so that when the carts came at them they were likely to bound over them by their


4As distinguished from the Thracian principalities near the coast which Philip had annexed. For this campaign, cf. Introd. 33; D. 8, 1; P. 11; Strabo vii 3, 8. Al.’s route from Amphipolis is unclear, see Seibert (Introd. n. 108) 78; the Lyginus (2, 1) and Peuce are not certainly identified. At this time the Triballi extended from round Sofia to the Danube, perhaps as far as Silistria (RE VI A 2392 ff.).5See textual note; the MS reading ‘merchants’ is sense-ess; editors propose ‘local barbarians’ or the like.7