Arrian

τὸν ἀριθμόν, καὶ πασσάλους μικροὺς σιδηροῦς, οἷς
αἱ σκηναὶ καταπεπήγεσαν αὐτοῖς, παρασκευάσαντες,
τοῦ καταπηγνύναι αὐτοὺς ἔς τε τὴν χιόνα
ὅπου πεπηγυῖα φανείη καὶ εἴ πού τι τῆς χώρας
ἔρημον χιόνος ὑποφαίνοιτο, καὶ τούτους καλωδίοις
ἐκ λίνου ἰσχυροῖς ἐκδήσαντες τῆς νυκτὸς προὐχώρουν
κατὰ τὸ ἀποτομώτατόν τε τῆς πέτρας καὶ
2ταύτῃ ἀφυλακτότατον. καὶ τούτους τοὺς πασσάλους
καταπηγνύντες τοὺς μὲν ἐς τὴν γῆν, ὅπου
διεφαίνετο, τοὺς δὲ καὶ τῆς χιόνος ἐς τὰ μάλιστα οὐ
θρυφθησόμενα, ἀνεῖλκον σφᾶς αὐτοὺς ἄλλοι ἄλλῃ
τῆς πέτρας. καὶ τούτων ἐς τριάκοντα μὲν ἐν τῇ
ἀναβάσει διεφθάρησαν, ὥστε οὐδὲ τὰ σώματα
αὐτῶν ἐς ταφὴν εὑρέθη ἐμπεσόντα ἄλλῃ καὶ ἄλλῃ
3τῆς χιόνος. οἱ δὲ λοιποὶ ἀναβάντες ὑπὸ τὴν ἕω καὶ
τὸ ἄκρον τοῦ ὄρους καταλαβόντες σινδόνας κατέσειον
ὡς ἐπὶ τὸ στρατόπεδον τῶν Μακεδόνων,
οὕτως αὐτοῖς ἐξ Ἀλεξάνδρου παρηγγελμένον.
πέμψας δὴ κήρυκα ἐμβοῆσαι ἐκέλευσε τοῖς προφυλάσσουσι
τῶν βαρβάρων μὴ διατρίβειν ἔτι, ἀλλὰ
παραδιδόναι σφᾶς· ἐξευρῆσθαι γὰρ δὴ τοὺς
πτηνοὺς ἀνθρώπους καὶ ἔχεσθαι ὑπὸ αὐτῶν τοῦ
ὄρους τὰ ἄκρα· καὶ ἅμα ἐδείκνυεν τοὺς ὑπὲρ τῆς
κορυφῆς στρατιώτας.
4Οἱ δὲ βάρβαροι ἐκπλαγέντες τῷ παραλόγῳ τῆς
ὄψεως καὶ πλείονάς τε ὑποτοπήσαντες εἶναι τοὺς
κατέχοντας τὰ ἄκρα καὶ ἀκριβῶς ὡπλισμένους
ἐνέδοσαν σφᾶς αὐτούς· οὕτω πρὸς τὴν ὄψιν τῶν
ὀλίγων ἐκείνων Μακεδόνων φοβεροὶ ἐγένοντο.
ἔνθα δὴ ἄλλων τε πολλῶν γυναῖκες καὶ παῖδες
ἐλήφθησαν καὶ ἡ γυνὴ ἡ Ὀξυάρτου καὶ οἱ παῖδες.
5καὶ ἦν γὰρ Ὀξυάρτῃ παῖς παρθένος ἐν ὥρᾳ γάμου,
402Anabasis Of Alexander IV

numbering about three hundred, and had got ready 327 b.c. small iron pegs, with which their tents had been pegged down, to fix them into the snow where it appeared to be frozen firm and also in any space bare of snow which might show through, and had bound the pegs to strong linen ropes, they set out at night to the part of the rock which was least guarded, because most precipitous. They fixed the pegs into2 the ground where it was visible, or in the snow where it seemed least likely to give way, and each in a different place, hauled themselves up the rock. About thirty of them perished in the ascent, in such a way that their bodies were not even found for burial, having fallen in different parts of the snow. The rest,3 however, climbed up about dawn, seized the summit of the mound, and waved linen flags to the Macedonian camp, in accordance with Alexander’s instructions to them. Then Alexander sent a herald and told him to shout to the front line of the barbarians, not to delay further but to give themselves up, for he had actually found the men with wings, and the summit of their mound was in their hands, pointing at the same time to the soldiers on the peak.
The barbarians were astounded at a sight they had4 never reckoned on, and suspecting that the soldiers occupying the heights were more numerous and fully armed, they surrendered; such was their panic at seeing those few Macedonians. Here were captured the wives and children of many men, notably the wife and daughters of Oxyartes. Now Oxyartes had a maiden5
403