Arrian

ἀπελθόντα δὲ ἐς τὴν εὐνὴν κεῖσθαι ὀδυρόμενον,
αὐτόν τε τὸν Κλεῖτον ὀνομαστὶ ἀνακαλοῦντα καὶ
τὴν Κλείτου μὲν ἀδελφήν, αὐτὸν δὲ ἀναθρεψαμένην,
Λανίκην τὴν Δρωπίδου παῖδα, ὡς καλὰ ἄρα αὐτῇ
4τροφεῖα ἀποτετικὼς εἴη ἀνδρωθείς, ἥ γε τοὺς μὲν
παῖδας τοὺς ἑαυτῆς ὑπὲρ αὐτοῦ μαχομένους ἐπεῖδεν
ἀποθανόντας, τὸν ἀδελφὸν δὲ αὐτῆς αὐτὸς αὐτοχειρίᾳ
ἔκτεινε· φονέα τε τῶν φίλων οὐ διαλείπειν
αὑτὸν ἀνακαλοῦντα, ἄσιτόν τε καὶ ἄποτον καρτερεῖν
ἔστε ἐπὶ τρεῖς ἡμέρας, οὐδέ τινα ἄλλην
θεραπείαν θεραπεῦσαι τὸ σῶμα.
5Καὶ ἐπὶ τούτοις τῶν μάντεών τινες μῆνιν ἐκ
Διονύσου ᾖδον, ὅτι ἡ θυσία ἐξελείφθη Ἀλεξάνδρῳ
ἡ τοῦ Διονύσου. καὶ Ἀλέξανδρος μόγις πρὸς τῶν
ἑταίρων πεισθεὶς σίτου τε ἥψατο καὶ τὸ σῶμα
κακῶς ἐθεράπευσε· καὶ τῷ Διονύσῳ τὴν θυσίαν
ἀπέδωκεν, ἐπεὶ οὐδὲ αὐτῷ ἄκοντι ἦν ἐς μῆνιν τοῦ
θείου μᾶλλόν τι ἢ τὴν αὑτοῦ κακότητα ἀναφέρεσθαι
6τὴν ξυμφοράν. ταῦτα μεγαλωστὶ ἐπαινῶ Ἀλεξάνδρου,
τὸ μήτε ἀπαυθαδιάσασθαι ἐπὶ κακῷ, μήτε
προστάτην τε καὶ ξυνήγορον κακίονα ἔτι γενέσθαι
τοῦ ἁμαρτηθέντος, ἀλλὰ ξυμφῆσαι γὰρ ἐπταικέναι
ἄνθρωπόν γε ὄντα.
7Εἰσὶ δὲ οἵ λέγουσιν Ἀνάξαρχον τὸν σοφιστὴν
ἐλθεῖν μὲν παρ᾿ Ἀλέξανδρον κληθέντα, ὡς παραμυθησόμενον·
εὑρόντα δὲ κείμενον καὶ ἐπιστένοντα,
ἀγνοεῖν, φάναι ἐπιγελάσαντα, διότι ἐπὶ
τῷδε οἱ πάλαι σοφοὶ ἄνδρες τὴν Δίκην πάρεδρον τῷ
Διῒ ἐποίησαν ὡς ὅ τι ἂν πρὸς τοῦ Διὸς κυρωθῇ,
τοῦτο ξὺν δίκῃ πεπραγμένον. καὶ οὖν καὶ τὰ ἐκ
βασιλέως μεγάλου γιγνόμενα δίκαια χρῆναι νομίζεσθαι,
πρῶτα μὲν πρὸς αὐτοῦ βασιλέως, ἔπειτα
368Anabasis Of Alexander IV

they say that Alexander took to his bed and lay there328 b.c. mourning, crying out the name of Clitus and of Clitus’ sister, Lanice,1 daughter of Dropides, who had nursed him: what a fine return for her nursing had he given her, now that he was a man! She had seen her sons4 die fighting for him, and now with his own hand he had killed her brother. He kept again and again calling himself the murderer of his friends, refused firmly all food or drink for three days, and neglected all other bodily needs.
In these circumstances some of the prophets ‘sang5 the wrath’ of Dionysus, because Alexander had neglected the sacrifice to him. With some difficulty Alexander was persuaded by his friends to eat, and take some slight care of his person; and he paid the due sacrifice to Dionysus, since it was not uncongenial to him that the disaster should be referred to divine wrath rather than to his own evil nature. In this I6 highly commend Alexander; he did not brazen out his evil act, nor degenerate further by becoming champion and advocate of his error; he admitted that he had erred, as a man may.2
Some say that Anaxarchus the Sophist3 came by7 summons to Alexander to offer consolation, and finding him groaning on his bed, laughed at him and said that he had not learnt why the old philosophers made Justice sit by the throne of Zeus, because whatever is determined by Zeus is done with Justice; so too the acts of a great King should be held just, first by the king himself and then by the rest of man-



1Hellanice QC. viii 1, 21.2Cf. vii 29, 2.3For his life and works see Diels, Fragmente der Vorsokratiker no. 72. Here and in ch. 11 he may be traduced.369