Arrian

γὰρ ἔδοξε γράφειν ὑπὲρ οὐδενὸς τοιούτου ἐς τὸ
ἐμφανές· τὰ δὲ ἀπὸ γλώσσης οἱ ἐντεταλμένα
ἐξήγγειλεν, καὶ οὕτω ξυλλαμβάνεται ὁ Ἀλέξανδρος
οὗτος καὶ ἐν φυλακῇ ἦν.
26. Ἀλέξανδρος δὲ ἄρας ἐκ Φασηλίδος μέρος
μέν τι τῆς στρατιᾶς διὰ τῶν ὀρῶν πέμπει ἐπὶ
Πέργης, ᾗ ὡδοπεποιήκεσαν αὐτῷ οἱ Θρᾷκες χαλεπὴν
ἄλλως καὶ μακρὰν οὖσαν τὴν πάροδον· αὐτὸς δὲ
παρὰ τὴν θάλασσαν διὰ τοῦ αἰγιαλοῦ ἦγε τοὺς
ἀμφ᾿ αὑτόν. ἔστι δὲ ταύτῃ ἡ ὁδὸς οὐκ ἄλλως ὅτι
μὴ τῶν ἀπ᾿ ἄρκτου ἀνέμων πνεόντων· εἰ δὲ νότοι
κατέχοιεν, ἀπόρως ἔχει διὰ τοῦ αἰγιαλοῦ ὁδοιπορεῖν.
2τῷ δὲ ἐκ νότων σκληροὶ βορραῖ ἐπιπνεύσαντες,
οὐκ ἄνευ τοῦ θείου, ὡς αὐτός τε καὶ οἱ
ἀμφ᾿ αὐτὸν ἐξηγοῦντο, εὐμαρῆ καὶ ταχεῖαν τὴν
πάροδον παρέσχον. ἐκ Πέργης δὲ ὡς προῄει,
ἐντυγχάνουσιν αὐτῷ κατὰ τὴν ὁδὸν πρέσβεις
Ἀσπενδίων αὐτοκράτορες, τὴν μὲν πόλιν ἐνδιδόντες,
3φρουρὰν δὲ μὴ εἰσάγειν δεόμενοι. καὶ περὶ
μὲν τῆς φρουρᾶς πράξαντες ἀπῆλθον, ὅσα ἠξίουν·
πεντήκοντα δὲ τάλαντα κελεύει τῇ στρατιᾷ δοῦναι
αὐτοῖς ἐς μισθὸν καὶ τοὺς ἵππους, οὓς δασμὸν
βασιλεῖ ἔτρεφον. οἱ δὲ ὑπέρ τε τοῦ ἀργυρίου καὶ
τοὺς ἵππους παραδώσειν ξυνθέμενοι ἀπῆλθον.
4Ἀλέξανδρος δὲ ἐπὶ Σίδης ᾔει. εἰσὶ δὲ οἱ
Σιδῆται Κυμαῖοι ἐκ Κύμης τῆς Αἰολίδος· καὶ
οὗτοι λέγουσιν ὑπὲρ σφῶν τόνδε τὸν λόγον, ὅτι, ὡς
κατῆράν τε ἐς τὴν γῆν ἐκείνην οἱ πρῶτοι ἐκ Κύμης



106Anabasis of Alexander I

of this sort; but he gave a verbal message as334–3 b.c. directed. As a result the other Alexander was arrested and kept under guard.2
26. Leaving Phaselis, Alexander sent part of his force through the mountain passes towards Perge, where the Thracians had made him a road, the approach being otherwise difficult and long. He himself led his men by the sea along the shore, a route practicable only with north winds blowing; south winds make the passage along the shore impossible. There had been southerlies but a north2 wind had set in, not without divine interposition, as Alexander and his followers interpreted it, and made the passage easy and swift.1 As he went on from Perge, plenipotentiaries from Aspendus met him on the way surrendering their city, but begging it might not be garrisoned. This point about the3 garrison they won; but Alexander ordered them to provide fifty Talents for the army as pay, with the horses they bred as tribute to the King of Persia.2 They agreed on the money and to hand over horses, and left.
Alexander now went towards Side,3 whose inhabitants4 are Cymaeans from Aeolian Cyme; according to their own account of themselves, when the first emigrants from Cyme put into land and



2For this Alexander and Amyntas see Introd. 46 and Appendix XI 5. Introd. 39.1This ‘miracle’, when the sea did ‘obeisance’ to Al. (Callisthenes F. 31, not a quotation of his words), is said to have appeared in all the histories of Al. (Josephus, Bell. Jud. ii 348) and was ridiculed by Menander (died c. 290 b.c.), fr. 924 Koch; but cf. P. 17 (no mention in a supposed letter of Al.); Strabo xiv, 3, 9.4Al. seems to have by-passed Aspendus as well as Syllium, keeping closer to the coast, on his march further east to Side, whence he returned towards Syllium and Perge (27, 5), again by-passing Aspendus, until he marched back against that city on news of its disloyalty.107