Arrian

δὴ ἑκατέρωθεν τοῦ ἐρηριμμένου τείχους αὐτοὶ
ὑπολελειμμένοι ἐκ πλαγίου τε καὶ μόνον οὐ κατὰ
νώτου παρεῖχον ἀκροβολίζεσθαι ἐς τοὺς τῷ
ἀντῳκοδομημένῳ τείχει προσάγοντας.
22. Οὐ πολλαῖς δὲ ὕστερον ἡμέραις ἐπάγοντος
αὖθις Ἀλεξάνδρου τὰς μηχανὰς τῷ πλινθίνῳ τῷ
ἐντὸς τείχει καὶ αὐτοῦ ἐφεστηκότος τῷ ἔργῳ,
ἐκδρομὴ γίνεται πανδημεὶ ἐκ τῆς πόλεως, τῶν μὲν
κατὰ τὸ ἐρηριμμένον τεῖχος, ᾗ αὐτὸς Ἀλέξανδρος
ἐπετέτακτο, τῶν δὲ κατὰ τὸ Τρίπυλον, ᾗ οὐδὲ πάνυ
2τι προσδεχομένοις τοῖς Μακεδόσιν ἦν. καὶ οἱ μὲν
δᾷδάς τε ταῖς μηχαναῖς ἐνέβαλλον καὶ ὅσα ἄλλα ἐς
τὸ ἐξάψαι τε φλόγα καὶ ἐπὶ μέγα προκαλέσασθαι,
τῶν δὲ ἀμφ᾿ Ἀλέξανδρον αὐτῶν τε ἐμβαλλόντων ἐς
αὐτοὺς ἐρρωμένως καὶ ταῖς μηχαναῖς ἀπὸ τῶν
πύργων λίθων τε μεγάλων ἀφιεμένων καὶ βελῶν
ἐξακοντιζομένων οὐ χαλεπῶς ἀπεστράφησάν τε καὶ
3ἔφυγον ἐς τὴν πόλιν. καὶ φόνος ταύτῃ οὐκ ὀλίγος
ἐγένετο, ὅσῳ πλείονές τε καὶ ξὺν μείζονι τῇ τόλμῃ
ἐξέδραμον. οἱ μὲν γὰρ εἰς χεῖρας ἐλθόντες τοῖς
Μακεδόσιν ἀπέθανον, οἱ δὲ ἀμφὶ τῷ τείχει τῷ
καταπεπτωκότι, στενωτέρας τε ἢ κατὰ τὸ πλῆθος
αὐτῶν τῆς παρόδου οὔσης καὶ τῶν κατερηριμμένων
τοῦ τείχους χαλεπὴν τὴν ὑπέρβασιν αὐτοῖς παρεχόντων.
4Τοῖς δὲ κατὰ τὸ Τρίπυλον ἐκδραμοῦσιν ἀπήντα
Πτολεμαῖος ὁ σωματοφύλαξ ὁ βασιλικός, τήν τε
Ἀδαίου καὶ Τιμάνδρου ἅμα οἷ τάξιν ἄγων καὶ
ἔστιν οὓς τῶν ψιλῶν· καὶ οὗτοι οὐδὲ αὐτοὶ χαλεπῶς
5ἐτρέψαντο τοὺς ἐκ τῆς πόλεως. ξυνέβη δὲ καὶ
τούτοις ἐν τῇ ἀποχωρήσει κατὰ στενὴν γέφυραν τὴν
ἐπὶ τῆς τάφρου πεποιημένην φεύγουσι τήν τε
92Anabasis of Alexander I

had been left standing on either side of the breach334 b.c. and which made it possible to fire from the flanks and almost at the back of those assailing the replacement wall.
22. A few days afterwards Alexander again brought up his engines to the inner brick wall, taking charge of operations himself, and there was a sally from the city in full force;1 some of the enemy attacked near the breach, where Alexander had himself taken up position, others at the triple gate, the last place the Macedonians looked for a sally. Some flung torches2 on the siege engines, and anything else which might light a flame and make a great blaze; but Alexander’s immediate supports counter-attacked vigorously; large stones were hurled by the engines from the towers, missiles were showered in volleys, and the besieged were easily repulsed and fled into the city. Here there was great carnage, proportionate to their3 number and the greater boldness of their sally. Some fell in hand-to-hand fight with the Macedonians, others round the fallen wall, where the passage was too narrow to admit such a number and the fallen parts of the wall made it difficult to pass over them.
As for those who sallied by the triple gate, Ptolemaeus,4 the royal bodyguard, met them, bringing up the battalions of Adaeus and Timander and some of the light troops; they too had no difficulty in driving back the sallying party, who in fact also5 suffered in the retreat over a narrow bridge thrown across the moat, which gave way under their numbers;

1D. 26 with variant details; he makes the Athenian Ephialtes (A. i 10, 4) the leader.93