Arrian

τά τε ἄλλα καὶ ὅτι οὐ καλὸν αὑτοῦ
κτήματα ἤδη ἀπολλύναι καὶ ὅτι οὐχ ὡσαύτως
προσέξουσιν αὐτῷ οἱ κατὰ τὴν Ἀσίαν ἄνθρωποι,
ὡς οὐδὲ αὐτῷ ἐγνωκότι κατέχειν τῆς Ἀσίας τὴν
12ἀρχήν, ἀλλὰ ἐπελθεῖν μόνον νικῶντα. ὁ δὲ τιμωρήσασθαι
ἐθέλειν Πέρσας ἔφασκεν ἀνθ᾿ ὧν ἐπὶ τὴν
Ἑλλάδα ἐλάσαντες τάς τε Ἀθήνας κατέσκαψαν καὶ
τὰ ἱερὰ ἐνέπρησαν, καὶ ὅσα ἄλλα κακὰ τοὺς
Ἕλληνας εἰργάσαντο, ὑπὲρ τούτων δίκας λαβεῖν.
ἀλλ᾿ οὐδ᾿ ἐμοὶ δοκεῖ σὺν νῷ δρᾶσαι τοῦτό γε
Ἀλέξανδρος οὐδὲ εἶναί τις αὕτη Περσῶν τῶν πάλαι
τιμωρία.
19. Ταῦτα δὲ διαπραξάμενος προὐχώρει ἐπὶ
Μηδίας· ἐκεῖ γὰρ ἐπυνθάνετο εἶναι Δαρεῖον.
γνώμην δὲ πεποίητο Δαρεῖος, εἰ μὲν ἐπὶ Σούσων
καὶ Βαβυλῶνος μένοι Ἀλέξανδρος, αὐτοῦ προσμένειν
καὶ αὐτὸς ἐν Μήδοις, εἰ δή τι νεωτερισθείη
τῶν ἀμφ᾿ Ἀλέξανδρον· εἰ δ᾿ ἐλαύνοι ἐπ᾿ αὐτόν,
αὐτὸς δὲ ἄνω ἰέναι τὴν ἐπὶ Παρθυαίους τε καὶ
Ὑρκανίαν ἔστε ἐπὶ Βάκτρα, τήν τε χώραν φθείρων
πᾶσαν καὶ ἄπορον ποιῶν Ἀλεξάνδρῳ τὴν πρόσω
2ὁδὸν. τὰς μὲν δὴ γυναῖκας καὶ τὴν ἄλλην τὴν ἔτι
ἀμφ᾿ αὑτὸν κατασκευὴν καὶ τὰς ἁρμαμάξας ἐπὶ
τὰς Κασπίας καλουμένας πύλας πέμπει, αὐτὸς δὲ
ξὺν τῇ δυνάμει, ἥτις ἐκ τῶν παρόντων ξυνείλεκτο
αὐτῷ, προσέμενεν ἐν Ἐκβατάνοις. ταῦτα ἀκούων
Ἀλέξανδρος προὐχώρει ἐπὶ Μηδίας. καὶ Παρ<α>ιτάκας
μὲν εἰς τὴν χώραν αὐτῶν ἐμβαλὼν
κατεστρέψατο καὶ σατραπεύειν ἔταξεν αὐτῶν
Ὀξ[ο]άθρην τὸν Ἀβουλίτου τοῦ [πρότερον]
3Σούσων σατράπου παῖδα. αὐτὸς δὲ ὡς ἠγγέλθη
κατὰ τὴν ὁδόν, ὅτι ἐγνωκὼς εἴη Δαρεῖος ἀπαντᾶν
288Anabasis of Alexander III

other things, that it was not good to destroy what was 330 b.c. now his own property, and that the Asians would not so readily adhere to him, but would suppose that even he had not decided to retain the empire of Asia but only to conquer and pass on. Alexander said that he12 wished to punish the Persians for sacking Athens and [480 b.c.] burning the temples when they invaded Greece, and to exact retribution for all the other injuries they had done to the Greeks. I too do not think that Alexander showed good sense in this action nor that he could punish Persians of a long past age.
19. After these measures Alexander went on towards Media, for he was getting information that Darius was there. Darius had determined, if Alexander were to remain at Susa and Babylon, to wait himself where he was in Media, in case there were any new developments on Alexander’s side, but if Alexander were to march straight against him, he proposed to go up country to the Parthyaeans and Hyrcania, as far as Bactra, ravaging all the country and making further progress impossible for Alexander. He sent the women, all the belongings he had2 still with him and the closed waggons to what are called the Caspian gates, while he stayed himself in Ecbatana with the force he had collected from available resources. On hearing this, Alexander went on towards Media, and subdued the Paraetacae by invading their territory, and appointed Oxathres, son of Abulites the satrap of Susa, as satrap over them. As he was informed on the road that Darius had3 decided to meet him in battle and fight it out again,
289