Arrian
3Τότε μὲν δὴ αὐτοῦ κατεστρατοπεδεύσατο· τῇ δὲ
ὑστεραίᾳ ξυντάξας τὴν στρατιὰν ἐπῆγε τῷ τείχει.
ὡς δὲ ἄπορόν τε διὰ δυσχωρίαν ἐφαίνετο αἱρεθῆναι
καὶ πολλὰς πληγὰς οἱ ἀμφ᾿ αὐτὸν ἐλάμβανον ἐξ
ὑπερδεξίου τε χωρίου καὶ ἀπὸ μηχανῶν βαλλόμενοι,
4τότε μὲν ἀποχωρεῖ ἐς τὸ στρατόπεδον· τῶν δὲ
αἰχμαλώτων φρασάντων ἄλλην ὁδὸν περιάξειν
αὐτόν, ὡς εἴσω παρελθεῖν τῶν πυλῶν, ἐπεὶ
τραχεῖαν τὴν ὁδὸν καὶ στενὴν ἐπύθετο, Κρατερὸν
μὲν αὐτοῦ καταλείπει ἐπὶ στρατοπέδου τήν τε
αὑτοῦ τάξιν ἔχοντα καὶ τὴν Μελεάγρου καὶ τῶν
τοξοτῶν ὀλίγους καὶ τῶν ἱππέων ἐς πεντακοσίους,
5καὶ προστάττει αὐτῷ, ἐπειδὰν ἐκπεριεληλυθότα
αὑτὸν αἴσθηται καὶ προσάγοντα ἤδη τῷ στρατοπέδῳ
τῶν Περσῶν (αἰσθήσεσθαι δὲ οὐ χαλεπῶς,
σημανεῖν γὰρ αὐτῷ τὰς σάλπιγγας), τότε δὲ
προσβαλεῖν τῷ τείχει· αὐτὸς δὲ προὐχώρει νύκτωρ
καὶ διελθὼν ὅσον ἑκατὸν σταδίους ἀναλαμβάνει
τοὺς ὑπασπιστὰς καὶ τὴν Περδίκκου τάξιν καὶ τῶν
τοξοτῶν τοὺς κουφοτάτους καὶ τοὺς Ἀγριᾶνας καὶ
τῶν ἑταίρων τὴν ἴλην τὴν βασιλικὴν καὶ τετραρχίαν
πρὸς ταύτῃ μίαν ἱππικήν, καὶ ξὺν τούτοις
ᾔει ἐπικάμψας ὡς ἐπὶ τὰς πύλας, ἵν᾿ οἱ αἰχμάλωτοι
6ἦγον. Ἀμύνταν δὲ καὶ Φιλώταν καὶ Κοῖνον τὴν
ἄλλην στρατιὰν ὡς ἐπὶ τὸ πεδίον ἄγειν καὶ τὸν
ποταμόν, ὃν ἐχρῆν περᾶσαι ἰόντα ἐπὶ Πέρσας,
γεφυροῦν ἐκέλευσεν· αὐτὸς δὲ ᾔει ὁδὸν χαλεπὴν καὶ
τραχεῖαν καὶ ταύτην δρόμῳ τὸ πολὺ ἦγε. τὴν μὲν
δὴ πρώτην φυλακὴν τῶν βαρβάρων πρὶν φάους
ἐπιπεσὼν διέφθειρε καὶ τῶν δευτέρων τοὺς πολλούς·
7τῆς τρίτης δὲ οἱ πλείους διέφυγον, καὶ οὐδὲ
284Anabasis of Alexander III
For the moment Alexander encamped there, but3 330 b.c. next day he marshalled his troops and led them to the assault of the wall. But as it appeared impregnable from the difficulty of the ground, and as his troops were suffering many blows from fire directed from commanding heights and from catapults, for the moment he fell back on the camp. His prisoners54 undertook to lead him round by a different road, so that he would make his way within the gates; but as he gathered from enquiry that this road was rough and narrow, he left Craterus there in charge of the camp with his own battalion and Meleager’s, a few of the archers, and about five hundred horse, and instructed5 him to attack the wall, as soon as he observed that Alexander himself had managed to get right round and was nearing the Persian camp (Craterus would easily observe this from a bugle signal). So he himself advanced by night, and after traversing about a hundred stades, took the hypaspists, with Perdiccas’ battalion, the lightest armed of the archers, the Agrianians, the royal squadron of the Companions, and a tetrarchy6 of cavalry in addition, and with them made a turning movement towards the gates, guided thither by the prisoners. Amyntas, Philotas6 and Coenus were instructed to march the remainder of the army to the plain, and to bridge the river7 which he had to cross to enter Persia. He himself traversed a difficult and rough path, and most of it at full speed. He fell upon the first barbarian guard before dawn and destroyed it together with the greater part of the second; most of the third escaped,7
5A bilingual Lycian in D. and QC, and P. 37, 1.6Obscure: evidently more than one squadron, cf. Introd. 58–60.7Araxes (Palvar), D. 69), 2; QC 5, 2. The plain is Ardakan.285