Arrian

καὶ τὸ χῶμα ξυνάπτον ἤδη ὁρῶντες, τοῦ
μὲν ἀπομάχεσθαι ἔτι ἀπείχοντο, πέμψαντες δὲ
κήρυκας σφῶν παρὰ Ἀλέξανδρον ἐθέλειν ἔφασκον
ἐνδοῦναι τὴν πέτραν, εἴ σφισι σπένδοιτο. γνώμην
δὲ ἐπεποίηντο ἐν τῷ ἔτι διαμέλλοντι τῶν σπονδῶν
διαγαγόντες τὴν ἡμέραν νυκτὸς ὡς ἕκαστοι διασκεδάννυσθαι
3ἐπὶ τὰ σφέτερα ἤθη. καὶ τοῦτο ὡς
ἐπύθετο Ἀλέξανδρος, ἐνδίδωσιν αὐτοῖς χρόνον τε
ἐς τὴν ἀποχώρησιν καὶ τῆς φυλακῆς τὴν κύκλωσιν
τὴν πάντῃ ἀφελεῖν. καὶ αὐτὸς ἔμενεν ἔστε ἤρξαντο
τῆς ἀποχωρήσεως· καὶ ἐν τούτῳ ἀναλαβὼν τῶν
σωματοφυλάκων καὶ τῶν ὑπασπιστῶν ἐς ἑπτακοσίους
κατὰ τὸ ἐκλελειμμένον τῆς πέτρας ἀνέρχεται ἐς
αὐτὴν πρῶτος, καὶ οἱ Μακεδόνες ἄλλος ἄλλῃ
4ἀνιμῶντες ἀλλήλους ἀνῄεσαν. καὶ οὗτοι ἐπὶ τοὺς
ἀποχωροῦντας τῶν βαρβάρων τραπόμενοι ἀπὸ
ξυνθήματος, πολλοὺς μὲν αὐτῶν ἐν τῇ φυγῇ ἀπέκτειναν,
οἱ δὲ καὶ πεφοβημένως ἀποχωροῦντες κατὰ
τῶν κρημνῶν ῥίψαντες σφᾶς ἀπέθανον. εἴχετό τε
Ἀλεξάνδρῳ ἡ πέτρα ἡ τῷ Ἡρακλεῖ ἄπορος
γενομένη καὶ ἔθυεν ἐπ᾿ αὐτῇ Ἀλέξανδρος καὶ
κατεσκεύασε φρούριον, παραδοὺς Σισικόττῳ ἐπιμελεῖσθαι
τῆς φρουρᾶς, ὃς ἐξ Ἰνδῶν μὲν πάλαι
ηὐτομολήκει ἐς Βάκτρα παρὰ Βῆσσον, Ἀλεξάνδρου
δὲ κατασχόντος τὴν χώραν τὴν Βακτρίαν
ξυνεστράτευέ τε αὐτῷ καὶ πιστὸς ἐς τὰ μάλιστα
ἐφαίνετο.
5Ἄρας δ᾿ ἐκ τῆς πέτρας ἐς τὴν Ἀσσακηνῶν
χώραν ἐμβάλλει. Τὸν γὰρ ἀδελφὸν τὸν Ἀσσακάνου
ἐξηγγέλλετο τούς τε ἐλέφαντας ἔχοντα καὶ τῶν
προσχώρων βαρβάρων πολλοὺς ξυμπεφευγέναι ἐς
τὰ ταύτῃ ὄρη. καὶ ἀφικόμενος ἐς Δύρτα πόλιν
444Anabasis Of Alexander IV

way to the hill, and seeing the mound already connected326 b.c. with it, began to desist from any defence, and sent a herald on their behalf to Alexander, saying they were willing to surrender the rock, on terms being granted them. They had formed a plan of spending the day in the delays incident to the treaty and scattering at night to their various homes. But3 when Alexander discovered this, he gave them time to withdraw and to remove the round of sentries who guarded all points, waited himself till they began their withdrawal and then took some seven hundred of the bodyguards and hypaspists to the deserted part of the rock. He was himself the first to scale it and the Macedonians followed, pulling each other up at different points. At a signal they turned on the4 retreating barbarians and killed many of them in flight; in the panic of their escape some threw themselves down the cliffs and perished. Alexander was now in possession of the rock Heracles could not take, sacrificed on it, and set a garrison there, appointing to command the guard Sisicottus,1 who had long ago deserted from the Indians and joined Bessus at Bactra, but taken service under Alexander when he became master of Bactria and shown himself especially trustworthy.
On leaving the rock, Alexander invaded the district5 of the Assacenians,2 for it was reported that Assacanus’ brother with the elephants and many of the neighbouring barbarians had taken refuge in the hills there. When he arrived at a city called Dyrta,


1‘Sisicostus’, QC. viii 11, 25, recording his appointment.2D. 86, 2; QC. viii 12, 1 ff. record different operations against ‘Aphrices’ or ‘Erices’.445