Arrian

ἐγίγνετο, παρήγγειλε τοῖς σωματοφύλαξι καὶ τοῖς
ἀμφ᾿ αὑτὸν ἑταίροις, ἀναλαβόντας τὰς ἀσπίδας
ἀναβαίνειν ἐπὶ τοὺς ἵππους καὶ ἐλαύνειν ἐπὶ τὸν
γήλοφον· ἐκεῖσε δὲ ἐλθόντας, εἰ ὑπομένοιεν οἱ
κατειληφότες τὸ χωρίον, τοὺς ἡμίσεας καταπηδῆσαι
ἀπὸ τῶν ἵππων καὶ ἀναμιχθέντας τοῖς ἱππεῦσι
6πεζοὺς μάχεσθαι. οἱ δὲ πολέμιοι τὴν ὁρμὴν τὴν
Ἀλεξάνδρου ἰδόντες λείπουσι τὸν γήλοφον καὶ
παρεκκλίνουσιν ἐφ᾿ ἑκάτερα τῶν ὀρῶν. ἔνθα δὴ
καταλαβὼν Ἀλέξανδρος τὸν γήλοφον σὺν τοῖς
ἑταίροις τούς τε Ἀγριᾶνας μεταπέμπεται καὶ τοὺς
τοξότας, ὄντας ἐς δισχιλίους· τοὺς δὲ ὑπασπιστᾶς
διαβαίνειν τὸν ποταμὸν ἐκέλευσε καὶ ἐπὶ τούτοις
τὰς τάξεις τῶν Μακεδόνων· ὁπότε δὲ διαβάντες
τύχοιεν, ἐπ᾿ ἀσπίδα ἐκτάσσεσθαι, ὡς πυκνὴν εὐθὺς
διαβάντων φαίνεσθαι τὴν φάλαγγα· αὐτὸς δὲ ἐν
προφυλακῇ ὢν ἀπὸ τοῦ λόφου ἀφεώρα τῶν
7πολεμίων τὴν ὁρμήν. οἱ δέ, ὁρῶντες διαβαίνουσαν
τὴν δύναμιν, κατὰ τὰ ὄρη ἀντεπῄεσαν, ὡς τοῖς μετὰ
Ἀλεξάνδρου ἐπιθησόμενοι τελευταίοις ἀποχωροῦσιν.
ὁ δὲ πελαζόντων ἤδη αὐτὸς ἐκθεῖ σὺν τοῖς
ἀμφ᾿ αὑτόν, καὶ ἡ φάλαγξ, ὡς διὰ τοῦ ποταμοῦ ἐπιοῦσα,
ἐπηλάλαξεν· οἱ δὲ πολέμιοι πάντων ἐπὶ
σφᾶς ἐλαυνόντων ἐγκλίναντες ἔφευγον· καὶ ἐν
τούτῳ ἐπῆγεν Ἀλέξανδρος τούς τε Ἀγριᾶνας καὶ
τοὺς τοξότας δρόμῳ ὡς ἐπὶ τὸν ποταμόν. καὶ
8πρῶτος μὲν αὐτὸς φθάσας διαβαίνει· τοῖς τελευταίοις
δὲ ὡς εἶδεν ἐπικειμένους τοὺς πολεμίους
ἐπιστήσας ἐπὶ τῇ ὄχθῃ τὰς μηχανὰς ἐξακοντίζειν
ὡς πορρωτάτω ἀπ᾿ αὐτῶν ἐκέλευσεν ὅσα ἀπὸ
μηχανῶν βέλη ἐξακοντίζεται, καὶ τοὺς τοξότας δὲ
ἐκ μέσου τοῦ ποταμοῦ ἐκτοξεύειν, ἐπεσβάντας καὶ
26Anabasis of Alexander I

bodyguards1 and the Companions with him to take 335 b.c. their shields, mount and charge the hill; on reaching it, supposing those who held it should stand their ground, half were to dismount and, mingling with the cavalry, fight on foot. But the enemy, observing6 Alexander’s onset, abandoned the hill and withdrew to the mountains on either side. So after occupying the hill with his Companions, Alexander sent for the Agrianians and the archers, up to the number of two thousand; the hypaspists were ordered to cross the river, and the battalions of the Macedonian phalanx to follow them. Once across, they were to extend to the left, so that the phalanx might appear solid the moment they had crossed. He himself was in an advanced covering position, watching the enemy’s movement from the hill. On seeing the force7 crossing, the enemy charged down the mountain with the idea of attacking the last of Alexander’s troops to withdraw. When they were already close, he himself with the troops he had with him ran out, and the phalanx coming to the attack through the river raised its battle-cry; under this combined onslaught the enemy broke and fled, whereupon Alexander brought up the Agrianians and the archers at the double in the direction of the river. He himself got over first, but seeing the enemy8 pressing on the hindmost, he set up his engines on the bank and ordered every kind of missile to be discharged from them at furthest range, and the
archers to shoot from mid-river, as they too had

1i.e. the hypaspists.27