Arrian

τοῦ διάπλου, τριῶν μάλιστα ὀργυιῶν τὸ βάθος.
ἀλλὰ λίθων τε πολλῶν ἀφθονία ἦν καὶ ὕλης, ἥντινα
τοῖς λίθοις ἄνωθεν ἐπεφόρουν, χάρακές τε οὐ
χαλεπῶς κατεπήγνυντο ἐν τῷ πηλῷ καὶ αὐτὸς ὁ
πηλὸς ξύνδεσμος τοῖς λίθοις ἐς τὸ ἐπιμένειν
4ἐγίγνετο. καὶ προθυμία τῶν τε Μακεδόνων ἐς τὸ
ἔργον καὶ Ἀλεξάνδρου πολλὴ ἦν παρόντος τε καὶ
αὐτοῦ ἕκαστα ἐξηγουμένου καὶ τὰ μὲν λόγῳ
ἐπαίροντος, τὰ δὲ καὶ χρήμασι τούς τι ἐκπρεπέστερον
κατ᾿ ἀρετὴν πονουμένους ἐπικουφίζοντος.
ἀλλ᾿ ἔστε μὲν τὸ πρὸς τῇ ἠπείρῳ ἐχώννυτο, οὐ
χαλεπῶς προὐχώρει τὸ ἔργον, ἐπὶ βάθος τε ὀλίγον
5χωννύμενον καὶ οὐδενὸς ἐξείργοντος. ὡς δὲ τῷ τε
βαθυτέρῳ ἤδη ἐπέλαζον καὶ ἅμα τῇ πόλει αὐτῇ
ἐγγὺς ἐγίγνοντο, ἀπό τε τῶν τειχῶν ὑψηλῶν ὄντων
βαλλόμενοι ἐκακοπάθουν, ἅτε καὶ ἐπ᾿ ἐργασίᾳ
μᾶλλόν τι ἢ ὡς ἐς μάχην ἀκριβῶς ἐσταλμένοι, καὶ
ταῖς τριήρεσιν ἄλλῃ καὶ ἄλλῃ τοῦ χώματος
ἐπιπλέοντες οἱ Τύριοι, ἅτε δὴ θαλασσοκρατοῦντες
ἔτι, ἄπορον πολλαχῇ τὴν πρόσχωσιν τοῖς Μακεδόσιν
6ἐποίουν. καὶ οἱ Μακεδόνες πύργους ἐπ᾿
ἄκρου τοῦ χώματος, ὅ τι περ προκεχωρήκει αὐτοῖς
ἐπὶ πολὺ τῆς θαλάσσης, ἐπέστησαν δύο καὶ μηχανὰς
ἐπὶ τοῖς πύργοις. προκαλύμματα δὲ δέρρεις καὶ
διφθέραι αὐτοῖς ἦσαν, ὡς μήτε πυρφόροις βέλεσιν
ἀπὸ τοῦ τείχους βάλλεσθαι, τοῖς τε ἐργαζομένοις
προβολὴ ἐν τῷ αὐτῷ εἶναι πρὸς τὰ τοξεύματα·
ἅμα τε ὅσοι προσπλέοντες τῶν Τυρίων ἔβλαπτον
τοὺς χωννύντας, ἀπὸ τῶν πύργων βαλλόμενοι οὐ
χαλεπῶς ἀνασταλήσεσθαι ἔμελλον.
19. Οἱ δὲ Τύριοι πρὸς ταῦτα ἀντιμηχανῶνται
τοιόνδε. ναῦν ἱππαγωγὸν κλημάτων τε ξηρῶν καὶ
188Anabasis of Alexander II

the crossing is deepest, the water is about three 332 b.c. fathoms deep. But there was plenty of stones and wood, which they heaped on to the stones; then it was easy to fix stakes in the mud, and the mud itself made a stable binding for the stones. The4 Macedonians were very eager for the work, like Alexander; he was present directing each step
himself, inspired the men with his words and encouraged their exertions by gifts to those who did work of exceptional merit. As long as the building of the mole was near the mainland, the operation went forward without difficulty; for the depth of the pile was not great, and no resistance was offered. But5 once they got into deeper water and also nearer the city, they were greatly distressed by volleys from the high walls, especially as they were properly clad for labouring rather than for fighting; and the Tyrians sailed up in their triremes here and there by the mole, being still masters of the sea, and in many places made it impossible for the Macedonians to build up the mole. The Macedonians set two towers6 on the mole, which had now run far out into the sea, with engines on the towers, and covered them with hides and skins, to prevent their being pelted with fire-darts from the wall, and to screen the workers also against arrows; besides, any Tyrians who rowed up and tried to injure the men building the mole would receive volleys from the towers and would probably be easily repulsed.4
19. The Tyrians, however, took a counter step;1 they filled a cavalry transport-ship with dry boughs


4D. 40, 4–41; QC 2, 8–24 supply other details.1QC. 3, 1 ff. (in Al’s absence, 20, 4 below); ignored by D. QC. 3, 9 f. tells of other Tyrian devices.189