Arrian
4Κλεῖτον δὲ δῆλον μὲν εἶναι πάλαι ἤδη ἀχθόμενον
τοῦ τε Ἀλεξάνδρου τῇ ἐς τὸ βαρβαρικώτερον
μετακινήσει καὶ τῶν κολακευόντων αὐτὸν τοῖς
λόγοις· τότε δὲ καὶ αὐτὸν πρὸς τοῦ οἴνου παροξυνόμενον
οὐκ ἐᾶν οὔτε ἐς τὸ θεῖον ὑβρίζειν, οὔτε
[ἐς] τὰ τῶν πάλαι ἡρώων ἔργα ἐκφαυλίζοντας
χάριν ταύτην ἄχαριν προστιθέναι Ἀλεξάνδρῳ.
5εἶναι γὰρ οὖν οὐδὲ τὰ Ἀλεξάνδρου οὕτω τι μεγάλα
καὶ θαυμαστὰ ὡς ἐκεῖνοι ἐπαίρουσιν· οὔκουν
μόνον καταπρᾶξαι αὐτά, ἀλλὰ τὸ πολὺ γὰρ μέρος
Μακεδόνων εἶναι τὰ ἔργα. καὶ τοῦτον τὸν λόγον
ἀνιᾶσαι Ἀλέξανδρον λεχθέντα. οὐδὲ ἐγὼ ἐπαινῶ
τὸν λόγον, ἀλλὰ ἱκανὸν γὰρ εἶναι τίθεμαι ἐν τοιᾷδε
παροινίᾳ τὸ καθ᾿ αὑτὸν σιγῶντα ἔχειν μηδὲ τὰ
6αὐτὰ τοῖς ἄλλοις ἐς κολακείαν πλημμελεῖν. ὡς δὲ
καὶ τῶν Φιλίππου τινὲς ἔργων, ὅτι οὐ μεγάλα οὐδὲ
θαυμαστὰ Φιλίππῳ κατεπράχθη, οὐδεμιᾷ ξὺν δίκῃ
ἐπεμνήσθησαν, χαριζόμενοι καὶ οὗτοι Ἀλεξάνδρῳ,
τὸν Κλεῖτον ἤδη οὐκέτι ἐν ἑαυτοῦ ὄντα πρεσβεύειν
μὲν τὰ τοῦ Φιλίππου, καταβάλλειν δὲ Ἀλέξανδρόν
τε καὶ τὰ τούτου ἔργα, παροινοῦντα ἤδη τὸν
Κλεῖτον, τά τε ἄλλα καὶ πολὺν εἶναι ἐξονειδίζοντα
Ἀλεξάνδρῳ, ὅτι πρὸς αὑτοῦ ἄρα ἐσώθη, ὁπότε ἡ
ἱππομαχία ἡ ἐπὶ Γρανίκῳ ξυνειστήκει πρὸς Πέρσας·
7καὶ δὴ καὶ τὴν δεξιὰν τὴν αὑτοῦ σοβαρῶς ἀνατείναντα,
αὕτη σε ἡ χείρ, φάναι, ὦ Ἀλέξανδρε, ἐν τῷ
τότε ἔσωσε. καὶ Ἀλέξανδρον οὐκέτι φέρειν τοῦ
Κλείτου τὴν παροινίαν τε καὶ ὕβριν, ἀλλὰ ἀναπηδᾶν
γὰρ ξὺν ὀργῇ ἐπ᾿ αὐτόν, κατέχεσθαι δὲ ὑπὸ τῶν
ξυμπινόντων. Κλεῖτον δὲ οὐκ ἀνιέναι ὑβρίζοντα.
8Ἀλέξανδρος δὲ ἐβόα ἄρα καλῶν τοὺς ὑπασπιστάς·
οὐδενὸς δὲ ὑπακούοντος ἐς ταὐτὰ ἔφη καθεστηκέναι
364Anabasis Of Alexander IV
Clitus, however, had made it plain for some time4328 b.c. past that he was aggrieved both by Alexander’s change-over to the more barbaric style and by the expressions of his flatterers; and now under the stimulus of wine he would not let them show disrespect for the divine power, or belittle the deeds of the heroes of old, to do Alexander a favour that was none. Nor in his view were Alexander’s achievements5 so great and wonderful as they cried them up to be; and Alexander had not achieved them by himself, but they were in great part Macedonian achievements. Alexander was deeply hurt by his words. Nor do I approve them; I think it enough, amid such drunkenness, for a man to keep his own views to himself without committing the same errors of flattery as the rest. But when some even referred6 to Philip’s achievements, quite unjustly suggesting that his achievements were not great or remarkable, again trying to gratify Alexander, Clitus could no longer control himself but spoke up in favour of Philip’s achievements, making little of Alexander and his; he was now heated with wine and heaped reproaches on Alexander; after all Alexander owed his life to him, when the cavalry battle on the Granicus had been joined with the Persians; what is more, he7 actually raised his right hand with an insolent gesture and cried, ‘This very hand, Alexander, saved you then!’3 Alexander could no longer bear Clitus’ drunken arrogance and leapt up in anger to strike him, but was held back by his fellow drinkers. Still Clitus did not restrain his insults and Alexander8 shouted out for the hypaspists; but as no one obeyed,

3Cf. i 15, 8.365