Arrian

κατεῖχον γὰρ χωρία ὑπερδέξια, τῷ τε
πλήθει σφῶν θαρσήσαντες καὶ τῶν Μακεδόνων, ὅτι
ὀλίγοι ἐφαίνοντο, καταφρονήσαντες ἐς τὸ πεδίον
ὑποκατέβησαν· καὶ μάχη γίγνεται καρτερά. ἀλλὰ
2τούτους μὲν οὐ ξὺν πόνῳ ἐνίκα Ἀλέξανδρος· οἱ δὲ
ἀμφὶ Πτολεμαῖον οὐκ ἐν τῷ ὁμαλῷ παρετάξαντο,
ἀλλὰ γήλοφον γὰρ κατεῖχον οἱ βάρβαροι, ὀρθίους
ποιήσαντας1 τοὺς λόχους Πτολεμαῖος προσῆγεν
ᾗπερ ἐπιμαχ[ιμ]ώτατον τοῦ λόφου ἐφαίνετο, οὐ
πάντῃ τὸν λόφον κυκλωσάμενος, ἀλλ᾿ ἀπολιπών, εἰ
φεύγειν ἐθέλοιεν οἱ βάρβαροι, χώραν αὐτοῖς ἐς τὴν
3φυγήν. καὶ γίγνεται καὶ τούτοις μάχη καρτερὰ
τοῦ χωρίου τῇ χαλεπότητι καὶ ὅτι οὐ κατὰ τοὺς
ἄλλους τοὺς ταύτῃ βαρβάρους οἱ Ἰνδοί, ἀλλὰ πολὺ
δή τι ἀλκιμώτατοι τῶν προσχώρων εἰσίν. ἐξώσθησαν
δὲ καὶ οὗτοι ἀπὸ τοῦ ὄρους ὑπὸ τῶν
Μακεδόνων· καὶ οἱ ἀμφὶ Λεοννάτον τῇ τρίτῃ, μοίρᾳ
τῆς στρατιᾶς ὡσαύτως ἔπραξαν· ἐνίκων γὰρ καὶ
4οὗτοι τοὺς κατὰ σφᾶς. καὶ λέγει Πτολεμαῖος
ἀνθρώπους μὲν ληφθῆναι τοὺς πάντας ὑπὲρ τετρακισμυρίους,
βοῶν δὲ ὑπὲρ τὰς τρεῖς καὶ εἴκοσι
μυριάδας· καὶ τούτων τὰς καλλίστας ἐπιλεξάμενον
Ἀλέξανδρον, ὅτι διαφέρουσαι αὐτῷ κάλλει τε καὶ
μεγέθει ἐφαίνοντο, πέμψαι ἐθέλειν ἐς Μακεδονίαν
ἐργάζεσθαι τὴν χώραν.
5Ἐντεῦθεν ἐπὶ τὴν τῶν Ἀσσακηνῶν χώραν ἦγεν·
τούτους γὰρ ἐξηγγέλλετο παρεσκευάσθαι ὡς μαχουμένους,
ἱππέας μὲν ἐς δισχιλίους ἔχοντας,
πεζοὺς δὲ ὑπὲρ τοὺς τρισμυρίους, τριάκοντα δὲ
ἐλέφαντας. Κρατερὸς μὲν δὴ ἐκτετειχικὼς ἤδη

1Reiske: ποιήσαντες codd.; Roos.424Anabasis Of Alexander IV

for they were occupying a commanding position, 327–6 b.c. confident in their numbers and despising the Macedonians, as they appeared to be few, they descended below to the plain; a fierce battle followed. Still Alexander defeated them without much difficulty. Ptolemy’s troops marshalled themselves on uneven2 ground, but as the barbarians were holding a hill, they formed into columns, and Ptolemy led them up to the point where the hill seemed most open to assault, not surrounding it on all sides, but leaving a space for flight, in case the barbarians chose to flee. Here too the battle was fierce, both because of the3 difficulty of the position and because these Indians were not like the other barbarians of these parts but much the most warlike people of the region. But even they were pushed off the hill by the Macedonians. Leonnatus and his troops in the third division of the army were equally successful; they too defeated their opponents. Ptolemy says that over4 forty thousand men in all and over two hundred and thirty thousand oxen were captured and that Alexander selected the finest oxen because he thought them of unusual beauty and size and wished to send them into Macedonia to work the soil.
Thence he proceeded to the territory of the5 Assacenians,1 who were reported to have prepared for battle with some two thousand horsemen, over thirty thousand infantry, and thirty elephants. Crater us,

1By implication previous operations had been against the Aspasians (23, 1), no opposition being recorded from Guraeans.425