Arrian

δικαιότερον τοὺς θεοὺς δυσχεραίνειν ὅσοι ἄνθρωποι
ἐς τὰς θείας τιμὰς σφᾶς εἰσποιοῦσιν ἢ πρὸς ἄλλων
εἰσποιούμενοι ἀνέχονται. Ἀλέξανδρον δὲ πόρρω
τοῦ ἱκανοῦ ἀνδρῶν ἀγαθῶν τὸν ἄριστον εἶναί τε καὶ
δοκεῖν, καὶ βασιλέων τὸν βασιλικώτατον καὶ στρατηγῶν
6τὸν ἀξιοστρατηγότατον. καὶ σέ, εἴπερ τινὰ
ἄλλον, ὦ Ἀνάξαρχε, εἰσηγητήν τε τούτων τῶν
λόγων ἐχρῆν γίγνεσθαι καὶ κωλυτὴν τῶν ἐναντίων,
ἐπὶ σοφίᾳ τε καὶ παιδεύσει Ἀλεξάνδρῳ ξυνόντα.
οὔκουν ἄρχειν γε τοῦδε τοῦ λόγου πρέπον ἦν, ἀλλὰ
μεμνῆσθαι γὰρ οὐ Καμβύσῃ οὐδὲ Ξέρξῃ ξυνόντα ἢ
ξυμβουλεύοντα, ἀλλὰ Φιλίππου μὲν παιδί, Ἡρακλείδῃ
δὲ ἀπὸ γένους καὶ Αἰακίδῃ, ὅτου οἱ
πρόγονοι ἐξ Ἄργους ἐς Μακεδονίαν ἦλθον, οὐδὲ
βίᾳ, ἀλλὰ νόμῳ Μακεδόνων ἄρχοντες διετέλεσαν.
7οὔκουν οὐδὲ αὐτῷ τῷ Ἡρακλεῖ ζῶντι ἔτι θεῖαι
τιμαὶ παρ᾿ Ἑλλήνων ἐγένοντο, ἀλλ᾿ οὐδὲ τελευτήσαντι
πρόσθεν ἢ πρὸς τοῦ θεοῦ τοῦ ἐς Δελφοῖς
ἐπιθεσπισθῆναι ὡς θεὸν τιμᾶν Ἡρακλέα. εἰ δέ,
ὅτι ἐν τῇ βαρβάρῳ γῇ οἱ λόγοι γίγνονται, βαρβαρικὰ
χρὴ ἔχειν τὰ φρονήματα, καὶ ἐγὼ τῆς Ἑλλάδος
μεμνῆσθαί σε ἀξιῶ, ὦ Αλέξανδρε, ἧς ἔνεκα
ὁ πᾶς στόλος σοι ἐγένετο, προσθεῖναι τὴν Ἀσίαν τῇ
8Ἑλλάδι. καὶ οὖν ἐνθυμήθητι, ἐκεῖσε ἐπανελθὼν
ἆρά γε καὶ τοὺς Ἕλληνας τοὺς ἐλευθερωτάτους
προσαναγκάσεις ἐς τὴν προσκύνησιν, ἢ Ἑλλήνων
μὲν ἀφέξῃ, Μακεδόσι δὲ προσθήσεις τήνδε τὴν
ἀτιμίαν, ἢ διακεκριμένα ἔσται σοι αὐτῷ τὰ τῶν
τιμῶν ἐς ἅπαν, ὡς πρὸς Ἑλλήνων μὲν καὶ Μακεδόνων
ἀνθρωπίνως τε καὶ Ἑλληνικῶς τιμᾶσθαι,
9πρὸς δὲ τῶν βαρβάρων μόνων βαρβαρικῶς; εἰ δὲ
ὑπὲρ Κύρου τοῦ Καμβύσου λέγεται πρῶτον προσκυνηθῆναι
376Anabasis Of Alexander IV

far better cause to be displeased with any men who328 b.c. thrust themselves or permit others to thrust them into divine honours. Alexander both is and is thought to be above all measure the bravest of the brave, most kingly of kings, most worthy to command of all commanders. As for you, Anaxarchus, you6 above all should have expounded these arguments and stopped those on the other side, as you are attending on Alexander as philosopher and instructor. It was improper for you to take the lead in this topic; you should rather have remembered that you are not attending nor advising a Cambyses1 or Xerxes, but a son of Philip, a descendant of Heracles and of Aeacus, whose forefathers came from Argos to Macedonia, and have continued to rule the Macedonians not by force but in accordance with custom. Even Heracles himself did not receive divine honours7 from the Greeks in his own lifetime, nor even after his death till the god of Delphi gave his sanction to honouring him as a god. If, however, we must think like barbarians, as we are speaking in their country, even so I appeal personally to you, Alexander, to remember Greece, on whose behalf you made your whole expedition, to annex Asia to Greece. Consider8 this too; when you return there, will you actually compel the Greeks as well, the freest of mankind, to do you obeisance, or will you keep away from the Greeks, but put this dishonour on the Macedonians, or will you yourself make a distinction once for all in this matter of honours and receive from Greeks and Macedonians honours of a human and Greek style, and barbarian honours only from barbarians? But9 if it is said of Cyrus son of Cambyses that he was the

1King of Persia 528–522 b.c.377