Arrian

ἱππέας καὶ τοὺς ἄλλους ξυμμάχους καὶ τὰς
ἁμάξας ἄγειν· καὶ κελεύει προϊέναι ἀπὸ Σάρδεων
ἐπὶ Φρυγίαν. αὐτὸς δὲ ἐπὶ Λυκίας τε καὶ Παμφυλίας
ᾔει, ὡς τῆς παραλίου κρατήσας ἀχρεῖον
4καταστῆσαι τοῖς πολεμίοις τὸ ναυτικόν. καὶ
πρῶτον μὲν ἐν παρόδῳ Ὕπαρνα, χωρίον ὀχυρόν,
φυλακὴν ἔχον ξένους μισθοφόρους, ἐξ ἐφόδου
ἔλαβεν· οἱ δ᾿ ἐκ τῆς ἄκρας ξένοι ὑπόσπονδοι
ἐξῆλθον. ἔπειτα εἰσβαλὼν εἰς Λυκίαν Τελμισσέας
μὲν ὁμολογίᾳ προσηγάγετο, περάσας δὲ τὸν
Ξάνθον ποταμὸν Πίναρα καὶ Ξάνθον τὴν πόλιν καὶ
Πάταρα ἐνδοθέντα ἔλαβε καὶ ἄλλα ἐλάττω πολίσματα
ἐς τριάκοντα.
5Ταῦτα καταπράξας ἐν ἀκμῇ ἤδη τοῦ χειμῶνος ἐς
τὴν Μιλυάδα καλουμένην χώραν ἐσβάλλει, ἥ ἐστι
μὲν τῆς μεγάλης Φρυγίας, ξυνετέλει δὲ ἐς τὴν
Λυκίαν τότε, οὕτως ἐκ βασιλέως μεγάλου τεταγμένον.
καὶ ἐνταῦθα Φασηλιτῶν πρέσβεις ἧκον
περὶ φιλίας τε καὶ χρυσῷ στεφάνῳ στεφανῶσαι
Ἀλέξανδρον· καὶ ὑπὲρ τῶν αὐτῶν ἐπικηρυκευόμενοι
ἐπρέσβευον Λυκίων τῶν κάτω οἱ πολλοί.
6Ἀλέξανδρος δὲ Φασηλίτας τε καὶ Λυκίους παραδοῦναι
τὰς πόλεις τοῖς ἐπὶ τοῦτο στελλομένοις
ἐκέλευσε· καὶ παρεδόθησαν ξύμπασαι. αὐτὸς δὲ
ὀλίγον ὕστερον ἐς τὴν Φασηλίδα παραγενόμενος
συνεξαιρεῖ αὐτοῖς φρούριον ὀχυρόν, ἐπιτετειχισμένον
τῇ χώρᾳ πρὸς Πισιδῶν, ὅθεν ὁρμώμενοι οἱ




100Anabasis of Alexander I

allies and the waggons, and given orders to proceed334 b.c. from Sardis to Phrygia.2 He himself went towards Lycia and Pamphylia, so as to gain control of the coast and render the enemy’s navy useless.3 On4 his route he first took in his stride Hyparna, a strong334–3 b.c. place with a mercenary garrison; the mercenaries received terms and marched out of the citadel. Then on entering Lycia he took over the Telmisseans by surrender, and after crossing the Xanthus he received Pinara and the city of Xanthus and Patara in submission with about thirty smaller little towns.
By the time he had completed all this it was the5 depth of winter, but he attacked the Milyan territory, as it is called; it belongs to Greater Phrygia, but was then reckoned part of Lycia by the Persian king’s orders. There envoys from Phaselis came to offer friendly relations and to crown Alexander with a gold crown; most of the Lower Lycians also sent envoys with overtures on the same matters. Alexander ordered Phaselis and the Lycians to hand6 over their cities to those appointed for the purpose; and all were handed over. He came soon after to Phaselis, and, along with these places, took a strong outpost, fortified to threaten this district by Pisidians,


2D. 27, 6 (vague). Hipparchy: Introd. 60.3D. 27. 7, cf. 31. 3 ff., takes Al. along the coast to Cilicia
in 334! 28 has the story of a Lycian hill-town not in A.,
whose account in 24, 4–29, 6 is virtually all that we know of the operations described, from autumn 334 (24, 1) to spring 333, cf. also P. 17, 2–18, 1. The routes taken are often unclear (cf. Freya Stark, JHS 1958, 102 ff.), and Al’s aims have never been explained; most of his marching was in the interior, and the coastal cities were not important as naval bases or suppliers of ships to Persia; it may be relevant that Phaselis (a Greek city) lay on the sea-route between Athens and Egypt, a potential supplier of Athens’ essential grain imports. Al. evidently planned to unite with Parmenio and the newly married in Phrygia (i 29, 4 f.). A. neglects to record the appointment of Nearchus as satrap of Lycia (iii 6, 6).101