Appendices
2. The obscure allusion in 26, 1 to previous charges made against Philotas is probably illuminated by P. 48, 3–49, 2, telling that Philotas’ mistress conveyed through Craterus to Al. his criticisms of Al. and boasts that Al’s successes were due to him and his father. (QC. vi 8, 1 also makes Craterus’ rivalry with Philotas a cause of his ruin.) QC. 9, 18; 10, 2G ff.; 11, 5 and 23 f. makes out that Philotas showed disapproval of Al’s claim to be son of Zeus-Ammon; this will not be credited by those who deny that Al. made any such claim, but if true, it would help to explain why delations against Philotas began in Egypt (Pt. and Ar.). Cf. also iv 10, 3 (‘vulgate’).
3. D., QC. and P. all give details of the plot of Dymnus which Philotas admittedly failed to reveal to Al. and here again credibly supplement Pt’s story. Pt. allows that there was other ‘evidence’ of Philotas’ guilt, but regards his failure to reveal the plot as the clearest proof; from this we may judge (a) that the other evidence was still more contemptible and (b) that there may be truth in what P. tells (§ 2 above) and perhaps in QC. vi 9, 14 (an ambiguous letter intercepted from Parmenio to his son). In QC. vi 11, 8 ff. the trial before the army is adjourned for a day; Philotas confesses in fear of torture, but is none the less barbarously tortured (cf. D. and P.) and then amplifies his confession, implicating Parmenio. It could be suggested that Pt. had nothing of this, because he disapproved of the torture of a noble or put no faith in a confession obtained under duress, but cf. iv 13, 7 and 14, 3; moreover, in antiquity such confessions were commonly treated as decisive. However, QC’s story of Philotas’ extorted confession and implication of Parmenio
518Appendices

cannot be true, as Pt. had to allow that against Parmenio there was no evidence. Nor is it any proof of Philotas’ guilt that the army convicted him: we know how feeble was the best evidence against him, and they were faced with the alternative of disbelieving Al. With good reason D. 79, 1 and P. 50, 1, cf. 49, 7, condemn the killing of both Philotas and Parmenio. Al. himself may indeed have been persuaded of Philotas’ guilt, however unjustifiably, but the murder of Parmenio is a different matter. Pt. did not profess to know his mind and suggests that he either believed in Parmenio’s complicity or simply thought it unsafe to leave him alive after the execution of his son. The second explanation is pure raison d’état. Though given to moralizing, A. makes no comment.
4. The claims Philotas may have made (§ 2 above) that Parmenio and his sons were really responsible for Al’s success were met by the Alexander-historians by stressing the occasions when Al. rejected Parmenio’s advice, cf. i 13 and 18 from A’s main sources, though ii 4; 25; iii 10 come from the ‘vulgate’, cf. also i 11, 1 n.; App. III 6; X 2; at Gaugamela his conduct was depreciated, App. IX 7. All this may go back to Callisthenes; it is not peculiar to Pt. and Ar. and indeed not prominent in their accounts; note also in contrast iii 9, 4. If they say little of Parmenio’s actions in the great battles, where he always commanded the left, or in the important tasks confided to him (i 24, 3; ii 5, 1; 11, 10: more here in QC.), this is perhaps because they always concentrate on Al’s own doings: Pt. seems merely to have mentioned the expedition that kept him personally away from Mallus (vi 11, 8). There is
519