Arrian

σταλέντες καὶ ἐπὶ οἰκισμῷ ἐξέβησαν, αὐτίκα τὴν
μὲν Ἑλλάδα γλῶσσαν ἐξελάθοντο, εὐθὺς δὲ
βάρβαρον φωνὴν ἵεσαν, οὐδὲ τῶν προσχώρων
βαρβάρων, ἀλλὰ ἰδίαν σφῶν οὔπω πρόσθεν οὖσαν
τὴν φωνήν· καὶ ἔκτοτε οὐ κατὰ τοὺς ἄλλους
5προσχώρους Σιδῆται ἐβαρβάριζον. καταλιπὼν δὲ
φρουρὰν ἐν Σίδῃ προῄει ἐπὶ Σύλλιον, χωρίον
ὀχυρὸν καὶ φρουρὰν ἔχον ξένων μισθοφόρων καὶ
αὐτῶν τῶν ἐπιχωρίων βαρβάρων. ἀλλ᾿ οὔτε τὸ
Σύλλιον ἐξ ἐφόδου αὐτοσχεδίου ἠδυνήθη λαβεῖν,
ἐπεί τ᾿ ἠγγέλθη αὐτῷ κατὰ τὴν ὁδὸν τοὺς Ἀσπενδίους
ὅτι οὐδὲν τῶν ξυγκειμένων πρᾶξαι ἐθέλοιεν,
οὔτε τοὺς ἵππους παραδοῦναι τοῖς πεμφθεῖσιν οὔτε
ἀπαριθμῆσαι τὰ χρήματα, καὶ τὰ ἐκ τῆς χώρας ὅτι
ἀνασκευασάμενοι ἐς τὴν πόλιν τάς τε πύλας ἀποκεκλείκασι
τοῖς παρὰ Ἀλεξάνδρου καὶ τὰ τείχη, ὅπῃ
πεπονηκότα ἦν, ἐπισκευάζουσι, ταῦτα πυθόμενος
ἐπὶ Ἀσπένδου ἀνεζεύγνυεν.
27. Ὤικισται δὲ τῆς Ἀσπένδου τὰ μὲν πολλὰ
ἐπὶ ἄκρᾳ ὀχυρᾷ καὶ ἀποτόμῳ καὶ παρ᾿ αὐτὴν τὴν
ἄκραν ὁ Εὐρυμέδων ποταμὸς ῥεῖ· ἦσαν δὲ αὐτοῖς
καὶ περὶ τῇ ἄκρᾳ ἐν τῷ χθαμαλῷ οὐκ ὀλίγαι
οἰκήσεις καὶ τεῖχος περιεβέβλητο αὐταῖς οὐ μέγα.
2τὸ μὲν δὴ τεῖχος εὐθύς, ὠς προσάγοντα Ἀλέξανδρον
ἔγνωσαν, ἐκλείπουσιν ὅσοι ἐπῴκουν καὶ
τὰς οἰκίας, ὅσας ἐν τῷ χθαμαλῷ ᾠκισμένας οὐκ
ἐδόκουν διαφυλάξαι ἂν δύνασθαι· αὐτοὶ δὲ ἐς τὴν
ἄκραν ξυμφεύγουσιν. Ἀλέξανδρος δὲ ὡς ἀφίκετο
ξὺν τῇ δυνάμει, εἴσω τοῦ ἐρήμου τείχους παρελθὼν
κατεστρατοπέδευσεν ἐν ταῖς οἰκίαις ταῖς καταλελειμμέναις
3πρὸς τῶν Ἀσπενδίων. οἱ δὲ Ἀσπένδιοι
ὡς εἶδον αὐτόν τε Ἀλέξανδρον παρ᾿ ἐλπίδα
108Anabasis of Alexander I

disembarked to found a colony, they at once forgot334–3 b.c. their native tongue and talked a foreign language straight away, and not that of the neighbouring barbarians, but their own idiom, in fact a new dialect; and from that time the people of Side spoke like barbarians but not like the other peoples of the neighbourhood. Alexander left a guard at Side and5 went on to Syllium, a strong place with a garrison of foreign mercenaries and of barbarians too from those parts. But he could not take Syllium at the first assault without preparation, and, when it was reported to him on his march that the Aspendians were unwilling to carry out any of the terms of the pact, would not hand over the horses to the party sent to fetch them, nor pay the money, and had packed up and brought their belongings in to the city from the countryside, had shut their gates upon Alexander’s envoys, and were repairing dilapidations in their walls, the news made him march towards Aspendus.
27. Aspendus is built, for the most part, on a strong hill-top, sheer, with the river Eurymedon flowing right past the height. Round this hill-top on the flat, they had a number of dwellings surrounded by a low wall. As soon as they were aware of2 Alexander’s approach, the inhabitants deserted this wall, as well as the houses built on the level which they thought it impossible to defend; they all took refuge on the hill-top. On arriving with his force, Alexander penetrated within the deserted wall and camped in the houses abandoned by the Aspendians. When the citizens saw with surprise Alexander3 present in person and his army all round them,
109