Arrian

τῶν μὲν <ἐν>οικούντων οὐδένα καταλαμβάνει οὐδὲ
ἐν τῇ χώρᾳ τῇ πρὸς τῇ πόλει· ἐς δὲ τὴν ὑστεραίαν
Νέαρχόν τε καὶ Ἀντίοχον τοὺς χιλιάρχους τῶν
6ὑπασπιστῶν ἐκπέμπει· καὶ Νεάρχῳ μὲν τοὺς
Ἀγριᾶνας <καὶ>1 τοὺς ψιλοὺς ἄγειν ἔδωκεν,
Ἀντιόχῳ δὲ τήν τε αὑτοῦ χιλιαρχίαν καὶ δύο ἐπὶ
ταύτῃ ἄλλας. ἐστέλλοντο δὲ τά τε χωρία κατοψόμενοι
καὶ εἴ πού τινας τῶν βαρβάρων ξυλλαβεῖν
ἐς ἔλεγχον τῶν κατὰ τὴν χώραν, τῶν τε ἄλλων καὶ
μάλιστα δὴ τὰ ἀμφὶ τοὺς ἐλέφαντας ἔμελεν αὐτῷ
μαθεῖν.
7Αὐτὸς δὲ ὡς ἐπὶ τὸν Ἰνδὸν ποταμὸν ἤδη ἦγε, καὶ
ἡ στρατιὰ αὐτῷ ὡδοποίει τὸ πρόσω ἰοῦσα ἄπορα
ἄλλως ὄντα τὰ ταύτῃ χωρία. ἐνταῦθα ξυλλαμβάνει
ὀλίγους τῶν βαρβάρων, καὶ παρὰ τούτων
ἔμαθεν, ὅτι οἱ μὲν ἐν τῇ χώρᾳ Ἰνδοὶ παρὰ Ἀβισάρῃ
ἀποπεφευγότες εἶεν, τοὺς δὲ ἐλέφαντας ὅτι
αὐτοῦ κατέλιπον νέμεσθαι πρὸς τῷ ποταμῷ τῷ
Ἰνδῷ· καὶ τούτους ἡγήσασθαί οἱ τὴν ὁδὸν ἐκέλευσεν
8ὡς ἐπὶ τοὺς ἐλέφαντας. εἰσὶ δὲ Ἰνδῶν
πολλοὶ κυνηγέται τῶν ἐλεφάντων, καὶ τούτους
σπουδῇ ἀμφ᾿ αὑτὸν εἶχεν Ἀλέξανδρος, καὶ τότε
ἐθήρα ξὺν τούτοις τοὺς ἐλέφαντας· καὶ δύο μὲν
αὐτῶν ἀπόλλυνται κατὰ κρημνοῦ σφᾶς ῥίψαντες ἐν
τῇ διώξει, οἱ δὲ ἄλλοι ξυλληφθέντες ἔφερόν τε τοὺς
9ἀμβάτας καὶ τῇ στρατιᾷ ξυνετάσσοντο. ἐπεὶ δὲ
καὶ ὕλῃ ἐργασίμῳ ἐνέτυχε παρὰ τὸν ποταμὸν, καὶ
αὕτη ἐκόπη αὐτῷ ὑπὸ τῆς στρατιᾶς καὶ ναῦς
ἐποιήθησαν. καὶ αὗται κατὰ τὸν Ἰνδὸν ποταμὸν
ἤγοντο ὡς ἐπὶ τὴν γέφυραν, ἥντινα Ἡφαιστίων καὶ
Περδίκκας αὐτῷ ἐξῳκοδομηκότες πάλαι ἦσαν.
1Added by Gronovius.446Anabasis Of Alexander IV

he found none of the inhabitants there, nor in the326 b.c. neighbourhood; but next day he sent out Nearchus and Antiochus, the chiliarchs of the hypaspists3; Nearchus was given the Agrianians and the light6 troops, and Antiochus his own chiliarchy and two more. They were sent to spy out the land and to seize any of the barbarians they might find for interrogation about details of the district; he was especially anxious to find out about the elephants.
He was himself now on the way to the river Indus,7 and his army as it went forward made a road, since the country here was otherwise impracticable. Here he seized a few barbarians and learnt from them that the Indians of the district had fled to Abisares,4 but that they had left their elephants grazing there near the river Indus. He commanded them to guide him on the way to the elephants. Many Indians are8 hunters of elephants, and Alexander took pains to have them among his attendants, and at this time had their help in elephant hunts. Two of the beasts threw themselves over cliffs in the pursuit and perished; the rest were captured, permitted riders to mount them, and were put on the strength of the army. He also found a wood good for felling near the9 river, and had it cut down by his troops, and ships built, which went down the river Indus to the bridge Hephaestion and Perdiccas had built for Alexander long before.5
3Introd. 61.4iv 27, 7 n.5v 7, 1 n.447