Arrian

καὶ οὕτω ξυνέβη ὅπως παρῄνεσέ τε Ἀλέξανδρος
10καὶ εἴκασεν. οἱ μὲν γὰρ διέσχον τὴν
φάλαγγα, αἱ δ᾿ ὑπὲρ τῶν ἀσπίδων ἐπικυλισθεῖσαι
ὀλίγα ἔβλαψαν· ἀπέθανε δὲ οὐδεὶς ὑπὸ ταῖς
ἁμάξαις. ἔνθα δὴ οἱ Μακεδόνες θαρσήσαντες, ὅτι
ἀβλαβεῖς αὐτοῖς, ἃς μάλιστα ἐδεδίεσαν, αἱ ἅμαξαι
ἐγένοντο, σὺν βοῇ ἐς τοὺς Θρᾷκας ἐνέβαλον.
11Ἀλέξανδρος δὲ τοὺς τοξότας μὲν ἀπὸ τοῦ δεξιοῦ
κέρως πρὸ τῆς ἄλλης φάλαγγος, ὅτι ταύτῃ εὐπορώτερα
ἦν, ἐλθεῖν ἐκέλευσε καὶ ἐκτοξεύειν ἐς τοὺς
Θρᾷκας ὅπῃ προσφέροιντο· αὐτὸς δὲ ἀναλαβὼν τὸ
ἄγημα καὶ τοὺς ὑπασπιστὰς καὶ τοὺς Ἀγριᾶνας
12κατὰ τὸ εὐώνυμον ᾖγεν. ἔνθα δὴ οἱ τοξόται βάλλοντες
τοὺς προεκθέοντας τῶν Θρᾳκῶν ἀνέστελλον·
καὶ ἡ φάλαγξ προσμίξασα οὐ χαλεπῶς ἐξέωσεν ἐκ
τῆς χώρας ἀνθρώπους ψιλοὺς καὶ κακῶς ὡπλισμένους
βαρβάρους, ὥστε Ἀλέξανδρον ἀπὸ τοῦ
εὐωνύμου ἐπάγοντα οὐκέτι ἐδέξαντο, ἀλλὰ ῥίψαντες
ὡς ἑκάστοις προὐχώρει τὰ ὅπλα κατὰ τοῦ ὄρους
13ἔφυγον. καὶ ἀπέθανον μὲν αὐτῶν ἐς χιλίους καὶ
πεντακοσίους, ζῶντες δὲ ἄνδρες μὲν ὀλίγοι ἐλήφθησαν
δι᾿ ὠκύτητα καὶ τῆς χώρας ἐμπειρίαν,
γυναῖκες δὲ ὅσαι ξυνείποντο αὐτοῖς ἑάλωσαν πᾶσαι,
καὶ τὰ παιδάρια καὶ ἡ λεία πᾶσα ἑάλω.
2. Ἀλέξανδρος δὲ τὴν μὲν λείαν ὀπίσω ἀπέπεμψεν
ἐς τὰς πόλεις τὰς ἐπὶ θαλάσσῃ, Λυσανίᾳ καὶ
Φιλώτᾳ παραδοὺς διατίθεσθαι· αὐτὸς δὲ τὸ ἄκρον
ὑπερβαλὼν προῄει διὰ τοῦ Αἵμου ἐς Τριβαλλούς,
καὶ ἀφικνεῖται ἐπὶ τὸν Λύγινον ποταμόν· ἀπέχει δὲ
οὗτος ἀπὸ τοῦ Ἴστρου ὡς ἐπὶ τὸν Αἷμον ἰόντι
2σταθμοὺς τρεῖς. Σύρμος δὲ ὁ τῶν Τριβαλλῶν
βασιλεύς, ἐκ πολλοῦ πυνθανόμενος τοῦ Ἀλεξάνδρου
8Anabasis of Alexander I

gathered impetus and pass without doing harm. The 335 b.c. event corresponded to Alexander’s advice and conjecture. Part of the phalanx divided, while the10 carts sliding over the shields of the others did little harm; not one man perished beneath them. The Macedonians now took heart, finding that the carts they had most dreaded proved harmless, and they charged the Thracians, shouting as they did so. Alexander ordered the archers from the right wing11 to the front of the phalanx as on that side it was easier to shoot at the Thracians wherever they attacked. He himself took the agema, the hypaspists and the Agrianians and led them on the left. Then12 by their volleys the archers held back those Thracians who were rushing forward and the phalanx, coming to close quarters, easily drove from their position men who were lightly clad and ill-armed barbarians; so they did not await the charge of Alexander on the left, but casting away their arms as best they could fled down the mountain-side. Some fifteen hundred 13 perished; few were captured alive, by reason of their speed and their knowledge of the country; the women, however, who followed them were all taken, with the children and all their impedimenta.
2. Alexander sent the booty back to the cities on the coast, appointing Lysanias and Philotas1 to deal with it; he himself crossed the ridge, marched over Haemus against the Triballians, and arrived at the river Lyginus; as you approach the Haemus, it is three days’ march from the Ister (Danube). Syrmus,2 King of the Triballians, learning some time before

1Berve no. 805; Parmenio’s son (ib. no. 802) is probably meant in § 5.9