Arrian

ἀλλὰ τῶν γε σατραπῶν τῶν τῆς Σκυθικῆς
χώρας καὶ ὅσοι ἄλλοι δυνάσται κατὰ τὴν γὴν τὴν
Σκυθίδα, τούτων τὰς παῖδας ἐθέλειν δοῦναι τοῖς
πιστοτάτοις τῶν ἀμφ᾿ Ἀλέξανδρον· ἥξειν δὲ καὶ
αὐτὸς ἔφασκεν, εἰ κελεύοιτο, ὡς παρ᾿ αὐτοῦ Ἀλεξάνδρου
4ἀκοῦσαι ὅσα ἐπαγγέλλοι. ἀφίκετο δ᾿ ἐν
τούτῳ παρ᾿ Ἀλέξανδρον καὶ Φαρασμάνης ὁ
Χορασμίων βασιλεὺς ξὺν ἱππεῦσι χιλίοις καὶ
πεντακοσίοις. ἔφασκεν δὲ ὁ Φαρασμάνης ὅμορος
οἰκεῖν τῷ τε Κόλχων γένει καὶ ταῖς γυναιξὶ ταῖς
Ἀμαζόσι, καὶ εἰ θέλοι Ἀλέξανδρος ἐπὶ Κόλχους τε
καὶ Ἀμαζόνας ἐλάσας καταστρέψασθαι τὰ ἐπὶ τὸν
πόντον τὸν Εὔξεινον ταύτῃ καθήκοντα γένη, ὁδῶν
τε ἡγεμὼν ἔσεσθαι ἐπηγγέλλετο καὶ τὰ ἐπιτήδεια
τῇ στρατιᾷ παρασκευάσειν.
5Τοῖς τε οὖν παρὰ τῶν Σκυθῶν ἥκουσι φιλάνθρωπα
ἀποκρίνεται Ἀλέξανδρος καὶ ἐς τὸν τότε
καιρὸν ξύμφορα, γάμου δὲ οὐδὲν δεῖσθαι Σκυθικοῦ,
καὶ Φαρασμάνην ἐπαινέσας τε καὶ φιλίαν καὶ
ξυμμαχίαν πρὸς αὐτὸν ξυνθέμενος αὑτῷ μὲν τότε
οὐκ ἔφη ἐν καιρῷ εἶναι ἐλαύνειν ἐπὶ τὸν Πόντον·
Ἀρταβάζῳ δὲ τῷ Πέρσῃ, ὅτῳ τὰ Βακτρίων ἐξ
Ἀλεξάνδρου ἐπετέτακτο, καὶ ὅσοι ἄλλοι πρόσχωροι
τούτῳ σατράπαι ξυστήσας Φαρασμάνην ἀποπέμπει
6ἐς τὰ ἤθη τὰ αὐτοῦ. αὑτῷ δὲ τὰ Ἰνδῶν ἔφη ἐν
τῷ τότε μέλειν. τούτους γὰρ καταστρεψάμενος
πᾶσαν ἂν ἤδη ἔχειν τὴν Ἀσίαν· ἐχομένης δὲ τῆς
Ἀσίας ἐπανιέναι ἂν ἐς τὴν Ἑλλάδα, ἐκεῖθεν δ᾿ ἐφ᾿
Ἑλλησπόντου τε καὶ τῆς Προποντίδος ξὺν τῇ
δυνάμει πάσῃ τῇ τε ναυτικῇ καὶ τῇ πεζικῇ ἐλάσειν
εἴσω τοῦ Πόντου· καὶ ἐς τὸ τότε ἠξίου ἀποθέσθαι
Φαρασμάνην ὅσα ἐν τῷ παραυτίκα ἐπηγγέλλετο.
388Anabasis Of Alexander IV

he was still willing to give the daughters of theWinter 329–8 b.c. satraps of the Scythian territory and of the chief personages in Scythia to Alexander’s most trusted followers; he would also come to visit Alexander, if summoned, and hear Alexander’s commands from Alexander himself. At the same time Pharasmanes,4 king of the Chorasmians, came to Alexander with fifteen hundred horsemen; he said that he lived on the borders of the Colchians and the Amazons, and if Alexander desired to attack Colchis and the Amazons and subdue all the races that extended in these regions to the Euxine Sea, he promised to act as guide and to provide supplies for the army.2
Alexander then replied to the Scythian envoys5 graciously and as his interest at the time demanded, that he had no need of a Scythian marriage. He commended Pharasmanes and entered into friendship and alliance with him, but said that for him it was not then the moment to march to Pontus. But he recommended Pharasmanes to Artabazus the Persian, to whom he had entrusted affairs in Bactria, and to all the other neighbouring satraps, and sent him back to his own abode. He said that for the time6 being his own concern was India; for by subduing India he would at once be in possession of Asia as a whole, and with Asia in his possession he would return to Greece, and march thence by the Hellespont and Propontis to Pontus with all his naval and land forces; he expected Pharasmanes to save up the promises he made now till that time.3
2App. XII.3For subsequent operations QC. vii 10, 13 ff. (very different); App. VIII 14.389