Arrian

ὡς οὐ πρὸς βίαν μᾶλλον ἢ κατὰ γνώμην ἐνδοὺς τὴν
πέτραν.
22. Ταῦτα δὲ καταπραξάμενος Ἀλέξανδρος αὐτὸς
μὲν ἐς Βάκτρα ᾔει, Κρατερὸν δὲ τῶν ἑταίρων
ἱππέας ἔχοντα ἑξακοσίους καὶ τῶν πεζῶν τήν τε
αὑτοῦ τάξιν καὶ τὴν Πολυπέρχοντος καὶ Ἀττάλου
καὶ τὴν Ἀλκέτα ἐπὶ Κατάνην τε καὶ Αὐστάνην
ἐκπέμπει, οἳ δὴ μόνοι ἔτι ὑπελείποντο ἐν τῇ
2Παρειτακηνῶν χώρᾳ ἀφεστηκότες. καὶ μάχης
γενομένης πρὸς αὐτοὺς καρτερᾶς νικῶσιν οἱ ἀμφὶ
Κρατερὸν τῇ μάχῃ· καὶ Κατάνης μὲν ἀποθνήσκει
αὐτοῦ μαχόμενος, Αὐστάνης δὲ ξυλληφθεὶς ἀνήχθη
παρ᾿ Ἀλέξανδρον· τῶν δὲ ξὺν αὐτοῖς βαρβάρων
ἱππεῖς μὲν ἀπέθανον ἑκατὸν καὶ εἴκοσι, πεζοὶ δὲ
ἀμφὶ τοὺς χιλίους πεντακοσίους. ταῦτα δὲ ὡς
ἐπράχθη τοῖς ἀμφὶ Κρατερόν, καὶ οὗτοι ἐς Βάκτρα
ἦσαν. καὶ ἐν Βάκτροις τὸ ἀμφὶ Καλλισθένην τε
καὶ τοὺς παῖδας πάθημα Ἀλεξάνδρῳ ξυνηνέχθη.
3Ἐκ Βάκτρων δὲ ἐξήκοντος ἤδη τοῦ ἦρος1 ἀναλαβὼν
τὴν στρατιὰν προὐχώρει ὡς ἐπ᾿ Ἰνδούς,
Ἀμύνταν ἀπολιπὼν ἐν τῇ χώρᾳ τῶν Βακτρίων καὶ
ξὺν αὐτῷ ἱππέας μὲν τρισχιλίους καὶ πεντακοσίους,
4πεζοὺς δὲ μυρίους. ὑπερβαλὼν δὲ τὸν
Καύκασον ἐν δέκα ἡμέραις ἀφίκετο εἰς Ἀλεξάνδρειαν
πόλιν τὴν κτισθεῖσαν ἐν Παραπαμισάδαις,
ὅτε τὸ πρῶτον ἐπὶ Βάκτρων ἐστέλλετο. καὶ τὸν
μὲν ὕπαρχον, ὅστις αὐτῷ ἐπὶ τῆς πόλεως τότε
ἐτάχθη, παραλύει τῆς ἀρχῆς, ὅτι οὐ καλῶς ἐξηγεῖσθαι
5ἔδοξε· προσκατοικίσας δὲ καὶ ἄλλους τῶν

1codd.: θέρους A. Fränkel. See historical note.412Anabasis Of Alexander IV

had given up the stronghold not so much under force327 b.c. as from free will.
22. After this achievement Alexander himself took the road to Bactra, but sent Craterus with six hundred of the Companion cavalry, his own battalion of the infantry and those of Polyperchon, Attalus and Alcetas against Catanes and Austanes, the only rebels left in Pareitacene. In a fierce battle with2 them Craterus’ troops won the day; Catanes perished on the field, Austanes was captured and brought before Alexander; of the barbarians who fought with them a hundred and twenty cavalry and about fifteen hundred foot perished.1 After their success Craterus’ force too made for Bactra, where Alexander’s misfortune with Callisthenes and the pages occurred.2
Now that spring was ending, Alexander took his3 force from Bactra and advanced towards India, leaving Amyntas in Bactria with three thousand and five hundred cavalry and ten thousand infantry.3 Crossing4 the Caucasus in ten days,4 he arrived at Alexandria, the city he had founded in the district of the Parapamisadae during his first expedition to Bactra. The hyparch whom he had then put in charge of the city was now dismissed from his office, as he appeared to have governed badly. He settled in Alexandria5
1QC. VIII 5, 1 f., giving Polyperchon (cf. 27, 5 n.) a separate mission.2Strabo xi 11, 4 says that Callisthenes was ‘arrested and imprisoned’ at Caryatae in Bactria.3QC. does not mention the garrison. A. in turn is silent on the great revolt of this presumably mercenary force in 325 (D. 99, 5 f.; QC. ix 7); Amyntas is not mentioned in this connection and had been replaced as satrap at Al’s death by Philippus (D. xviii 3, 3 etc.). Chronology: App. VIII 19. Emendation (reading ‘summer’ for ‘spring’) would remove a puzzle, but seems palaeographically too daring.4Not by the same pass as in 329, Strabo xv 1, 26.413