Arrian

ἀλλήλων τὰ στρατόπεδα ὅσον ἑξήκοντα σταδίους,
οὐ μήν πω καθεώρων ἀλλήλους· γήλοφοι γὰρ ἐν
μέσῳ ἐπίπροσθεν ἀμφοῖν ἦσαν.
3Ὡς δὲ ἀπεῖχεν Ἀλέξανδρος ὅσον ἐς τριάκοντα
σταδίους καὶ κατ᾿ αὐτῶν ἤδη τῶν γηλόφων ᾔει
αὐτῷ ὁ στρατός, ἐνταῦθα, ὡς εἶδε τοὺς βαρβάρους,
ἔστησε τὴν αὑτοῦ φάλαγγα· καὶ ξυγκαλέσας αὖ
τούς τε ἑταίρους καὶ στρατηγοὺς καὶ ἰλάρχας καὶ
τῶν συμμάχων τε καὶ τῶν μισθοφόρων ξένων τοὺς
ἡγεμόνας ἐβουλεύετο, εἰ αὐτόθεν ἐπάγοι ἤδη τὴν
φάλαγγα, ὡς οἱ πλεῖστοι ἄγειν ἐκέλευον, ἢ καθάπερ
4Παρμενίωνι [καλῶς] ἐδόκει, τότε μὲν αὐτοῦ
καταστρατοπεδεύειν, κατασκέψασθαι δὲ τόν τε
χῶρον ξύμπαντα, εἰ δή τι ὕποπτον αὐτοῦ ἢ ἄπορον,
ἢ εἴ πῃ τάφροι ἢ σκόλοπες καταπεπηγότες ἀφανεῖς,
καὶ τὰς τάξεις τῶν πολεμίων ἀκριβέστερον κατιδεῖν.
καὶ νικᾷ Παρμενίων τῇ γνώμῃ, καὶ καταστρατοπεδεύουσιν
αὐτοῦ ὅπως τεταγμένοι ἔμελλον ἰέναι ἐς
τὴν μάχην.
5Ἀλέξανδρος δὲ ἀναλαβὼν τοὺς ψιλοὺς καὶ τῶν
ἱππέων τοὺς ἑταίρους περιῄει ἐν κύκλῳ σκοπῶν τὴν
χώραν πᾶσαν, ἵνα τὸ ἔργον αὐτῷ ἔσεσθαι ἔμελλεν.
ἐπανελθὼν δὲ καὶ ξυγκαλέσας αὖθις τοὺς αὐτοὺς
ἡγεμόνας, αὐτοὺς μὲν οὐκ ἔφη χρῆναι παρακαλεῖσθαι
πρὸς οὗ ἐς τὸν ἀγῶνα· πάλαι γὰρ εἶναι δι᾿
ἀρετήν τε τὴν σφῶν παρακεκλημένους καὶ ὑπὸ τῶν
6πολλάκις ἤδη καλῶν ἔργων ἀποδεδειγμένων. τοὺς
κατὰ σφᾶς δὲ ἑκάστους ἐξορμᾶν ἠξίου, λοχαγόν τε
λοχίτας καὶ ἰλάρχην τὴν ἴλην τὴν αὑτοῦ ἕκαστον


250Anabasis of Alexander III

were about sixty stades apart, but had not yet 331 b.c. sighted one another, for there were hills intervening in front of both.2
Alexander was about thirty stades away and his3 army was already descending these hills, when he sighted the enemy; he stopped his phalanx there, and again summoned the Companions, generals, squadron commanders and commanders of the allies and foreign mercenary troops, and put the question whether he should advance his phalanx at once from this point, as most of them urged, or, as Parmenio thought best,4 camp there for the time being, survey the whole of the terrain, in case any part afforded ground for suspicion or was impassable, or in case there were ditches anywhere, or hidden stakes fixed in the soil,3 and make a thorough reconnaissance of the enemy’s dispositions. Parmenio’s advice prevailed, and they camped there, in the order in which they were to engage in battle.
Taking with him the light-armed troops and the5 Companion cavalry, Alexander rode all round, inspecting the whole of the ground where his work was to be done. Then he returned and again summoned the same officers, and said that there was no need for him to inspire them to the fight; they had long ago been inspired by their own bravery and by their many splendid exploits in the past; but he required each6 of them to encourage his own men; the infantry captains their companies, the squadron commanders


2QC. makes them 150 stades apart (10, 15), interpolates
here an attempt by Darius to stir up disloyalty among Al’s
Greek troops (10, 16 f.), the death of Darius’ wife and the negotiations in A. ii 25, 1 (10, 18–12, 1; both before the Tigris crossing in D. 54), and makes Persians as well as A. advance and cause a panic in Al’s army, which bivouacks; only on the next day does Al. occupy the hills and call the council of § 3 (12, 14–24).3For use of stakes, QC. 13, 36 f.251