Appendices

Caucasus between the Black Sea and the Caspian with the Hindu-Kush. Eratosthenes exposed this error (cf. v 3, 2 f.; 5, 3 ff.; Ind. 2, 2 ff.; 5, 10), substituting a highly simplified picture of a continuous range of mountains extending eastwards from Pamphylia to the northern border of India (i.e. the Himalayas), which he chose to call Taurus (cf. Strabo xi 8, 1), though acknowledging that they had various local names and that the true name for Ar’s Caucasus was Parapamisus (or the like; there are various spellings); he argued (cf. also Strabo xi 5, 5) that the Alexander-historians misnamed Parapamisus, in order to bring Al. to the regions where Heracles had performed exploits (D. 83, 1; QC. vii 3, 22), where Prometheus had suffered at the ends of the earth and where Jason had penetrated; for such motivation cf. App. IV. Though aware of the facts, A. prefers to use the nomenclature of his sources.
4. It had long been known that the Tanais (Don) flowed into the Sea of Azov (Herodotus iv 57) and some thought it rose in the true Caucasus (Strabo xi 2, 2). Having identified the Hindu-Kush with the Caucasus, the Alexander-historians then supposed that the Iaxartes, which in their view rose in that mountain and had its outlet in a lake connected perhaps with the Sea of Azov, must be the Tanais; it is clear from A. iii 30, 7 f. that this error was not founded on a local name resembling Tanais, and iv 5, 6 (cf. Ar. F. 28 = Strabo xi 11, 5) shows how the Macedonians could impose their own names on rivers. Again, Strabo xi 7, 4 (from Eratosthenes) suggests that as it was agreed that the Tanais (Don) separated Asia from Europe (cf. A. iii 30, 8; QC. vii 7, 2), and as the region between the Don and the Caspian, ‘a
524Appendices

considerable part of Asia’, had not been conquered by Al., the false equation was a deliberate attempt to obscure the truth; this explanation makes little sense, and again genuine misunderstanding seems more likely. It explains why on the Jaxartes Al. supposed himself to be in contact with both Asian and European Scythians (iv 1, 1; 3, 6); similarly he must have misinterpreted what he was told by Pharasmanes,
king of the Chorasmians, who were domiciled east of the Caspian and south of the Aral (Tarn, Greeks in Bactria and India2 478 ff.); he no doubt mentioned a great lake, which was taken to be the Caspian/Black Sea, and other things he said, doubtless jumbled in translation, were referred by his hearers to peoples they knew by report or legend to be near the Black Sea, the Colchians and Amazons (iv 15). It is at least clear that Al. thought it possible for a people to be not far from both Bactria and the Black Sea. Compare his conjecture that the Indus was the upper Nile (vi. 1, 2; Nearchus ap. Strabo xv 1, 25) and the estimate that the Black Sea was not far from the Persian Gulf (Ind. 40, 5). The confusions found in A’s main sources were of course shared by the ‘vulgate’ (in D. etc), which I forbear to analyse. Once again A. obscures the geography by normally using Tanais for the Jaxartes (iv 1; 3; v 25; vii 10, 6), though aware of the truth (cf. iii 30, 8 and vii 16, 3, as emended).
525