Appendices

was to make out that Al. adopted the advice in the hope that the reader, knowing that in the end (thanks to Darius) Al. did fight in Cilicia, would not notice that so far as in him lay Al. had disregarded it.
Appendix IV
Alexander And The Heroes
1. As an Argead, Al. was reputed a descendant in the male line from Heracles and through Heracles’ mother, Alcmene, from Perseus; through his own mother, Olympias, he claimed descent from Achilles by his son, Neoptolemus. In general the Greek world did not distinguish legend from history, and there is no reason to think that such genealogies, which were actually used to justify territorial claims in the fourth century, were not believed. Almost certainly, to Al., Heracles, Perseus and Achilles were real persons and his actual ancestors.
2. He was also strongly influenced by Homer, cf. P. 8; 26; Strabo xiii 1, 26 f.; Lane Fox ch. 3. A. had read in the ‘vulgate’ that he sought from childhood to emulate Achilles (vii 14, 4, cf. i 12, 1). He was ostensibly engaged in a Panhellenic crusade (cf. Introd. 40). Herodotus (i 3 f.) had represented the Trojan war as an incident in the struggle between Greeks and Asians continued in the Persian invasions of Greece in the fifth century, which he was to avenge. Isocrates had more than once touched on this theme (iv 154; 181; x 67; xii 42; 189). and had
464Appendices

urged Philip to emulate his ancestor, Heracles, who had shown his beneficence in uniting the Greeks for an earlier expedition against Troy (v 109 ff.). By his sacrifice at the tomb of Protesilaus, (i 11, 5, from Pt./Ar.), Al. symbolized that he was, like his ancestors,
fighting for Greece against the barbarians. The account of his acts immediately after he crossed to Asia in A. i 11, 6 ff. seems to come from the ‘vulgate’, but is perfectly credible, and is confirmed at one point, his taking arms supposedly dedicated in the Trojan war, by a later allusion from the main sources (vi 10, 2). We are told that he sacrificed to Heracles (cf. i 4, 5; Ind. 36, 3), and sought to placate Priam for his death at the hands of Neoptolemus. Fragments of Callisthenes indicate that that historian
sought to connect Al’s advance through Asia with Homeric and other heroic stories (Pearson 39 ff.). Even the version of the Granicus A. follows depicts Al’s aristeia in the Homeric style. Al. may well, then and later, have risked his life so recklessly, not only because this set his troops an example, but because such conduct was required by the heroic model he adopted.
3. It is no surprise then that we hear of Al. seeking to rival Heracles and Perseus by his visit to Siwah (iii 3, 2), or to outdo Heracles at Aornos (iv 28, 4 cf. 30, 4), or to follow in Dionysus’ footsteps at Nysa (v 2, 5). At least one of A’s main sources, perhaps Ar., lies behind these statements, and the motiv of his emulation of Heracles and Dionysus, though more prominent in the ‘vulgate’, is not confined to an inferior tradition, cf. further App. XVI in vol. II. Its credibility is supported by Nearchus’ statement
that he wished to outdo Cyrus and Semiramis
465