Arrian

τῷ πλείστῳ τῆς στρατιᾶς τὸν Κοῖνον, καταφρονήσαντες
τῶν Μακεδόνων, ὡς οὐ γενομένων ἄν
σφισιν ἀξιομάχων, ἐπεκθέουσιν ἐς τὸ πεδίον· καὶ
γίγνεται αὐτῶν μάχη καρτερά. καὶ ἐν ταύτῃ
πίπτουσι μὲν τῶν βαρβάρων ἐς πεντακοσίους,
ζῶντες δὲ ἐλήφθησαν ὑπὲρ τοὺς ἑβδομήκοντα· οἱ
δὲ λοιποὶ ἐν τῇ πόλει ξυμφυγόντες βεβαιότερον ἤδη
εἴργοντο τῆς χώρας ὑπὸ τῶν ἐκ τοῦ ἐπιτειχίσματος.
9καὶ Ἀλεξάνδρῳ δὲ τῶν Ὤρων ἡ πολιορκία οὐ
χαλεπὴ ἐγένετο, ἀλλ᾿ εὐθὺς ἐξ ἐφόδου προσβαλὼν
τοῖς τείχεσι τῆς πόλεως ἐκράτησε, καὶ τοὺς
ἐλέφαντας τοὺς ἐγκαταλειφθέντας ἔλαβε.
28. Καὶ ταῦτα οἱ ἐν τοῖς Βαζίροις ὡς ἔμαθον,
ἀπογνόντες τὰ σφέτερα πράγματα ἀμφὶ μέσας
νύκτας τὴν πόλιν ἐκλείπουσιν, ἔφυγον δὲ ἐς τὴν
πέτραν. ὣς δὲ καὶ οἱ ἄλλοι βάρβαροι ἔπραττον·
ἀπολιπόντες τὰς πόλεις ξύμπαντες ἔφευγον ἐς τὴν
πέτραν τὴν ἐν τῇ χώρᾳ τὴν Ἄορνον καλουμένην.
μέγα γάρ τι τοῦτο χρῆμα πέτρας ἐν τῇ χώρᾳ
ταύτῃ ἐστί, καὶ λόγος ὑπὲρ αὐτῆς κατέχει οὐδὲ
Ἡρακλεῖ τῷ Διὸς ἁλωτὸν γενέσθαι τὴν πέτραν.
2εἰ μὲν δὴ καὶ ἐς Ἰνδοὺς ἀφίκετο ὁ Ἡρακλῆς ὁ
Θηβαῖος ἢ ὁ Τύριος ἢ ὁ Αἰγύπτιος ἐς οὐδέτερα ἔχω
ἰσχυρίσασθαι· μᾶλλον δὲ δοκῶ ὅτι οὐκ ἀφίκετο,
ἀλλὰ πάντα γὰρ ὅσα χαλεπὰ οἱ ἄνθρωποι ἐς
τοσόνδε ἄρα αὔξουσιν αὐτῶν τὴν χαλεπότητα, ὡς
καὶ τῷ Ἡρακλεῖ ἂν ἄπορα γενέσθαι μυθεύειν.
κἀγὼ ὑπὲρ τῆς πέτρας ταύτης οὕτω γιγνώσκω, τὸν
Ἡρακλέα ἐς κόμπον τοῦ λόγου ἐπιφημίζεσθαι.


434Anabasis Of Alexander IV

Coenus depart with most of the army, made light of327–6 b.c. the Macedonians, supposing that they would not be their equals in the field, and sallied out into the plain; there was a fierce battle, in which about five hundred of the barbarians fell, and over seventy were taken alive; the rest took refuge in the city, where they were now more firmly barred from the country by those who held the stronghold facing the wall. The9 siege of Ora caused Alexander no difficulty; he attacked the walls at once, seized the city at the first attempt, and captured the elephants left there.
28. When the inhabitants of Bazira learnt this, they despaired of their position, and about midnight deserted the city and fled to the rock, as did the other barbarians; leaving their cities they all fled to the rock in this neighbourhood called Aornos. It is an enormous sort of rock in this country, and the prevalent story about it is that even Heracles the son of Zeus was unable to capture it. In fact I cannot2 assert with confidence if Heracles, whether the Theban or the Tyrian or the Egyptian Heracles,1 ever actually reached India; I incline to think that he did not, but that men will magnify difficulties they meet, so far as to make up a story that even Heracles would not have overcome them. So it is my own view about this rock, that the name of Heracles is

1A’s comment cf. App. IV 4. § 4, if not also 30, 4, shows
that the story stood in one of A’s main sources, perhaps Ar. rather than Pt., cf. App. XVI in vol ii.; A. first gives it with reserve, because of his own disbelief that the Greek Heracles had come to Aornos, but then treats it as a fact that Al. believed it. The story of the dimensions of Aornos (Pt/Ar?) is certainly well-founded, cf. Sir A. Stein (App. VIII 2) pp. 128 ff. D. 85, 2; QC. viii 11, 2 tell that Heracles was thwarted by an earthquake, Strabo (incredulous of the whole tale) that he was thrice repulsed (xv 1, 8). No doubt there were many variants. Fuller 245 ff. supplies plan and photographs of Aornos = Pir-Sar.435