Arrian

καὶ ταξιάρχους τὰς τάξεις, τούς τε ἡγεμόνας τῶν
πεζῶν τὴν φάλαγγα ἕκαστον τήν οἱ ἐπιτετραμμένην,
ὡς ἐν τῇδε τῇ μάχῃ οὐχ ὑπὲρ Κοίλης
Συρίας ἢ Φοινίκης, οὐδὲ ὑπὲρ Αἰγύπτου, ὡς πρόσθεν,
μαχουμένους, ἀλλὰ ὑπὲρ τῆς ξυμπάσης
Ἀσίας, οὕστινας χρὴ ἄρχειν, ἐν τῷ τότε κριθησόμενον.
7οὔκουν τὴν ἐς τὰ καλὰ ἐξόρμησιν διὰ
πολλῶν ἀναγκαίαν αὐτοῖς εἶναι οἴκοθεν τοῦτο
ἔχουσιν, ἀλλὰ κόσμου τε ἐν τῷ κινδύνῳ ὅπως τις
καθ᾿ αὑτὸν ἐπιμελήσεται καὶ σιγῆς ἀκριβοῦς,
ὁπότε σιγῶντας ἐπιέναι δέοι, καὶ αὖ λαμπρᾶς τῆς
βοῆς, ἵνα ἐμβοῆσαι καλόν, καὶ ἀλαλαγμοῦ ὡς
8φοβερωτάτου, ὁπότε ἐπαλαλάξαι καιρός, αὐτοί τε
ὅπως ὀξέως κατακούοιεν τῶν [τε] παραγγελλομένων
καὶ παρ᾿ αὐτῶν αὖ ὅπως ἐς τὰς τάξεις
ὀξέως παραδιδῶνται τὰ παραγγέλματα· ἔν τε τῷ
καθ᾿ αὑτὸν ἕκαστον καὶ τὸ πᾶν μεμνῆσθαι ξυγκινδυνεῦόν
τε ἀμελουμένῳ καὶ δι᾿ ἐπιμελείας ἐκπονουμένῳ
ξυνορθούμενον.
10. Ταῦτα καὶ τοιαῦτα ἄλλα οὐ πολλὰ παρακαλέσας
τε καὶ ἀντιπαρακληθεὶς πρὸς τῶν ἡγεμόνων
θαρρεῖν ἐπὶ σφίσι, δειπνοποιεῖσθαί τε καὶ ἀναπαύεσθαι
ἐκέλευσε τὸν στρατόν. Παρμενίων δὲ λέγουσιν
ὅτι ἀφικόμενος παρ᾿ αὐτὸν ἐπὶ τὴν σκηνήν,
νύκτωρ παρῄνει ἐπιθέσθαι τοῖς Πέρσαις· ἀπροσδοκήτοις
τε γὰρ καὶ ἀνατεταραγμένοις καὶ ἅμα ἐν
2νυκτὶ φοβερωτέροις ἐπιθήσεσθαι. ὁ δὲ ἐκείνῳ μὲν
ἀποκρίνεται, ὅτι καὶ ἄλλοι κατήκουον τῶν λόγων,
αἰσχρὸν εἶναι κλέψαι τὴν νίκην, ἀλλὰ φανερῶς καὶ


252Anabasis of Alexander III

their own squadrons, the battalion commanders their 331 b.c. battalions, and the infantry commanders the phalanx of which each was placed in charge. In this battle, he pointed out, they were to fight, not as before, for Hollow Syria or Phoenicia or Egypt: it was the sovereignty of all Asia that was there and then to be decided. There was then no need for them to employ7 long speeches to make their men act with that sense of honour which was born in them, but they were to urge each man in the moment of danger to attend in his own place in the line to the requirements of order, to keep perfect silence when that was necessary in the advance, and by contrast to give a ringing shout when it was right to shout, and a howl to inspire the greatest terror when the moment came to howl; they themselves were to obey orders sharply and to8 pass them on sharply to their regiments, and every man should recall that neglect of his own duty brought the whole cause into common danger, while energetic attention to it contributed to the common success.4
10. These and other such brief exhortations brought in return assurances from the commanders that he could rely on them. So he ordered his army to take their meal and rest. They say1 that Parmenio went to him in his tent and advised him to attack the Persians at night; they would be surprised, confused and more prone to panic in a night attack. Alexander, however, replied, since others were2 listening, that it was dishonourable to steal the victory,

4Callisthenes imputed to Al. ‘lengthy discourses’ with
the Greek allies just before the battle (P. 33, 1); at that point
D. 56, 4 and QC. 13, 38–14 fin. set speeches.1‘Vulgate’, or Pt. and Ar.? Unlike P. 31, 5 if., QC. iv 13, 3 ff. transposes this to the council, where most (‘the older Companions P.) agreed with Parmenio.253