Arrian

Περσικῷ ναυτικῷ τὸν λιμένα, τοῖς Μιλησίοις δὲ
4τὴν ἐκ τῶν Περσῶν ὠφέλειαν. ἔνθα οἱ Μιλήσιοί τε
καὶ οἱ μισθοφόροι πανταχόθεν ἤδη προσκειμένων
σφίσι τῶν Μακεδόνων οἱ μὲν αὐτῶν ῥιπτοῦντες
σφᾶς ἐν τῇ θαλάσσῃ ἐπὶ τῶν ἀσπίδων ὑπτίων ἐς
νησῖδά τινα ἀνώνυμον τῇ πόλει ἐπικειμένην διενήχοντο,
οἱ δὲ ἐς κελήτια ἐμβαίνοντες καὶ ἐπειγόμενοι
ὑποφθάσαι τὰς τριήρεις τῶν Μακεδόνων
ἐγκατελήφθησαν ἐν τῷ στόματι τοῦ λιμένος πρὸς
τῶν τριήρων· οἱ δὲ πολλοὶ ἐν αὐτῇ τῇ πόλει
ἀπώλοντο.
5Ἀλέξανδρος δὲ ἐχομένης ἤδη τῆς πόλεως ἐπὶ
τοὺς ἐς τὴν νῆσον καταπεφευγότας ἐπέπλει αὐτός,
κλίμακας φέρειν ἐπὶ τὰς πρώρας τῶν τριήρων
κελεύσας, ὡς κατὰ τὰ ἀπότομα τῆς νήσου, καθάπερ
πρὸς τεῖχος, ἐκ τῶν νεῶν τὴν ἀπόβασιν ποιησόμενος.
6ὡς δὲ διακινδυνεύειν ἐθέλοντας τοὺς ἐν τῇ
νήσῳ ἑώρα, οἶκτος λαμβάνει αὐτὸν τῶν ἀνδρῶν, ὅτι
γενναῖοί τε καὶ πιστοὶ αὐτῷ ἐφαίνοντο, καὶ
σπένδεται πρὸς αὐτοὺς ἐπὶ τῷδε ὡς αὑτῷ ξυστρατεύειν·
ἦσαν δὲ οὗτοι μισθοφόροι Ἕλληνες ἐς
τριακοσίους. αὐτοὺς δὲ Μιλησίους, ὅσοι μὴ ἐν τῇ
καταλήψει τῆς πόλεως ἔπεσον, ἀφῆκεν καὶ ἐλευθέρους
εἶναι ἔδωκεν.
7Οἱ δὲ βάρβαροι ἀπὸ τῆς Μυκάλης ὁρμώμενοι τὰς
μὲν ἡμέρας ἐπέπλεον τῷ Ἑλληνικῷ ναυτικῷ,
προκαλέσεσθαι ἐς ναυμαχίαν ἐλπίζοντες· τὰς δὲ
νύκτας πρὸς τῇ Μυκάλῃ οὐκ ἐν καλῷ ὡρμίζοντο,
ὅτι ὑδρεύεσθαι ἀπὸ τοῦ Μαιάνδρου ποταμοῦ τῶν
8ἐκβολῶν διὰ μακροῦ ἠναγκάζοντο. Ἀλέξανδρος δὲ
ταῖς μὲν ναυσὶ τὸν λιμένα ἐφύλαττε τῶν Μιλησίων,
ὡς μὴ βιάσαιντο οἱ βάρβαροι τὸν ἔσπλουν, ἐκπέμπει
80Anabasis of Alexander I

the harbour against the Persian fleet, and cut off 334 b.c. Persian help for Miletus. Then, as the Milesians4 and mercenaries were hard pressed on all sides by the Macedonians, some threw themselves into the sea and inverting their shields paddled over to a little nameless island off the city, while others got into small boats and hurried to get in front of the Macedonian triremes, but were caught by them at the harbour entrance; the greatest number perished in the city itself.
With the city now under control, Alexander sailed5 in person against those who had fled to the islet, ordering ladders to be brought to the bows of the triremes, so as to disembark from the ships on the cliffs of the island as if on a city wall. But when he6 saw that the men on the island were going to fight to the death, he was seized with pity for them, as fine, loyal soldiers, and made terms with them on which they should join his forces; there were about 300 of these Greek mercenaries. The Milesians themselves who had not fallen at the city’s capture were released and granted their freedom.
The Persians with Mycale as a base by day-time7 used to sail towards the Greek navy,1 hoping to provoke an engagement; but at night they could not ride in comfort at Mycale, because they were obliged to get water from the mouths of the Maeander, some way off. While guarding the harbour of8 Miletus with his fleet, so that the Persians might not force the entrance, Alexander sent Philotas to

1Cf. 18, 4 n.81