Appendices

in marching through Gadrosia (Strabo xv i, 15), which also appeared in the ‘vulgate’ (A. vi 24, 2).
4. It seems that in Afghanistan and India Al. and his men came across legends of figures they identified
with Heracles and Dionysus (App. XVI). Similarly Al. had equated the Tyrian Melkarth with Heracles (ii 15, 7; 24, 5 f.; iii 6, 1), just as he had assumed that a Phrygian god was ‘Zeus the king’ (ii 3, 6), and (on my view) identified Ammon with Zeus (App. V, cf. also vii 20, 1). It is A., following Herodotus (ii 43–5), who differentiates between the Greek, Tyrian and Egyptian Heracles and later distinguishes the Indian Heracles from these (ii 16, 1–6; iv 28, 2; Ind. 5 13), just as he doubts (v 1) if the Indian Dionysus is the Theban or Lydian; it is somewhat misleading when he says (ii 16, 7) that Al. wished to sacrifice to ‘this Heracles’, i.e. the Tyrian; the very special honour Al. paid to the god at Tyre shows that Al. must have taken the Tyrian god to be his own ancestor.
5. ‘After quitting this life, Heracles became a god instead of a mortal’ (Isocrates vi 17); he owed this exaltation to his ‘virtue’ (ib. i 50; v 132), i.e. to noble and beneficent acts. We can only speculate whether a belief that he had equalled or excelled Heracles led Al. to expect a similar reward, and whether the fictitious debate in iv 10 reflects
contemporary opinions and a prevalent view that deification should be at least deferred till death.
466Appendices
Appendix V
The Visit To Siwah (iii 3–4)
1. Though aware of other accounts (3, 5), A. seems to rely entirely on Pt. or Ar. or both. Ar. is his source for the distance, roughly correct, from Paraetonium (Mersah-Matruh) to the oasis (3, 3), and since he was more interested than Pt. in geographical matters, probably for the description of the oasis (4, 1–4); if so, the allusion to ‘the king’ in 4, 3 suggests that he wrote after Ptolemy assumed that title in 304. (However that may be, A’s use of the present tense about dues paid to the king shows that he was
mechanically copying his source.) A. twice records discrepancies between Pt. and Ar. (3, 5 f.; 4, 5) and evinces some incredulity in the reported miracles, which appeared in some form in all accounts (D. 49–51; QC. iv 7; P. 26–8; J. xi 11); Strabo too observed that the Alexander-historians were guilty of many flatteries in describing the visit to Siwah, though he held that something (just what he does not say) in their stories deserved acceptance (xvii 1, 43). On 4,5 C. B. Welles (Historia 1962, 274 ff.) argues that Pt. gave an impracticable route for Al’s return; this is refuted by P. M. Fraser, Opuscula Atheniensia 1967, 23 ff. He also contends that Ar. brought Al. back to the site of Alexandria and agreed with the ‘vulgate’ that the foundation of that city was later than the visit to Siwah. But A. would surely have noted this divergency from Pt. in a context in which he records others. Welles thinks the vulgate’s chronology right, since Ps-Callisthenes, an Alexandrian
writer who may be trusted on this point, says
467