Arrian

βάρβαροι πολλὰ ἔβλαπτον τῶν Φασηλιτῶν τοὺς τὴν
γῆν ἐργαζομένους.
25. Ἔτι δὲ αὐτῷ περὶ τὴν Φασηλίδα ὄντι
ἐξαγγέλλεται Ἀλέξανδρον τὸν Ἀερόπου ἐπιβουλεύειν,
τά τε ἄλλα τῶν ἑταίρων ὄντα καὶ ἐν τῷ τότε
Θεσσαλῶν τῆς ἵππου ἄρχοντα. ἦν μὲν δὴ ὁ
Ἀλέξανδρος οὗτος ἀδελφὸς Ἡρομένους τε καὶ
Ἀρραβαίου τῶν ξυνεπιλαβόντων τῆς σφαγῆς τῆς
2Φιλίππου· καὶ τότε αἰτίαν σχόντα αὐτὸν Ἀλέξανδρος
ἀφῆκεν, ὅτι ἐν πρώτοις τε ἀφίκετο τῶν
φίλων παρ᾿ αὐτόν, ἐπειδὴ Φίλιππος ἐτελεύτησε, καὶ
τὸν θώρακα συνενδὺς συνηκολούθησεν αὐτῷ εἰς τὰ
βασίλεια· ὕστερον δὲ καὶ ἐν τιμῇ ἀμφ᾿ αὑτὸν εἶχε,
στρατηγόν τε ἐπὶ Θρᾴκης στείλας καὶ ἐπειδὴ
Κάλας ὁ τῶν Θετταλῶν ἵππαρχος ἐπὶ σατραπείᾳ
ἐξεπέμφθη, αὐτὸν ἀπέδειξεν ἄρχειν τῆς Θεσσαλικῆς
ἵππου. τὰ δὲ τῆς ἐπιβουλῆς ἐξηγγέλθη ὧδε.
3Δαρεῖος, ἐπειδὴ Ἀμύντας αὐτομολήσας παρ᾿
αὐτὸν λόγους τέ τινας καὶ γράμματα παρὰ τοῦ
Ἀλεξάνδρου τούτου ἐκόμισε, καταπέμπει ἐπὶ
θάλασσαν Σισίνην, ἄνδρα Πέρσην τῶν ἀμφ᾿ αὑτὸν
πιστῶν, πρόφασιν μὲν παρὰ Ἀτιζύην τὸν Φρυγίας
σατράπην, τῇ δὲ ἀληθείᾳ τῷ Ἀλεξάνδρῳ τούτῳ
συνεσόμενον καὶ πίστεις δώσοντα, εἰ ἀποκτείνει <ε>
βασιλέα Ἀλέξανδρον, αὐτὸν βασιλέα καταστήσειν
Μακεδονίας καὶ χρυσίου τάλαντα πρός τῇ βασιλείᾳ
4ἐπιδώσειν χίλια. ὁ δὲ Σισίνης ἁλοὺς πρὸς Παρμενίωνος
λέγει πρὸς Παρμενίωνα ὧν ἕνεκα ἀπεστάλη·
καὶ τοῦτον ἐν φυλακῇ πέμπει Παρμενίων παρ᾿
Ἀλέξανδρον, καὶ πυνθάνεται ταὐτὰ παρ᾿ αὐτοῦ
Ἀλέξανδρος. ξυναγαγὼν δὲ τοὺς φίλους βουλὴν
προὐτίθει, ὅ τι χρὴ ὑπὲρ Ἀλεξάνδρου γνῶναι.
102Anabasis of Alexander I

a base from which the barbarians did much injury to334–3 b.c. the people of Phaselis tilling the soil.
25. While Alexander was still operating round Phaselis it was reported to him that his namesake, son of Aeropus, was conspiring; he was one of the Companions, and at the time commander of the Thessalian cavalry. This Alexander was brother to Heromenes and Arrabaeus, who had a part in the murder of Philip. Though he was implicated at the2 time, Alexander let him off, since he had been among the first of his friends to rally to him on Philip’s death, and had put on his cuirass and accompanied Alexander into the palace; later Alexander had even held him in honour near his person, had sent him to command in Thrace, and when Calas, commander of the Thessalian cavalry, had been transferred to a satrapy,1 appointed him commander of the Thessalian horse. The story of the plot was reported as follows.
Darius, when Amyntas deserted to him bringing3 overtures and a letter from this Alexander, sent Sisines, a trusty Persian from his suite, to the sea. The pretext was that he was to visit Atizyes, satrap of Phrygia, but in fact he was to meet this Alexander and give him assurances that if he assassinated Alexander the king, the Persian king would make him king of Macedonia and give him a thousand gold Talents as well. Sisines fell into Parmenio’s hands4 and revealed to him the object of his mission; and Parmenio sent him under escort to Alexander, who heard the same story from him. So he called together his friends, to consider what should be decided

117, 1.103