Arrian

οὐρανὸν τὰς χεῖρας καὶ εὔξασθαι ὧδε· ἀλλ᾿ ὦ Ζεῦ
βασιλεῦ, ὅτῳ ἐπιτέτραπται νέμειν τὰ βασιλέων
πράγματα ἐν ἀνθρώποις, σὺ νῦν μάλιστα μὲν ἐμοὶ
φύλαξον Περσῶν τε καὶ Μήδων τὴν ἀρχήν, ὥσπερ
οὖν καὶ ἔδωκας· εἰ δὲ δὴ ἐγὼ οὐκέτι σοι βασιλεὺς
τῆς Ἀσίας, σὺ δὲ μηδενὶ ἄλλῳ ὅτι μὴ Ἀλεξάνδρῳ
παραδοῦναι τὸ ἐμὸν κράτος. οὕτως οὐδὲ πρὸς τῶν
πολεμίων ἄρα ἀμελεῖται ὅσα σώφρονα ἔργα.
4Ὀξυάρτης δὲ ἀκούσας τοὺς παῖδας ἐχομένους,
ἀκούσας δὲ καὶ ὑπὲρ Ῥωξάνης τῆς θυγατρὸς ὅτι
μέλει αὐτῆς Ἀλεξάνδρῳ, θαρσήσας ἀφίκετο παρὰ
Ἀλέξανδρον, καὶ ἦν ἐν τιμῇ παρ᾿ αὐτῷ, ᾗπερ εἰκὸς
ἐπὶ ξυντυχίᾳ τοιαύτῃ.
21. Ἀλέξανδρος δέ, ὡς τὰ ἐν Σογδιανοῖς αὐτῷ
διεπέπρακτο, ἐχομένης ἤδη καὶ τῆς πέτρας ἐς
Παρειτάκας προὐχώρει, ὅτι καὶ ἐν Παρειτάκαις
χωρίον τι ὀχυρόν, ἄλλην πέτραν, κατέχειν ἐλέγοντο
πολλοὶ τῶν βαρβάρων. ἐκαλεῖτο δὲ αὕτη Χοριήνου
ἡ πέτρα· καὶ ἐς αὐτὴν αὐτός τε ὁ Χοριήνης
ξυμπεφεύγει καὶ ἄλλοι τῶν ὑπάρχων οὐκ ὀλίγοι.
2ἦν δὲ τὸ μὲν ὕψος τῆς πέτρας ἐς σταδίους εἴκοσι,
κύκλος δὲ ἐς ἑξήκοντα· αὐτὴ δὲ ἀπότομος πάντοθεν,
ἄνοδος δὲ ἐς αὐτὴν μία καὶ αὐτὴ στενή τε καὶ
οὐκ εὔπορος, οἷα δὴ παρὰ τὴν φύσιν τοῦ χωρίου
πεποιημένη, ὡς χαλεπὴ εἶναι καὶ μηδενὸς εἴργοντος
καὶ καθ᾿ ἕνα ἀνελθεῖν, φάραγξ τε κύκλῳ περιεῖργε
τὴν πέτραν βαθεῖα, ὥστε ὅστις προσάξειν στρατιὰν
τῇ πέτρᾳ ἔμελλε, πολὺ πρόσθεν αὐτῷ τὴν φάραγγα
εἶναι χωστέον, ὡς ἐξ ὁμαλοῦ ὁρμᾶσθαι προσάγοντα
ἐς προσβολὴν τὸν στρατόν.
406Anabasis Of Alexander IV

prayed in these terms: ‘O Zeus the King, to whom 327 b.c. it has been given to order the affairs of Kings among men, I beseech thee most of all to preserve my sovereignty over Persians and Medes, as thou didst grant it me; but if I am by your wish no longer to be king of Asia, to give my power to none but Alexander.’ Thus even enemies are not indifferent to virtuous acts.
When Oxyartes heard that his daughters were4 captives, but also that Alexander was showing solicitude for his daughter Roxane, he ventured to come to Alexander and was honourably treated by him, as was appropriate on so happy an event.
21. After completing his work in Sogdiana, with the rock now in his possession, Alexander advanced to the Pareitacae, since many of the barbarians were reported to be holding a strong place in their country, another rock, called the Rock of Chorienes; Chorienes himself and many other hyparchs had taken refuge there.1 The height of this rock was about twenty2 stades,2 its circuit about sixty; it was sheer on all sides; there was only one way up to it, and this was narrow and difficult, since it had been constructed in defiance of the nature of the place, so that it was hard, even without opposition, to ascend even in single file. A deep ravine also protected the rock all round, hence anyone who was going to bring an army up to the rock would be obliged first to do much filling up of the ravine, so as to start from level ground when bringing up his force to the assault.
1Sisimithres in QC. viii 2, 19 ff, (who puts the episode late in 328) and Strabo xi 11, 4; Chorienes was perhaps the official title of this local chief (‘hyparch’). P. 58 has an allusion.2This can only mean 20 stades from foot to peak; it is not a measurement of height (von Schwarz, App. VIII 2).407