Arrian

χώραν τὴν Αἰγυπτίαν· Πετίσιος δὲ ἀπειπαμένου
3τὴν ἀρχὴν Δολόασπις ἐκδέχεται πᾶσαν. φρουράρχους
δὲ τῶν ἑταίρων ἐν Μέμφει μὲν Πανταλέοντα
κατέστησε τὸν Πυδναῖον, ἐν Πηλουσίῳ δὲ Πολέμωνα
τὸν Μεγακλέους Πελλαῖον· τῶν ξένων δὲ
ἄρχειν Λυκίδαν Αἰτωλόν, γραμματέα δὲ ἐπὶ τῶν
ξένων Εὔγνωστον τὸν Ξενοφάντου τῶν ἑταίρων·
ἐπισκόπους δὲ αὐτῶν Αἰσχύλον τε καὶ Ἔφιππον
4τὸν Χαλκιδέως.1 Λιβύης δὲ τῆς προσχώρου
ἄρχειν δίδωσιν Ἀπολλώνιον Χαρίνου, Ἀραβίας δὲ
τῆς πρὸς Ἡρώων πόλει Κλεομένην τὸν ἐκ Ναυκράτιος·
καὶ τούτῳ παρηγγέλλετο τοὺς μὲν
νομάρχας ἐᾶν ἄρχειν τῶν νομῶν τῶν κατὰ σφᾶς
καθάπερ ἐκ παλαιοῦ καθειστήκει, αὐτὸν δὲ ἐκλέγειν
παρ᾿ αὐτῶν τοὺς φόρους· οἱ δὲ ἀποφέρειν αὐτῷ
5ἐτάχθησαν. στρατηγοὺς δὲ τῇ στρατιᾷ κατέστησεν,
ἥντινα ἐν Αἰγύπτῳ ὑπελείπετο, Πευκέσταν τε
τὸν Μακαρτάτου καὶ Βάλακρον τὸν Ἀμύντου,
ναύαρχον δὲ ἐπὶ τῶν νεῶν Πολέμωνα τὸν Θηραμένους·
σωματοφύλακα δὲ ἀντὶ Ἀρρύβα2 [τὸν]
Λεοννάτον τὸν †Ὀνάσου3 ἔταξεν· Ἀρρύβας γὰρ
6νόσῳ ἀπέθανεν. ἀπέθανε δὲ καὶ Ἀντίοχος ὁ
ἄρχων τῶν τοξοτῶν, καὶ ἀντὶ τού <του> ἄρχειν
ἐπέστησε τοῖς τοξόταις Ὀμβρίωνα Κρῆτα. ἐπὶ δὲ
τοὺς ξυμμάχους τοὺς πεζούς, ὧν Βάλακρος ἡγεῖτο,





1Χαλκιδέως: Χαλκιδέα Geier.2Ἀρρύββας would be the right form.3Leonnatus is son Ἀντέου (vi 28. 4): Ἄνθους (Arrian ed. Roos vol. ii 254, 4), Εὔνου (Ind. 18. 3); the true name cannot be determined.234Anabasis of Alexander III

of Egypt between them; Petisis, however, declined 331 b.c. the power, and Doloaspis took it all. As garrison3 commandants he appointed Companions, Pantaleon of Pydna at Memphis, and Polemon, son of Megacles of Pella at Pelusium; Lycidas, an Aetolian, was to command the mercenaries and Eugnostos son of Xenophantes, one of the Companions, to be secretary in charge of the mercenaries, with Aeschylus and Ephippus son of Chalcideus as their overseers.3 The4 government of the neighbouring country of Libya was given to Apollonius son of Charinus; and that of Arabia round Heroönpolis to Cleomenes from Naucratis.4 He was instructed to permit the nomarchs to govern their own districts in accordance with the ancient practices, but to exact the tribute from them himself, while they were ordered to pay it over to him. As generals of the army which he was leaving5 behind in Egypt he appointed Peucestas son of Macartatus and Balacrus son of Amyntas, and as admiral of the fleet, Polemon son of Theramenes. As bodyguard in place of Arrhybas, who had died of disease, he appointed Leonnatus son of Anteas. Antiochus, the commander of the archers, had also6 died, and in his place Alexander appointed as commander of the archers Ombrion, a Cretan. The allied infantry, of which Balacrus had been commander,


3Or, with Geier’s emendation, ‘a Chalcidean’; he can then
be identified with Ephippus of Olynthus (since Olynthus had
been the centre of the Chalcidean federation), author of a work ‘On the Death of Al. and Hephaestion’ (Jacoby no. 126), very hostile to Al., as one might expect most of those who came from a city Philip had destroyed to have been, though the attitude is stranger if Ephippus, like Callisthenes, had taken service with Al., and might, if the identification is right, be more plausibly connected with Al’s treatment of Callisthenes. However, Chalcideus is attested as a personal name, and emendation is not required.4See vii 23, 6 ff. with notes. The other officers named are totally or almost unknown.235