Arrian

τούτους δὲ ἄλλῃ καὶ ἄλλῃ, ὀξείας τὰς διώξεις
ποιησάμενος, τοὺς μὲν ἀπέκτεινε, τοὺς δὲ ἠνδραπόδισε·
σατράπην δὲ Ἀρείων ἀπέδειξεν Ἀρσάκην,
8ἄνδρα Πέρσην. αὐτὸς δὲ ξὺν τοῖς ἀμφὶ Κρατερὸν
ὑπολελειμμένοις, ὁμοῦ οὖσιν ἤδη, ὡς ἐπὶ τὴν
Ζαραγγαίων χώραν ἦγε· καὶ ἀφικνεῖται ἵνα τὰ
βασίλεια τῶν Ζαραγγαίων ἦν. Βαρσαέντης δέ, ὃς
τότε κατεῖχε τὴν χώραν, εἷς ὢν τῶν ξυνεπιθεμένων
Δαρείῳ ἐν τῇ φυγῇ, προσιόντα Ἀλέξανδρον μαθὼν
ἐς Ἰνδοὺς τοὺς ἐπὶ τάδε τοῦ Ἰνδοῦ ποταμοῦ ἔφυγε.
ξυλλαβόντες δὲ αὐτὸν οἱ Ἰνδοὶ παρ᾿ Ἀλέξανδρον
ἀπέστειλαν, καὶ ἀποθνήσκει πρὸς Ἀλεξάνδρου τῆς
ἐς Δαρεῖον ἀδικίας ἕνεκα.
26. Ἐνταῦθα καὶ τὴν Φιλώτα ἐπιβουλὴν τοῦ
Παρμενίωνος ἔμαθεν Ἀλέξανδρος, καὶ λέγει Πτολεμαῖος
καὶ Ἀριστόβουλος, ὅτι προσηγγελμένη
<μὲν ἦν> ἤδη οἱ καὶ πρότερον ἐν Αἰγύπτῳ, οὐ
μέντοι πιστή γε ἐφάνη τῆς τε φιλίας τῆς πάλαι
ἕνεκα καὶ τῆς ἐξ αὐτοῦ ἐς Παρμενίωνά τε τὸν
πατέρα τὸν Φιλώτα τιμῆς καὶ ἐς αὐτὸν Φιλώταν
2πίστεως. Πτολεμαῖος δὲ ὁ Λάγου λέγει εἰσαχθῆναι
εἰς Μακεδόνας Φιλώταν καὶ κατηγορῆσαι
μὲν αὐτοῦ ἰσχυρῶς Ἀλέξανδρον, ἀπολογήσασθαι δὲ
αὐτὸν Φιλώταν· καὶ τοὺς ἐπιμηνυτὰς τοῦ ἔργου
παρελθόντας ἐξελέγξαι Φιλώταν τε καὶ τοὺς ἀμφ᾿
αὐτὸν ἄλλοις τε ἐλέγχοις οὐκ ἀφανέσι καὶ μάλιστα
δὴ ὅτι αὐτὸς Φιλώτας πεπύσθαι μὲν ἐπιβουλήν τινα
Ἀλεξάνδρῳ παρασκευαζομένην συνέφη, ἐξηλέγχετο
δὲ κατασιωπήσας ταύτην πρὸς Ἀλέξανδρον, καίτοι
δὶς ἐπὶ τὴν σκηνὴν ὁσημέραι τὴν Ἀλεξάνδρου
314Anabasis of Alexander III

in the revolt, who had at the time deserted their 330 b.c. villages, and going in different directions, he killed some and enslaved the rest. As satrap of Areia he appointed Arsaces, a Persian.6 With the force left8 under Craterus, which had now joined him, he marched towards the territory of the Zarangaeans, and arrived at the place where their palace was.7 Barsaentes, who was then in occupation of the country, and was one of those who had joined in attacking Darius on his flight, on learning that Alexander was approaching, fled to the Indians on this side of the river Indus; but they seized him and sent him to Alexander, who put him to death for the wrong he had done Darius.
26. It was there too that Alexander learnt of the conspiracy of Philotas son of Parmenio.1 Ptolemy and Aristobulus say that it had already been reported to him earlier in Egypt, but he did not think it credible because of their long friendship, the honour he had shown to Parmenio, Philotas’ father, and the trust he had reposed in Philotas himself. Ptolemy2 son of Lagus gives the following account. Philotas was summoned before the Macedonians, Alexander vigorously accused him, Philotas made his defence; then those who had denounced the plot came forward and convicted Philotas and his associates with clear proofs; in particular, they showed that while Philotas himself admitted that he had heard of some sort of plot being laid against Alexander, he was convicted of having said nothing of it to Alexander, though he




6Presumably ‘Arsames’, made satrap of the Zarangaeans after Philotas’ death in QC. vii 3, 1.7The Zarangaean capital should be at or near Farah, App. VIII 12 f. Cf. D. 78, 4; QC. vi 6, 36; 7, 1.1See App. XI on 26–27, 4.315