Arrian

καὶ τὴν λοιπὴν ἵππον ἀναλαβόντα τὴν λεωφόρον τε
καὶ μακροτέραν ἡγεῖσθαι ἐκέλευσε, τὰς ἁμάξας καὶ
τὰ σκευοφόρα καὶ τὸν ἄλλον ὅμιλον ἄγοντα.
3Ὑπερβαλὼν δὲ τὰ πρῶτα ὄρη καὶ καταστρατοπεδεύσας
αὐτοῦ ἀναλαβὼν τούς τε ὑπασπιστὰς καὶ
τῆς Μακεδονικῆς φάλαγγος τοὺς κουφοτάτους καὶ
τῶν τοξοτῶν ἔστιν οὓς ᾔει χαλεπὴν ὁδὸν καὶ
δύσπορον, φύλακας τῶν ὁδῶν καταλιπών, ἵνα
σφαλερόν τι αὐτῷ ἐφαίνετο, ὡς μὴ τοῖς ἑπομένοις
κατ᾿ ἐκεῖνα ἐπιθοῖντο οἱ τὰ ὄρη ἔχοντες τῶν βαρβάρων.
4αὐτὸς δὲ μετὰ τῶν τοξοτῶν διελθὼν τὰ
στενὰ ἐν τῷ πεδίῳ κατεστρατοπέδευσε πρὸς
ποταμῷ οὐ μεγάλῳ. καὶ ἐνταῦθα ὄντος αὐτοῦ
Ναβαρζάνης τε ὁ Δαρείου χιλιάρχης καὶ Φραταφέρνης
ὁ Ὑρκανίας τε καὶ Παρθυαίων σατράπης
καὶ ἄλλοι τῶν ἀμφὶ Δαρεῖον Περσῶν οἱ ἐπιφανέστατοι
5ἀφικόμενοι παρέδοσαν σφᾶς αὐτούς. ὑπομείνας
δὲ ἐν τῷ στρατοπέδῳ τέσσαρας ἡμέρας
ἀνέλαβε τοὺς ὑπολειφθέντας κατὰ τὴν ὁδόν, τοὺς
μὲν ἄλλους ἀσφαλῶς διελθόντας, τοῖς δὲ Ἀγριᾶσιν
ὀπισθοφυλακοῦσιν ἐπέθεντο οἱ ὄρειοι τῶν βαρβάρων,
καὶ μεῖον ἔχοντες τῷ ἀκροβολισμῷ ἀπηλλάγησαν.
6Ἄρας δὲ ἐντεῦθεν προῄει ὡς ἐφ᾿ Ὑρκανίαν εἰς
Ζαδράκαρτα πόλιν Ὑρκανίων. καὶ ἐν τούτῳ οἱ
περὶ Κρατερὸν ξυνέμιξαν αὐτῷ, τοῖς μὲν ξένοις τοῖς
Δαρείου οὐκ ἐντετυχηκότες, τὴν χώραν δὲ ὅσην
διαπεπορευμένοι ἦσαν τὴν μὲν βίᾳ, τὴν δὲ ἐνδιδόντων


304Anabasis of Alexander III

the rest of the cavalry and bring them along the 330 b.c. high-road, which was longer, convoying the waggons, the baggage train and the rest of his people.2
After he had crossed the first mountains and had3 encamped there, Alexander took the hypaspists and the lightest armed of the Macedonian phalanx and some of the archers, and marched along a rough and difficult road, leaving troops behind to guard the roads where he thought there was danger, so that the barbarians in possession of the heights might not attack the forces coming after at those points. He4 himself with the archers crossed the pass and camped in the plain by a small river. While he was there, Nabarzanes, Darius’ chiliarch, Phrataphernes the satrap of Hyrcania and Parthyaea and other very highly placed Persian officers of Darius came and gave themselves up.3 After waiting four days in the5 camp, he picked up those who had been left behind on the march, most of whom had got through with safety; the native hillmen had attacked the Agrianians, guarding the rear, but had the worst of a long range skirmish and withdrew.
Starting off again, Alexander advanced towards6 Hyrcania to Zadracarta, a city of the Hyrcanians.4 At this point Craterus and his troops joined him; they had not fallen in with Darius’ mercenaries, but partly by force and partly by the surrender of the



2Al. had only 3 phalanx battalions with him at this time
(Introd. 61), the third being that of Coenus (24, 1). Contra Lane Fox (cf. Introd. n. 99) A’s words do not imply that Coenus’ battalion was less heavily armoured than the rest; Al. took not only the lightest armed (e.g. the hypaspists) but the largest part of the force.3Phrataphernes (henceforth unswervingly loyal), QC. vi 4, 23; he puts Nabarzanes’ surrender later, after prior negotiations, 4, 8 ff.; 5, 22.4App. VIII 10.305