Arrian

τοῦ ἀποθανόντος ἐν τῇ μάχῃ Πολυπέρχοντα τὸν
Σιμμίου ἄρχειν ἀπέδειξε τῆς ἐκείνου τάξεως. καὶ
Σολεῦσι τά τε πεντήκοντα τάλαντα, ἃ ἔτι ἐνδεᾶ
ἦν ἐκ τῶν ἐπιβληθέντων σφίσι χρημάτων, ἀνῆκεν
καὶ τοὺς ὁμήρους ἀπέδωκεν.
3Ὁ δὲ οὐδὲ τῆς μητρὸς τῆς Δαρείου οὐδὲ τῆς
γυναικὸς ἢ τῶν παίδων ἠμέλησεν. ἀλλὰ λέγουσί
τινες τῶν τὰ Ἀλεξάνδρου γραψάντων τῆς νυκτὸς
αὐτῆς, ᾗ ἀπὸ τῆς διώξεως τῆς Δαρείου ἐπανῆκεν,
ἐς τὴν σκηνὴν παρελθόντα αὐτὸν τὴν Δαρείου, ἥτις
αὐτῷ ἐξῃρημένη ἦν, ἀκοῦσαι γυναικῶν οἰμωγὴν
καὶ ἄλλον τοιοῦτον θόρυβον οὐ πόρρω τῆς σκηνῆς·
4πυθέσθαι οὖν αἵτινες γυναῖκες καὶ ἀνθ᾿ ὅτου οὕτως
ἐγγὺς παρασκηνοῦσι· καί τινα ἐξαγγεῖλαι, ὅτι· ὦ
βασιλεῦ, ἡ μήτηρ τε καὶ ἡ γυνὴ Δαρείου καὶ οἱ
παῖδες, ὡς ἐξηγγέλθη αὐταῖς ὅτι τὸ τόξον τε τοῦ
Δαρείου ἔχεις καὶ τὸν κάνδυν τὸν βασιλικὸν καὶ ἡ
ἀσπὶς ὅτι κεκόμισται ὀπίσω ἡ Δαρείου, ὡς ἐπὶ
5τεθνεῶτι Δαρείῳ ἀνοιμώζουσιν. ταῦτα ἀκούσαντα
Ἀλέξανδρον πέμψαι πρὸς αὐτὰς Λεοννάτον, ἕνα
τῶν ἑταίρων, ἐντειλάμενον φράσαι ὅτι ζῇ Δαρεῖος,
τὰ δὲ ὅπλα καὶ τὸν κάνδυν ὅτι φεύγων ἀπέλιπεν ἐπὶ
τῷ ἅρματι καὶ ταῦτα ὅτι μόνα ἔχει Ἀλέξανδρος.
καὶ Λεοννάτον παρελθόντα ἐς τὴν σκηνὴν τά τε
περὶ Δαρείου εἰπεῖν καὶ ὅτι τὴν θεραπείαν αὐταῖς
ξυγχωρεῖ Ἀλέξανδρος τὴν βασιλικὴν καὶ τὸν ἄλλον
κόσμον καὶ καλεῖσθαι βασιλίσσας, ἐπεὶ οὐδὲ κατὰ
ἔχθραν οἱ γενέσθαι τὸν πόλεμον πρὸς Δαρεῖον,
ἀλλ᾿ ὑπὲρ τῆς ἀρχῆς τῆς Ἀσίας διαπεπολεμῆσθαι
6ἐννόμως. ταῦτα μὲν Πτολεμαῖος καὶ Ἀριστόβουλος
λέγουσι· λόγος δὲ ἔχει καὶ αὐτὸν Ἀλέξανδρον
τῇ ὑστεραίᾳ ἐλθεῖν εἴσω ξὺν Ἡφαιστίωνι
166Anabasis of Alexander II

fallen in the battle, he appointed Polyperchon son of 333 b.c. Simmias commander of his battalion. To the citizens of Soli he remitted the fifty Talents still due from the fine he had imposed on them, and restored their hostages.
Nor did he neglect Darius’ mother, wife, or3 children. Now, some of the accounts of Alexander relate that the very night after his return from the pursuit of Darius he entered Darius’ tent, which had been put aside for his own use, and heard a lament and other confused sounds of women’s voices near the tent; he enquired what women they were4 and why they were accommodated so near him; and was told, ‘Sire, it is Darius’ mother, wife and children; as they have heard that you are in possession of his bow and royal mantle and that his shield has been brought back, they are mourning his death.’ On5 hearing this, Alexander sent Leonnatus, one of the Companions, to them with instructions to tell them that Darius was alive and had left his arms and mantle in the chariot while escaping, and that these were all Alexander had. Leonnatus entered the tent and gave Alexander’s message about Darius, adding that Alexander granted them the right of royal state and all other marks of royalty, with the title of queens, since he had not made war with Darius from personal enmity but had fought for the sovereignty of Asia lawfully. This is the6 account of Ptolemaeus and Aristobulus; there is, however, a story2 that next day Alexander himself


2‘Vulgate’. Cf. D. 37, 3–38, 3; QC. 11, 24–6; 12, 1–26; P. 21.167