Arrian

Σπιθριδάτου ἀρχῆς, δοὺς αὐτῷ ἱππέας τε καὶ
ψιλοὺς ὅσοι ἱκανοὶ πρὸς τὰ παρόντα ἐδόκουν.
8Κάλαν δὲ καὶ Ἀλέξανδρον τὸν Ἀερόπου ἐπὶ τὴν
χώραν τὴν Μέμνονος ἐκπέμπει, ἄγοντας τούς τε
Πελοποννησίους καὶ τῶν ἄλλων ξυμμάχων τοὺς
πολλοὺς πλὴν Ἀργείων· οὗτοι δὲ ἐν Σάρδεσι
κατελείφθησαν τὴν ἄκραν φυλάττειν.
9Ἐν τούτῳ δέ, ὡς τὰ ὑπὲρ τῆς ἱππομαχίας
ἐξηγγέλθη, οἵ τε τὴν Ἔφεσον φρουροῦντες μισθοφόροι
ᾤχοντο φεύγοντες, δύο τριήρεις τῶν
Ἐφεσίων λαβόντες, καὶ ξὺν αὐτοῖς Ἀμύντας ὁ
Ἀντιόχου, ὅς ἔφυγεν ἐκ Μακεδονίας Ἀλέξανδρον,
παθὼν μὲν οὐδὲν πρὸς᾿ Αλεξάνδρου, δυσνοίᾳ δὲ τῇ
πρὸς Ἀλέξανδρον καὶ αὐτὸς ἀπαξιώσας τι παθεῖν
πρὸς αὐτοῦ ἄχαρι.
10Τετάρτῃ δὲ ἡμέρᾳ ἐς Ἔφεσον ἀφικόμενος τούς τε
φυγάδας, ὅσοι δι᾿ αὐτὸν ἐξέπεσον τῆς πόλεως,
κατήγαγε καὶ τὴν ὀλιγαρχίαν καταλύσας δημοκρατίαν
κατέστησε· τοὺς δὲ φόρους, ὅσους τοῖς
βαρβάροις ἀπέφερον, τῇ Ἀρτέμιδι ξυντελεῖν ἐκέλευσεν.
11ὁ δὲ δῆμος ὁ τῶν Ἐφεσίων, ὡς ἀφῃρέθη
αὐτοῖς ὁ ἀπὸ τῶν ὀλίγων φόβος, τούς τε Μέμνονα
ἐπαγομένους καὶ τοὺς τὸ ἱερὸν συλήσαντας τῆς
Ἀρτέμιδος καὶ τοὺς τὴν εἰκόνα τὴν Φιλίππου τὴν
ἐν τῷ ἱερῷ καταβαλόντας καὶ τὸν τάφον ἐκ τῆς
ἀγορᾶς ἀνορύξαντας τὸν Ἡροπύθου τοῦ ἐλευθερώσαντος
12τὴν πόλιν ὥρμησαν ἀποκτεῖναι. καὶ
Σύρφακα μὲν καὶ τὸν παῖδα αὐτοῦ Πελάγοντα καὶ
τοὺς τῶν ἀδελφῶν τοῦ Σύρφακος παῖδας ἐκ τοῦ
ἱεροῦ ἐξαγαγόντες κατέλευσαν· τοὺς δὲ ἄλλους
διεκώλυσεν Ἀλέξανδρος προσωτέρω ἐπιζητεῖν καὶ
τιμωρεῖσθαι, γνοὺς ὅτι ὁμοῦ τοῖς αἰτίοις καὶ οὐ
72Anabasis of Alexander I

of Philotas, governor of Lydia and the rest of 334 b.c.
Spithridates’ district with cavalry and light troops that seemed sufficient for present needs. Calas8 and Alexander son of Acropus were sent to Memnon’s
country,5 with the Peloponnesians and the greater part of the allies except the Argives who were left in Sardis to garrison the citadel.
Meanwhile, when the news of the cavalry engagement9 came through, the mercenary troops garrisoning Ephesus made off, taking two Ephesian triremes; along with them went Amyntas son of Antiochus6 who had fled from Macedon to avoid Alexander; he had not actually suffered at Alexander’s hands, but he was disaffected and did not think he deserved to suffer harm at his hands. Alexander reached10 Ephesus on the fourth day, restored the exiles who had been turned out of the city on his account, destroyed the oligarchy, and established a democracy; he also ordered them to contribute to Artemis the taxes they had been paying to the barbarians. The11 Ephesian populace, relieved from fear of the oligarchs, rushed to kill those who had been for calling in Memnon, those who had plundered the temple of Artemis, and those who threw down the statue of Philip in the temple and dug up the tomb of Heropythes, the liberator of the city, in the marketplace. Syrphax, his son Pelagon, and the sons of12 the brothers of Syrphax were pulled from the temple and stoned: but Alexander prevented further inquiry or punishment, knowing that once permission was given the people would put to death innocent


5Apparently in the Troad, Polyaenus iv 3, 15; Strabo xiii 1, 11.6In trod. 46.73