Appendices

suddenly and was ended before Gaugamela, i.e. 1 October. It had been preparing for some time, and if Antipater’s victory occurred so early, we might expect a courier to have brought the news to Al. by December, when he was at Susa or (see n. ad loc.) approaching it. Aeschines actually says that Antipater was long in mustering his forces; but conceivably he is counting from the time when the Spartans were in arms and not from the later point when they had secured allies, and his testimony need not prove that the revolt was not put down till spring 330; we might prefer a date in October if we need to give QC. any credence; he would then be guilty of only a small chronological error.
4. QC. chose to describe the revolt after his narrative of Darius’ death, perhaps because one of his sources recorded that it was then that Al. heard of its suppression; so J. (whose account is, however, full of errors). In fact QC. himself says that the report reached Al. only when he was at Bactra (vii 4, 32) in spring 329; this is far too late, and perhaps he garbled a statement in his source that it was there that the Spartans sent to plead for their city overtook Al. (Earlier, in summer 330, Al. had captured Spartan emissaries sent to Darius, A. iii 24, 4; we can suppose that they had left in 332, before it was known at Sparta that Al. was master of the seas and the Syrian ports and that they had to make their way via Egypt and the Red Sea, reaching Darius by a long, slow detour.) D. recorded the revolt immediately after Gaugamela and absurdly makes it a consequence of that battle; he also dates it to the next Athenian archon year, 330/329, which is refuted by Aeschines as well as by A. D’s dates are 
484Appendices

notoriously unreliable; in 40, 1 and 64, 3 he makes Al. bury his dead after Issus and Gaugamela in the next archon year! If he, QC. and J. all drew ultimately on a common source for the revolt, it is plain that each took a different way of relating the story to Al’s operations (cf. R. A. Lock, Antichthon 1972, 10 ff.), and thus fell into various chronological errors.
5. See also E. Badian, Hermes 1967, 170 ff., though I do not accept his conjecture that Al. tarried at Persepolis, because he was anxiously awaiting news from Greece, see App. VIII 6 for another explanation); G. L. Cawkwell, CQ 1969, 163 ff. (dating the revolt to 330); G. E. M. de Ste Croix, Origins of the Peloponnesian War 376 ff.
6. Why did A. and presumably his sources almost ignore these events? Perhaps because of their persistent tendency to minimize discontent in Greece, which made nonsense of Al’s Panhellenic claims; they were equally silent about the events that led up to the Lamian war that broke out in autumn 323 (unless much is crammed into the lacuna in A. vii 12), for which Al’s own actions were partly responsible, though they were careful to record the insincere congratulations of Greek envoys in vii 23, 2. But they were mainly concerned with Al’s own campaigns and perhaps did not see it as their task to write a general history of his reign. And Al. did not allow the revolt to disturb his own strategy in 331; he assumed that somehow Antipater could cope with Agis, and he was proved right.
485