Arrian

πάντῃ ἀπότομος, καὶ ταύτην φυλακὴ κατεῖχεν ἐκ
τοῦ σατράπου τῆς Φρυγίας Κᾶρες μὲν χίλιοι,
2Ἕλληνες δὲ μισθοφόροι ἑκατόν. καὶ οὗτοι πρεσβεύονται
παρ᾿ Ἀλέξανδρον, ἐπαγγελλόμενοι, εἰ
μὴ ἀφίκοιτό σφισι βοήθεια ἐν ἡμέρᾳ ᾗ ξυνέκειτο,
φράσαντες τὴν ἡμέραν, ὅτι παραδώσουσι τὸ
χωρίον. καὶ ἔδοξε ταῦτα Ἀλεξάνδρῳ ὠφελιμώτερα
ἢ πολιορκεῖν ἄπορον πάντῃ προσφέρεσθαι
3τὴν ἄκραν. πρὸς μὲν δὴ ταῖς Κελαιναῖς φυλακὴν
καταλείπει στρατιώτας ἐς χιλίους καὶ πεντακοσίους.
μείνας δὲ αὐτοῦ ἡμέρας δέκα καὶ σατράπην ἀποδείξας
Φρυγίας Ἀντίγονον τὸν Φιλίππου, ἐπὶ δὲ
τοὺς συμμάχους ἀντ᾿ ἐκείνου στρατηγὸν Βάλακρον
τὸν Ἀμύντου ἐπιτάξας, αὐτὸς ἐπὶ Γορδίου ἐστέλλετο.
καὶ Παρμενίωνι ἐπέστειλεν, ἄγοντα ἅμα οἷ
τὴν δύναμιν ἐκεῖσε ἀπαντᾶν· καὶ ἀπήντα ξὺν τῇ
4δυνάμει Παρμενίων. καὶ οἱ νεόγαμοι δὲ οἱ ἐπὶ
Μακεδονίας σταλέντες εἰς Γόρδιον ἧκον καὶ ξὺν
αὐτοῖς ἄλλη στρατιὰ καταλεχθεῖσα, ἣν ἦγε Πτολεμαῖός
τε ὁ Σελεύκου καὶ Κοῖνος ὁ Πολεμοκράτους
καὶ Μελέαγρος ὁ Νεοπτολέμου, πεζοὶ μὲν
Μακεδόνες τρισχίλιοι, ἱππεῖς δὲ ἐς τριακοσίους καὶ
Θεσσαλῶν ἱππεῖς διακόσιοι, Ἠλείων δὲ ἑκατὸν καὶ
πεντήκοντα, ὧν ἡγεῖτο Ἀλκίας Ἠλεῖος.
Τὸ δὲ Γόρδιον ἔστι μὲν τῆς Φρυγίας τῆς ἐφ᾿
Ἑλλησπόντου, κεῖται δὲ ἐπὶ τοῦ Σαγγαρίου
ποταμοῦ· τοῦ δὲ Σαγγαρίου αἱ μὲν πηγαὶ ἐκ
Φρυγίας εἰσίν, αὐτὸς δὲ διὰ τῆς Θρᾳκῶν τῶν



116Anabasis of Alexander I

by a garrison of a thousand Carians and a hundred333 b.c. Greek mercenaries. They sent envoys to Alexander,2 offering, in case help did not come to them on a day previously appointed (the date was specified), to surrender the position. Alexander thought this more advantageous than a siege of a height inaccessible on every side. So he left 1,500 troops3 as a guard over Celaenae.1 After waiting there ten days and appointing Antigonus son of Philip satrap of Phrygia,2 and replacing him as commander of the allies by Balacrus son of Amyntas, he in person set out for Gordium, ordering Parmenio to meet him there bringing his force with him, as he did. The recently married Macedonians who had gone to4 Macedonia also came to Gordium,3 and with them a freshly levied army, led by Ptolemaeus son of Seleucus, Coenus son of Polemocrates and Meleager son of Neoptolemus; there were 3,000 Macedonian foot, 300 horse, 200 Thessalian horse, 150 Eleians under Alcias of Elis.4
Gordium is in Hellespontine Phrygia on the river5 Sangarius, the springs of which are in Phrygia; it



1QC. iii 1, 1–8 (Celaenae surrendered after expiry of time
limit of 60 days); iv 1, 35 says that Antigonus later sent on to
Alexander most of the troops left to him.2Wrongly styled satrap of Lydia by QC. iv 1, 34 f. (cf. ii 4, 2 n.), he was prominent after Al’s death, almost reunited the empire under his rule and was the ancestor of the kings of Macedon, 284–168 b.c.3As Gordium is 500 miles from Pella, they could not have arrived before May 333 b.c. On Al’s arrival, he presumably lost little time before ‘loosing’ the Gordian knot (ii 3, 1) and then set out ‘next day’ (ii 4,1); he too then did not reach Gordium before May. K. Kraft, Der ‘rationale’ Alexander 86 ff., reasonably suggests that Gordium was made the rendezvous (cf. 24, 3 n.), as a place on the main road from Syria to the Hellespont, where Al. could withstand any Persian counter-offensive, and that his unwillingness to tarry in besieging Telmissus and Celaenae was due to his need to meet the rest of his forces there at the appointed time.4See Introd. 57.117