Arrian

Ἀπολλωνίδην τοὺς Χίους ἐς Ἐλεφαντίνην πόλιν
Αἰγυπτίαν ξὺν φυλακῇ ἀκριβεῖ ἔπεμψεν.
3. Ἐπὶ τούτοις δὲ πόθος λαμβάνει αὐτὸν ἐλθεῖν
παρ᾿ Ἄμμωνα ἐς Λιβύην, τὸ μέν τι τῷ θεῷ
χρησόμενον, ὅτι ἀτρεκὲς ἐλέγετο εἶναι τὸ μαντεῖον
τοῦ Ἄμμωνος καὶ χρήσασθαι αὐτῷ Περσέα καὶ
Ἡρακλέα, τὸν μὲν ἐπὶ τὴν Γοργόνα ὅτε πρὸς
Πολυδέκτου ἐστέλλετο, τὸν δὲ ὅτε παρ᾿ Ἀνταῖον
ᾔει εἰς Διβύην καὶ παρὰ Βούσιριν εἰς Αἴγυπτον.
2Ἀλεξάνδρῳ δὲ φιλοτιμία ἦν πρὸς Περσέα καὶ
Ἡρακλέα, ἀπὸ γένους τε ὄντι τοῦ ἀμφοῖν καί τι
καὶ αὐτὸς τῆς γενέσεως τῆς ἑαυτοῦ ἐς Ἄμμωνα
ἀνέφερε, καθάπερ οἱ μῦθοι τὴν Ἡρακλέους τε καὶ
Περσέως ἐς Δία. καὶ οὖν παρ᾿ Ἄμμωνα ταύτῃ τῇ
γνώμῃ ἐστέλλετο, ὡς καὶ τὰ αὑτοῦ ἀτρεκέστερον
εἰσόμενος ἢ φήσων γε ἐγνωκέναι.
3Μέχρι μὲν δὴ Παραιτονίου παρὰ θάλασσαν ᾔει
δι᾿ ἐρήμου, οὐ μέντοι δι᾿ ἀνύδρου τῆς χώρας,
σταδίους ἐς χιλίους καὶ ἑξακοσίους, ὡς λέγει
Ἀριστόβουλος. ἐντεῦθεν δὲ ἐς τὴν μεσόγαιαν
ἐτράπετο, ἵνα τὸ μαντεῖον ἦν τοῦ Ἄμμωνος. ἔστι
δὲ ἐρήμη τε ἡ ὁδὸς καὶ ψάμμος ἡ πολλὴ αὐτῆς καὶ
4ἄνυδρος. ὕδωρ δὲ ἐξ οὐρανοῦ πολὺ Ἀλεξάνδρῳ
ἐγένετο, καὶ τοῦτο ἐς τὸ θεῖον ἀνηνέχθη. ἀνηνέχθη
δὲ ἐς τὸ θεῖον καὶ τόδε· ἄνεμος νότος ἐπὰν πνεύσῃ
ἐν ἐκείνῳ τῷ χώρῳ, τῆς ψάμμου ἐπιφορεῖ κατὰ τῆς
ὁδοῦ ἐπὶ μέγα, καὶ ἀφανίζεται τῆς ὁδοῦ τὰ σημεῖα
οὐδὲ ἔστιν εἰδέναι ἵνα χρὴ πορεύεσθαι καθάπερ ἐν
πελάγει τῇ ψάμμῳ, ὅτι σημεῖα οὐκ ἔστι κατὰ τὴν


228Anabasis of Alexander III

were sent to the city of Elephantine in Egypt, with a 332-1 b.c. strong guard.2
3. After this a longing seized Alexander to pay a 331 b.c. visit to Amnion in Libya, for one reason to consult the god, since the oracle of Ammon was said to be infallible, and to have been consulted by Perseus, when he was sent by Polydectes against the Gorgon, and by Heracles when he was on his way into Libya to find Antaeus, and into Egypt to find Busiris. Alexander2 sought to rival Perseus and Heracles, as he was descended from them both; and in addition he himself traced his birth in part to Ammon, just as the legends traced that of Heracles and Perseus to Zeus. In any case he set out for Ammon with this idea, hoping to secure more exact knowledge of his affairs, or at least to say he had secured it.1
As far as Paraetonium [Mersah Matruh] he went3 along the coast through country which, though desert, is not wholly waterless, a distance of sixteen hundred stades, as Aristobulus tells us. There he turned into the interior, where the oracle of Ammon lay. The route is desolate; most of it is sand, and waterless. Alexander, however, had plenty of rain,4 and this was attributed to the divinity. And so was the following incident. Whenever a south wind blows in that country, it makes a great heap of sand on the route and obscures its marks, and one cannot get one’s bearings in a sort of ocean of sand, since


2A. returns to his main source(s), who normally recorded actions in which Al. was not personally engaged, not when they occurred but when they were reported to him. QC. iv 8, 11–13 (with other particulars) puts Al’s decisions about the Greek islands after the visit to Siwah, cf. 5, 1 n. See also App. II. Al’s imprisonment of the Chian oligarchs hardly gave effect to Chios’ decree (Tod 192) that they should be tried by the Greek synedrion.1For the visit to the oracle of Ammon in the oasis of Siwah see App. V; for Heracles and Perseus, App. IV.229