Appendices

more than allude (D. 59, 8; QC. 15, 1–2) to the initial fighting on Al’s extreme right (A. 13), and though both put the chariot charge early, allowing it rather more effect than A., and have the decisive conflict between Al. and Darius (who behaves with more courage in their narratives, cf. ii 11, 3 n.), they wholly differ about the break-through to the baggage. In A. this is effected by Persian cavalry in the centre coming through a gap in the Macedonian phalanx after the attack by Al. on the right (14, 4 ff.), but D. and QC. know nothing of this, nor consequently of the fierce fighting described by A. 15, 2. D. makes Mazaeus on the Persian right send cavalry round Al’s flank to the camp; unfortunately the units he names are known to have been on the Persian left. P. 32, 3 f., who also records this movement, makes a similar mistake, and QC. actually transposes to the camp the fighting between Bessus’ forces on the Persian left and Alexander’s troops on his right flank, described in A. 13 and 14, 3. As for the romantic story in D. and QC. that Darius’ mother refused to be freed by the Persians who took the camp, would not she, and the other captive women, have been left behind in the rear camp (A. 9, 1)?
5. P’s account is anecdotal and unintelligible. He twice refers to Callisthenes, once for Al’s prayer to Zeus (App. V 7) and again on the lack of energy allegedly shown by Parmenio (33, 1 and 6). It is not clear to me that P. ever cites Callisthenes from personal inspection, but be that as it may, he was quite capable of muddling his account, especially as it was not even his purpose to provide a full historical record but only to bring out the characteristics of his hero (P. 1). Callisthenes evidently depreciated
512Appendices

Parmenio’s services on this and probably other occasions, and glorified Al. It is quite another matter to suppose that he placed Persian units on the wrong wing, especially if his work is the source of Aristobulus’ document (iii 11, 3 n.), or that he distorted the story except for flattery, or even for that purpose to an extent that was patently untrue. In particular, we cannot tax him with the absurdity of telling that Parmenio was heavily engaged at a time when he sent a message to Alexander, stationed on the other wing (as P’s account implies) and still not fully armed and horsed for action, and that Al. then made a long speech—to the men under Parmenio’s command; contra Tarn ii 352 f., this nonsense can only be P’s.
6. Yet here we may have a substratum of truth. Parmenio is made to warn Al. of an outflanking movement round his left, threatening the baggage (so also QC. 15, 6 ff.); Al. refuses to take any action (for good reasons). Suppose that such a movement was made, probably before rather than after Parmenio (or Al.) was engaged; this could explain the ‘vulgate’ story that the camp was actually taken by Mazaeus’ men. It was clearly proper, and at this stage practicable, for Parmenio to notify Al. Now contrast the other message Parmenio is reported by A. 15, 1 and all other sources (D. 60, 7; QC. 16, 1 ff.; P. 33, 6) to have sent to Al., when he was in hot pursuit of Darius, imploring his help against the Persian right. How could Parmenio know where Al. was then to be found amid all the dust (D. 60, 4; 61, 1; QC. 15, 32, cf. Fuller 178)? How could the messenger overtake him? D. in fact says that the message never got through, and in A. Parmenio
513