Arrian

Ἀγριᾶνάς τε καὶ τοὺς τοξότας ἐπ᾿ Ἀραβίας στέλλεται
εἰς τὸν Ἀντιλίβανον καλούμενον τὸ ὄρος·
5καὶ τὰ μὲν βίᾳ, τῶν ταύτῃ ἐξελών, τὰ δὲ ὁμολογίᾳ
παραστησάμενος ἐν δέκα ἡμέραις ἐπανῆγεν ἐς τὴν
Σιδῶνα, καὶ καταλαμβάνει Κλέανδρον τὸν Πολεμοκράτους
ἐκ Πελοποννήσου ἥκοντα καὶ ξὺν αὐτῷ
μισθοφόρους Ἕλληνας ἐς τετρακισχιλίους.
6Ὡς δὲ συνετέτακτο αὐτῷ τὸ ναυτικόν, ἐπιβιβάσας
τοῖς καταστρώμασι τῶν ὑπασπιστῶν ὅσοι
ἱκανοὶ ἐδόκουν ἐς τὸ ἔργον, εἰ μὴ διέκπλοις
μᾶλλόν τι ἢ ἐν χερσὶν ἡ ναυμαχία γίγνοιτο, ἄρας ἐκ
τῆς Σιδῶνος ἐπέπλει τῇ Τύρῳ ξυντεταγμέναις ταῖς
ναυσίν, αὐτὸς μὲν κατὰ τὸ δεξιὸν κέρας, ὃ δὴ ἐς τὸ
πέλαγος αὐτῷ ἀνεῖχε, καὶ ξὺν αὐτῷ οἵ τε Κυπρίων
βασιλεῖς καὶ ὅσοι Φοινίκων, πλὴν Πνυταγόρου.
οὗτος δὲ καὶ Κρατερὸς τὸ εὐώνυμον κέρας εἶχον
7τῆς πάσης τάξεως. τοῖς δὲ Τυρίοις πρότερον μὲν
ναυμαχεῖν ἐγνωσμένον ἦν, εἰ κατὰ θάλασσαν ἐπιπλέοι
σφίσιν Ἀλέξανδρος, τότε δὲ πλῆθος νεῶν
πολὺ ἀπροσδοκήτως κατιδόντες (οὐ γάρ πω
πεπυσμένοι ἦσαν τάς τε Κυπρίων ναῦς καὶ τὰς
8Φοινίκων ξυμπάσας Ἀλέξανδρον ἔχοντα) καὶ ἅμα
ξυντεταγμένως τοῦ ἐπίπλου γιγνομένου (ὀλίγον γὰρ
πρὶν προσχεῖν τῇ πόλει ἀνεκώχευσαν ἔτι πελάγιαι
αἱ ξὺν Ἀλεξάνδρῳ νῆες, εἴ πως ἄρα ἐς ναυμαχίαν
τοὺς Τυρίους προκαλέσαιντο, ἔπειτα οὕτως ξυνταξάμενοι,
ὡς οὐκ ἀντανήγοντο, πολλῷ τῷ ῥοθίῳ
ἐπέπλεον)—ταῦτα ὁρῶντες οἱ Τύριοι ναυμαχεῖν μὲν
ἀπέγνωσαν, τριήρεσι δὲ ὅσας τῶν λιμένων τὰ
στόματα ἐδέχοντο βύζην τὸν ἔσπλουν φραξάμενοι


194Anabasis of Alexander II

the Agrianians and the archers in the direction of 332 b.c. Arabia to the mountain called Antilebanon.2 Here5 he stormed and destroyed some places and brought others to terms; in ten days he was back at Sidon, and found that Cleander son of Polemocrates had arrived from the Peloponnese with four thousand Greek mercenaries.3
When his fleet was organized, he put on deck as6 many of the hypaspists as he thought sufficient for the action (in case the engagement were not rather a matter of breaking the line of ships than of
hand-to-hand fighting), and weighing anchor sailed from Sidon to Tyre with his ships in formation; himself on the right wing, that is, seaward, with the Cyprian kings and all the Phoenicians, except Pnytagoras who with Craterus commanded the left wing of the whole line. The Tyrians had previously decided7 to give battle by sea, if Alexander attacked them there. But when they sighted an armada far beyond their estimate—for they had not been apprized earlier that the Cyprian and the Phoenician ships were all with Alexander—and observed the sea-attack coming8 in regular order—just before closing on the city Alexander’s ships, while still in the open sea, had lain to, hoping to draw out the Tyrians to an engagement, and then, as they did not put out in their original order, came on with a loud din of oars and waves—the Tyrians, observing all this, refused a sea-battle, but used as many of the triremes as the mouths of their harbours would hold to block the entrances


2Cf. 19, 1 n. and P. 24, 6 (anecdotes from Chares); QC. 2, 24 and 3, 1, explaining that the natives were interfering with the dispatch of timber from Lebanon (cf. 2, 18), not Antilebanon, and stating that Perdiccas and Craterus were left in command.3QC. 3, 11 makes them arrive with the ships from Cyprus.195