Arrian

ἀγαθοῖς ἐξ ἀγαθοῦ ἡγεμόνος παραινεῖσθαι εἰκός.
οἱ δὲ ἄλλος ἄλλοθεν δεξιούμενοί τε τὸν βασιλέα καὶ
τῷ λόγῳ ἐπαίροντες ἄγειν ἤδη ἐκέλευον.
8. Ὁ δὲ τότε μὲν δειπνοποιεῖσθαι παραγγέλλει,
προπέμπει δὲ ὡς ἐπὶ τὰς πύλας τῶν τε ἱππέων
ὀλίγους καὶ τῶν τοξοτῶν προκατασκεψομένους τὴν
ὁδὸν τὴν ὀπίσω [ὡς ἐπὶ τὰς πύλας]· καὶ αὐτὸς τῆς
νυκτὸς ἀναλαβὼν τὴν στρατιὰν πᾶσαν ᾔει, ὡς
2κατασχεῖν αὖθις τὰς πύλας. ὡς δὲ ἀμφὶ μέσας
νύκτας ἐκράτησεν αὖθις τῶν παρόδων, ἀνέπαυε τὴν
στρατιὰν τὸ λοιπὸν τῆς νυκτὸς αὐτοῦ ἐπὶ τῶν
πετρῶν, προφυλακὰς ἀκριβεῖς καταστησάμενος.
ὑπὸ δὲ τὴν ἕω κατῄει ἀπὸ τῶν πυλῶν κατὰ τὴν
ὁδόν· καὶ ἕως μὲν πάντῃ στενόπορα ἦν τὰ χωρία,
ἐπὶ κέρως ἦγεν, ὡς δὲ διεχώρει ἐς πλάτος, ἀνέπτυσσεν
ἀεὶ τὸ κέρας ἐς φάλαγγα, ἄλλην καὶ ἄλλην τῶν
ὁπλιτῶν τάξιν παράγων, τῇ μὲν ὡς ἐπὶ τὸ ὄρος, ἐν
3ἀριστερᾷ δὲ ὡς ἐπὶ τὴν θάλασσαν. οἱ δὲ ἱππεῖς
αὐτῷ τέως μὲν κατόπιν τῶν πεζῶν τεταγμένοι
ἦσαν, ὡς δὲ ἐς τὴν εὐρυχωρίαν προῄεσαν, συνέτασσεν
ἤδη τὴν στρατιὰν ὡς ἐς μάχην, πρώτους μὲν
ἐπὶ τοῦ δεξιοῦ κέρως πρὸς τῷ ὄρει τῶν πεζῶν τό τε
ἄγημα καὶ τοὺς ὑπασπιστάς, ὧν ἡγεῖτο Νικάνωρ ὁ
Παρμενίωνος, ἐχομένην δὲ τούτων τὴν Κοίνου
τάξιν, ἐπὶ δὲ τούτοις τὴν Περδίκκου. οὗτοι μὲν
ἔστε ἐπὶ τὸ μέσον τῶν ὁπλιτῶν ἀπὸ τοῦ δεξιοῦ
4ἀρξαμένῳ τεταγμένοι ἦσαν. ἐπὶ δὲ τοῦ εὐωνύμου
πρώτη μὲν ἡ Ἀμύντου τάξις ἦν, ἐπὶ δὲ ἡ Πτολεμαίου,
ἐχομένη δὲ ταύτης ἡ Μελεάγρου. τοῦ δὲ
εὐωνύμου τοῖς πεζοῖς μὲν Κρατερὸς ἐπετέτακτο


148Anabasis of Alexander II

would naturally tell brave men by way of encouragement. 333 b.c. They crowded round and clasped their king’s hand, and with cries of encouragement urged him to lead them on at once.
8. For the moment, however, Alexander told his troops to take their meal, but he sent a few horsemen and archers on [towards the Gates] to reconnoitre the road that lay behind them; then at nightfall he himself marched with his whole force to seize the Gates again. When about midnight he was in possession of2 the passes once more, he rested his army for the remainder of the night there on the crags, after carefully setting outposts.1 Just upon dawn he descended from the Gates along the road; as long as the defile enclosed on every side remained narrow, he led the army in column, but when it grew broader, he deployed his column continuously into a phalanx, bringing up battalion after battalion of hoplites, on the right up to the ridge, and on the left up to the sea. His cavalry so far had been ranged behind the3 infantry, but when they moved forward into open ground, he at once drew up his army in battle order;2 on the right wing towards the mountain ridge he placed first of the infantry the agema and hypaspists under Nicanor son of Parmenio, next to them Coenus’ battalion, and then that of Perdiccas. From right to left these regiments stretched to the centre of the hoplites. On the left, Amyntas’ battalion came first,4 then Ptolemaeus’, and next Meleager’s. Craterus 3 had been put in command of the infantry on the left


1Contrast QC. 8, 22–3.2QC. 8, 24; 9, 12 (muddled). D. 33, 1 puts the horse in front.3A. obscures the fact that Craterus also had a battalion (i 14, 3; iii 11, 10). Battle order: QC. 9, 7–9.149