Arrian
2κατόπιν τῆς φάλαγγος ἀφανῶς διελθεῖν. προέταξε
δὲ τῶν μὲν ἱππέων κατὰ τὸ δεξιὸν τοὺς προδρόμους,
ὧν ἡγεῖτο Πρωτόμαχος, καὶ τοὺς
Παίονας, ὧν ἡγεῖτο Ἀρίστων, τῶν δὲ πεζῶν τοὺς
τοξότας, ὧν ἦρχεν Ἀντίοχος· τοὺς δὲ Ἀγριᾶνας,
ὧν ἦρχεν Ἄτταλος, καὶ τῶν ἱππέων τινὰς καὶ τῶν
τοξοτῶν ἐς ἐπικαμπὴν πρὸς τὸ ὄρος τὸ κατὰ νώτου
ἔταξεν, ὥστε κατὰ τὸ δεξιὸν αὐτῷ τὴν φάλαγγα ἐς
δύο κέρατα διέχουσαν τετάχθαι, τὸ μὲν ὡς πρὸς
Δαρεῖόν τε καὶ τοὺς πέραν τοῦ ποταμοῦ τοὺς
πάντας Πέρσας, τὸ δὲ ὡς πρὸς τοὺς ἐπὶ τῷ ὄρει
3κατὰ νώτου σφῶν τεταγμένους. τοῦ δὲ εὐωνύμου
προετάχθησαν τῶν μὲν πεζῶν οἵ τε Κρῆτες
τοξόται καὶ οἱ Θρᾷκες, ὧν ἡγεῖτο Σιτάλκης, πρὸ
τούτων δὲ ἡ ἵππος ἡ κατὰ τὸ εὐώνυμον. οἱ δὲ
μισθοφόροι ξένοι πᾶσιν ἐπετάχθησαν. ἐπεὶ δὲ οὔτε
πυκνὴ αὐτῷ ἡ φάλαγξ κατὰ τὸ δεξιὸν τὸ ἑαυτοῦ
ἐφαίνετο, πολύ τε ταύτῃ ὑπερφαλαγγήσειν οἱ
Πέρσαι ἐδόκουν, ἐκ τοῦ μέσου ἐκέλευσε δύο ἴλας
τῶν ἑταίρων, τήν τε Ἀνθεμουσίαν, ἧς ἰλάρχης ἦν
Περοίδας ὁ Μενεσθέως, καὶ τὴν Λευγαίαν καλουμένην,
ἧς ἡγεῖτο Παντόρδανος ὁ Κλεάνδρου, ἐπὶ τὸ
4δεξιὸν ἀφανῶς παρελθεῖν. καὶ τοὺς τοξότας δὲ καὶ
μέρος τῶν Ἀγριάνων καὶ τῶν Ἑλλήνων μισθοφόρων
ἔστιν οὓς κατὰ τὸ δεξιὸν τὸ αὑτοῦ ἐπὶ
μετώπου παραγαγὼν ἐξέτεινεν ὑπὲρ τὸ τῶν
Περσῶν κέρας τὴν φάλαγγα. ἐπεὶ γὰρ οἱ ὑπὲρ τοῦ
ὄρους τεταγμένοι οὔτε κατῄεσαν, ἐκδρομῆς τε ἐπ᾿
αὐτοὺς τῶν Ἀγριάνων καὶ τῶν τοξοτῶν ὀλίγων
κατὰ πρόσταξιν Ἀλεξάνδρου γενομένης ῥᾳδίως


154Anabasis of Alexander II

phalanx.1 He posted the prodromoi under Protomachus’2 333 b.c. command in front of the cavalry on the right, with the Paeonians led by Ariston, and in front of his foot the archers commanded by Antiochus. The Agrianians under Attalus, with some of the cavalry and archers, he threw back at an angle with the heights in his rear, so that on his right wing his line forked into two parts, one facing Darius and the main body of Persians across the river, the other towards the force posted in the Macedonian rear in the heights. On the left wing of the infantry the3 Cretan archers and the Thracians under Sitalces had been posted in front, with the cavalry of the left wing further in advance. The foreign mercenaries were drawn up in support of the whole line. But as his phalanx did not seem very solid on his right, and the Persians seemed likely to overlap them considerably there, he ordered two squadrons of the Companions from the centre, that from Anthemus, commanded by Peroedes son of Menestheus, and that called the Leugaean, under Pantordanus son of Cleander, to transfer unobserved to the right wing.2 He brought over the archers and some of the Agrianians4 and Greek mercenaries to the front of his right and so extended his phalanx to out-flank the Persian wing. For since the troops posted on the heights had not descended, but on a sally made by the Agrianians and a few archers at Alexander’s order, had been easily dislodged from the foothills


1QC. 11, 3, though in 11, 13 f, he unintelligibly separates Parmenio from the Thessalians. D. 37, 2 also puts them on the left. QC. 9, 9 f. has some of the following details, not making it clear that they represent last minute changes.2This move was no doubt consequential on taking the Thessalians out of the line on the right.155