Arrian

ἐν πολλῷ χρόνῳ μελετηθέν τε καὶ τὰς γνώμας
αὐτοῖς δουλωσάμενον.
3Ἐτάχθη δὲ αὐτῷ ἡ στρατιὰ ὧδε· ἑάλω γὰρ
ὕστερον ἡ τάξις, ἥντινα ἔταξε Δαρεῖος, γεγραμμένη,
ὡς λέγει Ἀριστόβουλος. τὸ μὲν εὐώνυμον
αὐτῷ κέρας οἵ τε Βάκτριοι ἱππεῖς εἶχον καὶ ξὺν
τούτοις Δάαι καὶ Ἀραχωτοί· ἐπὶ δὲ τούτοις
Πέρσαι ἐτετάχατο, ἱππεῖς τε ὁμοῦ καὶ πεζοὶ
ἀναμεμιγμένοι, καὶ Σούσιοι ἐπὶ Πέρσαις, ἐπὶ δὲ
4Σουσίοις Καδούσιοι. αὕτη μὲν ἡ τοῦ εὐωνύμου
κέρως ἔστε ἐπὶ τὸ μέσον τῆς πάσης φάλαγγος
τάξις ἦν· κατὰ δὲ τὸ δεξιὸν οἵ τε ἐκ Κοίλης
Συρίας καὶ οἱ ἐκ τῆς μέσης τῶν ποταμῶν ἐτετάχατο,
καὶ Μῆδοι ἔτι κατὰ τὸ δεξιόν, ἐπὶ δὲ
Παρθυαῖοι καὶ Σάκαι, ἐπὶ δὲ Τόπειροι καὶ
Ὑρκάνιοι, ἐπὶ δὲ Ἀλβανοὶ καὶ Σακεσ[ε]ῖναι,
οὗτοι μὲν ἔστε ἐπὶ τὸ μέσον τῆς πάσης φάλαγγος.
5κατὰ τὸ μέσον δέ, ἵνα ἦν βασιλεὺς Δαρεῖος, οἵ τε
συγγενεῖς οἱ βασιλέως ἐτετάχατο καὶ οἱ μηλοφόροι
Πέρσαι καὶ Ἰνδοὶ καὶ Κᾶρες οἱ ἀνάσπαστοι
καλούμενοι καὶ οἱ Μάρδοι τοξόται· Οὔξιοι δὲ καὶ
Βαβυλώνιοι καὶ οἱ πρὸς τῇ ἐρυθρᾷ θαλάσσῃ καὶ
6Σιττακηνοὶ εἰς βάθος ἐπιτεταγμένοι ἦσαν. προετετάχατο
δὲ ἐπὶ μὲν τοῦ εὐωνύμου κατὰ τὸ δεξιὸν τοῦ
Ἀλεξάνδρου οἵ τε Σκύθαι ἱππεῖς καὶ τῶν Βακτριανῶν
ἐς χιλίους καὶ ἅρματα δρεπανηφόρα ἑκατόν.



256Anabasis of Alexander III

was not produced suddenly by a crisis, but cultivated 331 b.c. for a long period, till it mastered their minds.1
Darius’ army was drawn up as follows (Aristobulus3 tells us that a document giving the order as Darius drew it up was afterwards captured).2 His left wing was held by the Bactrian cavalry with the Dahae and Arachotians; next to them Persians had been marshalled, cavalry and infantry mixed, and after the Persians Susians, and then Cadusians. This was the4 disposition of the left wing up to the centre of the entire phalanx. On the right3 had been marshalled the troops from Hollow Syria and Mesopotamia; and further to the right were Medes, then Parthyaeans and Sacians, then Topeirians and Hyrcanians, next Albanians and Sacesinians, right up to the centre of the entire phalanx. In the centre, with king Darius,5 had been posted the king’s kinsmen,4 the Persians whose spears are fitted with golden apples,5 the Indians, the ‘transplanted’ Carians, as they were called, and the Mardian bowmen.6 The Uxians, Babylonians, Red Sea peoples and Sittacenians had been posted in deep formation behind them. Then,6 in advance, on the left wing, facing Alexander’s right, had been posted the Scythian cavalry, some thousand Bactrians, and a hundred chariots carrying scythes.





1Contra, QC. iv 13, 11–14.2Perhaps from Callisthenes; where else? Pt. neglected
the information, but perhaps 8, 3 ff. represent his account;
Sogdianians and Areians only occur there, and Persians(!).
Dahae (= ‘Scythians’ of § 6; 13, 2; they lived in steppes east
of Caspian and north of the Parthyaeans) and Mardians only here; hence neither Ar. nor Pt. gave a full list, unless A. has excerpted carelessly. QC. 12, 5 if. is different again.3Commander, Mazaeus, D. 59, 5; by a slip QC. 15, 2 gives Bessus whom he correctly puts on the left in 12, 6.41,000 strong, D. 59, 2; an honorific title, cf. ‘Companions’.5The royal bodyguard, 1,000 strong, with apples instead of spikes at butt-ends of spears, cf. Herodotus vii 40 f.6D. 59, 2 ff. and QC. 14, 8, who divide the line into left and right, put Darius on the left, perhaps because in fact, the Persian line being longer, he was opposite Al. (A. 13, 1; 14, 2). Carians: 8, 5 n.257