Arrian

Ῥωξάνη ὀνόματι, ἣν δὴ καλλίστην τῶν Ἀσιανῶν
γυναικῶν λέγουσιν ὀφθῆναι οἱ ξὺν Ἀλεξάνδρῳ
στρατεύσαντες μετά γε τὴν Δαρείου γυναῖκα. καὶ
ταύτην ἰδόντα Ἀλέξανδρον ἐς ἔρωτα ἐλθεῖν αὐτῆς·
ἐρασθέντα δὲ οὐκ ἐθελῆσαι ὑβρίσαι καθάπερ
6αἰχμάλωτον, ἀλλὰ γῆμαι γὰρ οὐκ ἀπαξιῶσαι. καὶ
τοῦτο ἐγῶ Ἀλεξάνδρου τὸ ἔργον ἐπαινῶ μᾶλλόν τι
ἢ μέμφομαι. καίτοι τῆς γε Δαρείου γυναικός, ἣ
καλλίστη δὴ ἐλέγετο τῶν ἐν τῇ Ἀσίᾳ γυναικῶν, ἢ
οὐκ ἦλθεν ἐς ἐπιθυμίαν ἢ καρτερὸς αὐτὸς αὑτοῦ
ἐγένετο, νέος τε ὢν καὶ τὰ μάλιστα ἐν ἀκμῇ τῆς
εὐτυχίας, ὁπότε ὑβρίζουσιν οἱ ἄνθρωποι· ὁ δὲ
κατῃδέσθη τε καὶ ἐφείσατο, σωφροσύνῃ τε πολλῇ
διαχρώμενος καὶ δόξης ἅμα ἀγαθῆς οὐκ ἀτόπῳ
ἐφέσει.
20. Καὶ τοίνυν καὶ λόγος κατέχει ὀλίγον μετὰ
τὴν μάχην, ἣ πρὸς Ἰσσῷ Δαρείῳ τε καὶ Ἀλεξάνδρῳ
ξυνέβη, ἀποδράντα ἐλθεῖν παρὰ Δαρεῖον
τὸν εὐνοῦχον τὸν φύλακα αὐτῷ τῆς γυναικός. καὶ
τοῦτον ὡς εἶδε Δαρεῖος, πρῶτα μὲν πυθέσθαι εἰ
ζῶσιν αὐτῷ αἱ παῖδες [καὶ οἱ υἱοὶ] καὶ ἡ γυνή τε
2καὶ ἡ μήτηρ. ὡς δὲ ζώσας τε ἐπύθετο καὶ βασίλισσαι
ὅτι καλοῦνται καὶ ἡ θεραπεία ὅτι ἀμφ᾿ αὐτάς
ἐστιν, ἥντινα καὶ ἐπὶ Δαρείου ἐθεραπεύοντο, ἐπὶ
τῷδε αὖ πυθέσθαι εἰ σωφρονεῖ αὐτῷ ἡ γυνὴ ἔτι.
ὡς δὲ σωφρονοῦσαν ἐπύθετο, αὖθις ἐρέσθαι μή τι
βίαιον ἐξ Ἀλεξάνδρου αὐτῇ ἐς ὕβριν ξυνέβη· καὶ
τὸν εὐνοῦχον ἐπομόσαντα φάναι ὅτι· ὦ βασιλεῦ,
οὕτω τοι ὡς ἀπέλιπες ἔχει ἡ σὴ γυνή, καὶ Ἀλέξανδρος
ἀνδρῶν ἄριστός τέ ἐστι καὶ σωφρονέστατος.
3ἐπὶ τοῖσδε ἀνατεῖναι Δαρεῖον ἐς τὸν
404Anabasis Of Alexander IV

daughter of age to marry called Roxane,1 and those 327 b.c. who served with Alexander2 said that she was the loveliest woman they had seen in Asia next to Darius’ wife, and that when Alexander saw her he fell in love with her; despite his passion he was not ready to violate her as a war captive, but did not think it beneath him to take her in marriage. This was an6 action of Alexander that I approve and do not censure. As for Darius’ wife, who was said to be the most beautiful woman in Asia, either he felt no desire for her or he controlled himself, young as he was and at the very height of good fortune, when men act violently: he respected and spared her, showing much restraint as well as an ambition for good repute which was not misplaced.3
20. There is indeed a story prevalent1 that soon after the battle of Issus between Darius and Alexander the eunuch in charge of Darius’ wife escaped to Darius. When Darius saw him, he first asked if his daughters, wife and mother were alive. When he2 learnt that they were, and had the title of queens, and the same attendance as in Darius’ court, he next asked if his wife remained true to him. On learning that she was, he enquired again whether she had been outraged by Alexander. The eunuch replied on his oath, ‘Your wife, sir, is as you left her, and Alexander is the noblest and most self-controlled of men.’ Darius then stretched his hands to the heavens and3
2‘Vulgate’? More probably Pt./Ar.3Cf. ii 12, 8 n.1‘Vulgate’. Main sources again from § 4.405