Arrian

Μένητι, ἐπειδὰν ἀφίκωνται ἐπὶ θάλασσαν, ἐπιμεληθῆναι
ὅπως ἐπὶ τριήρων κομισθήσονται ἐς
7Εὔβοιαν. Παρμενίωνα δὲ προσέταξε τὰ χρήματα
τὰ ἐκ Περσῶν κομιζόμενα εἰς τὴν ἄκραν τὴν ἐν
Ἐκβατάνοις καταθέσθαι καὶ Ἁρπάλῳ παραδοῦναι·
Ἅρπαλον γὰρ ἐπὶ τῶν χρημάτων ἀπέλιπε καὶ
φυλακὴν τῶν χρημάτων Μακεδόνας ἐς ἑξακισχιλίους
καὶ ἱππέας καὶ ψιλοὺς ὀλίγους· αὐτὸν δὲ
Παρμενίωνα τοὺς ξένους ἀναλαβόντα καὶ τοὺς
Θρᾷκας καὶ ὅσοι ἄλλοι ἱππεῖς ἔξω τῆς ἵππου τῆς
ἑταιρικῆς παρὰ τὴν χώραν τὴν Καδουσίων ἐλαύνειν
8ἐς Ὑρκανίαν. Κλείτῳ δὲ τῷ τῆς βασιλικῆς ἴλης
ἡγεμόνι ἐπέστειλεν, ἐπειδὰν ἐκ Σούσων εἰς
Ἐκβάτανα ἀφίκηται, κατελέλειπτο γὰρ ἐν Σούσοις
ἀρρωστῶν, ἀναλαβόντα τοὺς Μακεδόνας τοὺς ἐπὶ
τῶν χρημάτων τότε ὑπολειφθέντας ἰέναι τὴν ἐπὶ
Παρθυαίους, ἵνα καὶ αὐτὸς ἥξειν ἔμελλεν.
20. Αὐτὸς δὲ ἀναλαβὼν τήν τε ἵππον τῶν
ἑταίρων καὶ τοὺς προδρόμους καὶ τοὺς μισθοφόρους
ἱππέας, ὧν Ἐριγύϊος ἡγεῖτο, καὶ τὴν φάλαγγα τὴν
Μακεδονικὴν ἔξω τῶν ἐπὶ τοῖς χρήμασι ταχθέντων
καὶ τοὺς τοξότας καὶ τοὺς Ἀγριᾶνας ἤλαυνεν ὡς
ἐπὶ Δαρεῖον. καὶ αὐτῷ κατὰ τὴν ὁδὸν σπουδῇ
γιγνομένην τῶν τε στρατιωτῶν πολλοὶ κάμνοντες
2ὑπελείποντο καὶ ἵπποι ἀπέθνησκον· ἀλλὰ καὶ ὣς
ἦγε, καὶ ἀφικνεῖται ἐς Ῥάγας ἑνδεκάτῃ ἡμέρᾳ.
διέχει δὲ ὁ χῶρος οὗτος ἀπὸ τῶν Κασπίων πυλῶν
ὁδὸν ἡμέρας μιᾶς ἐλαύνοντι ὡς Ἀλέξανδρος ἦγε.
Δαρεῖος δὲ ἐφθάκει ἤδη παρεληλυθὼς εἴσω τῶν



292Anabasis of Alexander III

He instructed Menes3 too, when they reached the 330 b.c. coast, to see to their being conveyed on triremes to Euboea. Parmenio was ordered to deposit in the7 citadel of Ecbatana the treasure conveyed from Persia and to hand it over to Harpalus; for he left Harpalus in charge of the treasure, with some six thousand Macedonians, cavalry and a few light troops to protect it. Parmenio himself was instructed to take the mercenaries, Thracians and any cavalry other than the Companion cavalry past the land of the Cadusians and march into Hyrcania.4 Clitus the8 commander of the royal squadron was ordered, on reaching Ecbatana from Susa, where he had been left sick, to take the Macedonians who had been left for the time being to protect the treasure and proceed on the road for Parthyaea, where he himself also proposed to go.
20. Alexander then taking the cavalry, Companions and prodromoi, and the mercenary horse under Erigyius, and the Macedonian phalanx (except for those detailed to protect the treasure) along with the archers and the Agrianians, began his march against Darius.1 By reason of the speed of his march many of his troops were left behind worn out, while the horses were dying. Still Alexander went on and2 reached Rhagae on the eleventh day. This place is one day’s journey from the Caspian gates for anyone marching like Alexander. Darius, however, was too


3Cf. 16, 9.4See Appendixes X 3, XI 4, XIII 5 (we do not know why Parmenio remained in Media, 26, 3). Harpalus: iii 6, 4–7; vii 12, 7 n.; E. Badian, Historia 1960, 245 ff.; JHS 1961, 16 ff.1App. VIII 7. D. compresses the pursuit of Darius into one sentence, P. 42 f. is anecdotal, QC. v 13 often discordant with A.293