Appendices

Farah to Kabul. And where is the Arachotian town? It should be at or near some modern centre, as town sites are within limits determined by permanent geographical factors. Under A Ghazni is the right distance from Farah, Kalat right from Kabul; under B nothing offers. (Pliny gives no help; his mileage from Prophthasia to the Arachotian town may easily be emended to produce Strabo’s 4,120 stades, but the distance thence to Ortospana remains too far from Ghazni, whatever the length of the stade; this figure too must be corrupt.) However, Strabo’s data will make sense if we suppose that his source, also followed by Pliny, was guilty of taking the distance from Herat to Farah to be an additional item when it should really have been included in the distance from Herat to the Arachotian town. If Strabo’s total under A. really represents the whole distance from Herat (Artacoana or Alexandria in Areia), and not just that from Farah (Prophthasia) to Kabul (near Ortospana), it is only 6 km. too short. The Arachotian town would now be near Kalat, long regarded as a candidate; by the modern road it is only 23 km. further from Herat and 17 nearer to Kabul than Strabo’s figures would now suggest, discrepancies that are perfectly acceptable. Fischer indeed argues powerfully that Alexandria in Arachosia is Kandahar; that is suggested by the fertility of its plain, its importance on the route to the lower Indus (cf. vi 17, 3 n.) and evidence that it was a Hellenized centre in the early third century. Let this be so: the very fact that Strabo and Pliny speak of the Arachotian town and not of Alexandria in Arachosia (whereas they do refer to Alexandria in Areia and Prophthasia) suggests that the two places were not identical, and that Fischer’s hypothesis
502Appendices

does not oblige us to equate the Arachotian town with Kandahar rather than with a site near Kalat.
14. The new city (A. iii 28, 4) from which Al. crossed the Hindu-Kush to Bactra in spring 329 (cf. Strabo xv 2, 10) and to which he returned in late spring 326 (iv 22, 3 f.), wrongly placed by D. 83, 2 and QC. vii 3, 23 north of the range, was founded ‘sub ipso Caucaso’ (Pliny vi 62) and ‘in radicibus montis’ (QC.); Pliny puts it 400 stades (c. 70 km) from Ortospana; though its exact site has not been found, it was evidently near Begram and Charikar, perhaps at the junction of the Ghorband and Panjshir rivers in what Foucher (I 29) describes as the largest, richest and most populous basin of north Afghanistan, and close to the ancient Kapica, then more important than Kabul; for further speculation see Tarn, GBI 460 ff. The true distance from Kabul is c. 50 km. QC. vii 3, 18 plausibly tells that the army was revived after its march on reaching cultivated lands with abundant supplies; this valley, like that of Kabul (where perhaps some of the troops bivouacked, to ease the supply problem), enjoys a milder climate than the region of Ghazni which the army had traversed.
15. The topography of the campaigns of 329–327 is explained with exemplary conciseness and clarity by von Schwarz; though he wrongly denied the traditional equation of Bactra with Zariaspa (Reuss, Rheinisches Museum lxii, 591 ff; Kaerst, Geschichte des Hellenismus I2 438), I follow him in general. A. makes little use of the descriptive material Ar. provided, but see iii 28, 5 f. (cf. Strabo xv 2, 10); 30, 7; iv 6, 6 (cf. Strabo xi 11, 5); perhaps 29, 2 ff.
503