Arrian

τούτους. καὶ οἱ μὲν ἀμφὶ τὸν Γλαυκίαν εἴσω
βέλους παρελθεῖν οὐκ ἐτόλμων, οἱ Μακεδόνες δὲ ἐν
τούτῳ ἀσφαλῶς ἐπέρασαν τὸν ποταμόν, ὥστε
οὐδεὶς ἀπέθανεν ἐν τῇ ἀποχωρήσει αὐτῶν.
9Τρίτῃ δὲ ἀπ᾿ ἐκείνης ἡμέρᾳ καταμαθὼν Ἀλέξανδρος
κακῶς αὐλιζομένους τοὺς ἀμφὶ Κλεῖτον καὶ
Γλαυκίαν, καὶ οὔτε φυλακὰς ἐν τῇ τάξει αὐτοῖς
φυλαττομένας οὔτε χάρακα ἢ τάφρον προβεβλημένους,
οἷα δὴ ξὺν φόβῳ ἀπηλλάχθαι οἰομένων
Ἀλέξανδρον, ἐς μῆκος τε οὐκ ὠφέλιμον ἀποτετα[γ]μένην
αὐτοῖς τὴν τάξιν, ὑπὸ νύκτα ἔτι λαθὼν
διαβαίνει τὸν ποταμόν, τούς τε ὑπασπιστὰς ἅμα οἷ
ἄγων καὶ τοὺς Ἀγριᾶνας καὶ τοὺς τοξότας καὶ τὴν
10Περδίκκου καὶ Κοίνου τάξιν. καὶ προσετέτακτο
μὲν ἀκολουθεῖν τὴν ἄλλην στρατιάν· ὡς δὲ καιρὸν
εἶδεν εἰς ἐπίθεσιν, οὐ προσμείνας ὁμοῦ γενέσθαι
πάντας ἐφῆκε τοὺς τοξότας καὶ τοὺς Ἀγριᾶνας· οἱ
δὲ ἀπροσδόκητοί τε ἐπιπεσόντες καὶ φάλαγγι κατὰ
κέρας, ᾗπερ ἀσθενεστάτοις αὐτοῖς καρτερωτάτῃ τῇ
ἐμβολῇ προσμίξειν ἔμελλον, τοὺς μὲν ἔτι ἐν ταῖς
εὐναῖς κατέκτεινον, τοὺς δὲ φεύγοντας εὐμαρῶς
αἱροῦντες, ὥστε πολλοὶ μὲν αὐτοῦ ἐγκατελήφθησαν
καὶ ἀπέθανον, πολλοὶ δὲ ἐν τῇ ἀποχωρήσει ἀτάκτῳ
καὶ φοβερᾷ γενομένῃ· οὐκ ὀλίγοι δὲ καὶ ζῶντες
11ἐλήφθησαν. ἐγένετο δὲ ἡ δίωξις τοῖς ἀμφὶ
Ἀλέξανδρον μέχρι πρὸς τὰ ὄρη τῶν Ταυλαντίων·
ὅσοι δὲ καὶ ἀπέφυγον αὐτῶν, γυμνοὶ τῶν ὅπλων
διεσώθησαν. Κλεῖτος δὲ ἐς τὴν πόλιν τὸ πρῶτον
καταφυγὼν ἐμπρήσας τὴν πόλιν ἀπηλλάγη παρὰ
Γλαυκίαν ἐς Ταυλαντίους.
7. Ἐν τούτῳ δὲ τῶν φυγάδων τινὲς τῶν ἐκ
Θηβῶν φευγόντων παρελθόντες νύκτωρ ἐς τὰς
28Anabasis of Alexander I

breasted the stream. Glaucias’ troops did not 335 b.c. venture within range; the Macedonians meanwhile crossed the river safely and lost not a man in the withdrawal.
On the third day after this Alexander learned9 that Clitus’ and Glaucias’ troops were carelessly bivouacked, no sentry posts in due order, no palisade, no trench in front of them—for they thought that Alexander had retreated in panic—and their line unduly elongated; he crossed the river unobserved under cover of night with the hypaspists, Agrianians, archers and the battalion of Perdiccas and Coenus.2 He had left orders for the rest of the army to follow,10 but seeing an opportunity for attack, he did not wait for all to join him, but sent on all the archers and Agrianians: his forces attacked when not expected and in deep formation on the flank of the line, where they were likely to make the strongest onslaught on the enemy at his weakest point; they killed several in their beds and easily seized the fugitives, so that many were caught and killed there and then, and many others in panic-stricken and headlong flight; a good number too were taken alive. Alexander’s men carried on the pursuit of11 the Taulantians as far as the mountains; those who did escape survived with the loss of their arms. Clitus, who had originally taken refuge in the city, set fire to it and fled to Glaucias among the Taulantians.
7. Meanwhile some of the exiles from Thebes slipped into Thebes by night on the invitation of

2Later they each command a battalion. A. is doubtless careless and should have written ‘battalions’.29