Appendices

they could not be reconciled with his statements about numbers and terrain. It was those statements that he should have challenged; C. exaggerated the Persian numbers at least, and his estimates of distances were much less likely to be reliable than his record of manoeuvres. In any event it is significant that Polybius plainly thought that his account, however absurd, was generally accepted (in vi 45, 1 he names him among the most learned of the old historians), and the summary Polybius gives of his story suggests that A’s main sources largely agreed with and could have drawn on C.; we have no right to suppose that Pt. provided a more accurate account.
As to (a) the distance between Myriandrus and the Pinarus and (b) the extent of the Pinarus plain (§3) A. indeed gives no estimates; the true extent of the Deli Chai plain allows ample room for even the excessive number of men that he, like all other sources, places in the front lines, (c) Both C. and A. (8, 5) have 30,000 Persian cavalry on the right and 30,000 mercenaries in the centre; C. puts an unstated number of peltasts on the left with ‘the phalanx behind’, whereas A. (8, 6–8) makes the left consist of 60,000 hoplite Cardaces with other troops in the rear and mentions a flanking force of 20,000. The Cardaces cannot have been hoplites (Tarn ii 180 ff.); here the advantage lies with C. Polybius may simply have omitted what C. too had on the flanking force (cf. (f) below), as well as a parallel to A’s statement that Darius threw troops over the Pinarus, which were withdrawn before the battle (8, 5 and 10); it is always important to remember
that C’s account must have been very detailed, and that little of it is preserved, (d) Both C. (Pol. 18, 9 f.) and A. (8, 6 and 11) placed
460Appendices

Darius in the centre with the mercenaries. (e) According to C. Al. marched north with the foot in front and horse behind (cf. A. 8, 3), but on reaching more open country deployed the foot in line of battle, at first 32 deep, then 16, then 8 (19, 6; 21, 1); A. 8, 2 f. has different but congruent details. (It was not to Polybius’ purpose to mention the different regiments, as no doubt C., like A., did.) The
deployment could have begun just north of the Kurudere ravine, about 40 stades from the battlefield; C. did not necessarily mean, as Polybius thought (20, 1), that it was complete at that point; the line could only have been thinned in stages as the country opened out. On the battlefield itself there was room for the 42,000 foot and 5,000 horse whose presence was in Polybius’ view implied in C’s history (19, 2); but P’s own words show that in fact C. did not actually
state how many men were engaged, (f) Like A. 8, 7; 9,2 C. referred to the force Al. posted at an angle to his line to prevent outflanking (21, 5); this surely implies that he also mentioned the Persian flanking movement, (g) Whereas A. 8, 9 puts Al. (as always) on the right, C. allegedly said that he took care to be opposite Darius in the centre; but probably
Polybius (22) has abbreviated; no doubt it was Al’s plan to turn against Darius after smashing the Persian left, and the invention of the contemporary,
Chares (11, 4 n.), cf. D. 33, 5 ff. and QC. iii 11, 7 ff., may suggest that his attack did reach the Persian centre before Darius fled, though this is not made clear by A. Polybius’ contention that Al. could not have known where Darius would be posted betrays his own ignorance. (h) Polybius ridicules a manoeuvre recorded only by C., which Walbank explains (18, 9 n.); it is not inconsistent
461