Arrian

δὲ ὑπὸ προθυμίας ὠθουμένων ἄχθος λαβοῦσα μεῖζον
ἡ γέφυρα κατερράγη καὶ πίπτουσι ξὺν αὐτῇ οἱ
7Μακεδόνες. οἱ δὲ βάρβαροι ἰδόντες τὸ γιγνόμενον
λίθοις τε ξὺν βοῇ ἀπὸ τῶν τειχῶν καὶ τοξεύμασι
καὶ ἄλλῳ ὅτῳ τις μετὰ χεῖρας ἔχων ἐτύγχανεν ἢ
ὅτῳ τις ἐν τῷ τότε ἔλαβεν ἐξηκόντιζον ἐς τοὺς
Μακεδόνας· οἱ δὲ καὶ κατὰ θύρας, αἵτινες αὐτοῖς
κατὰ τὰ μεσοπύργια μικραὶ ἦσαν, ἐκθέοντες ἐκ
χειρὸς ἔπαιον τεταραγμένους.
27. Ἀλέξανδρος δὲ πέμπει Ἀλκέταν ξὺν τῇ
αὐτοῦ τάξει τούς τε κατατετρωμένους ἀναλαβεῖν
καὶ ὅσοι προσεμάχοντο ἐπανακαλέσασθαι ὡς ἐπὶ τὸ
στρατόπεδον. καὶ τῇ τετάρτῃ ὡσαύτως ἀπ᾿ ἄλλης
μηχανῆς ἄλλη ἐπιβάθρα αὐτῷ προσήγετο πρὸς τὸ
τεῖχος.
2Καὶ οἱ Ἰνδοί, ἕως μὲν αὐτοῖς ὁ ἡγεμὼν τοῦ
χωρίου περιῆν, ἀπεμάχοντο καρτερῶς· ὡς δὲ βέλει
ἀπὸ μηχανῆς τυπεὶς ἀποθνήσκει ἐκεῖνος, αὐτῶν τε
οἱ μέν τινες πεπτωκότες ἐν τῇ ξυνεχεῖ πολιορκίᾳ,
οἱ πολλοὶ δὲ τραυματίαι τε καὶ ἀπόμαχοι ἦσαν,
3ἐπεκηρυκεύοντο πρὸς Ἀλέξανδρον. τῷ δὲ ἀσμένῳ
γίνεται ἄνδρας ἀγαθοὺς διασῶσαι· καὶ ξυμβαίνει
ἐπὶ τῷδε Ἀλέξανδρος τοῖς μισθοφόροις Ἰνδοῖς ὡς
καταταχθέντας ἐς τὴν ἄλλην στρατιὰν ξὺν αὑτῷ
στρατεύεσθαι. οἱ μὲν δὴ ἐξῆλθον ξὺν τοῖς ὅπλοις,
καὶ κατεστρατοπέδευσαν κατὰ σφᾶς ἐπὶ γηλόφῳ,
ὃς ἦν ἀντίπορος τοῦ τῶν Μακεδόνων στρατοπέδου.
νυκτὸς δὲ ἐπενόουν δρασμῷ διαχρησάμενοι ἐς τὰ
σφέτερα ἤθη ἀπαναστῆναι οὐκ ἐθέλοντες ἐναντία
4αἴρεσθαι τοῖς ἄλλοις Ἰνδοῖς ὅπλα. καὶ ταῦτα ὡς
ἐξηγγέλθη Ἀλεξάνδρῳ, περιστήσας τῆς νυκτὸς τῷ
γηλόφῳ τὴν στρατιὰν πᾶσαν κατακόπτει τοὺς
430Anabasis Of Alexander IV

Tyre. Many were shoved forward in eagerness, the327–6 b.c. bridge received too great a weight and broke, and the Macedonians fell with it. Seeing what was happening,7 the barbarians shouted and volleyed stones on the Macedonians from the walls, and arrows and anything else anyone happened to have in his hands or could seize at the moment, while others ran out at the small gates in the curtain walls and struck at them in their confusion at close quarters.
27. Alexander sent Alcetas with his battalion to pick up the wounded and to recall to the camp all who were still offering resistance. On the fourth day another step-ladder was brought up to the wall in the same way by another engine.
The Indians resisted strongly as long as the commander2 of the place survived, but when he was hit by a missile from a catapult and killed, with part of their number already fallen in continuous siege and most of them wounded and unfit for service, they sent a herald to Alexander. He was glad to be able3 to save the lives of brave men, granted terms to the mercenary Indians on the basis that they should join the rest of his army and take the field with him. They came out with their arms, and encamped by themselves on a hill facing the Macedonian camp; however, they intended to slip away at night and escape to their own homes, as they had no wish to bear arms against the rest of the Indians. When4 this was reported to Alexander, he threw his whole force round the hill in the night, and cut down the
431