Arrian
5καὶ ἐδόκει τοῖς ἑταίροις μήτε πάλαι εὖ βεβουλεῦσθαι
τὸ κράτιστον τοῦ ἱππικοῦ ἀνδρὶ οὐ πιστῷ
ἐπιτρέψας, νῦν τε χρῆναι αὐτὸν κατὰ τάχος ἐκποδὼν
ποιεῖσθαι, πρὶν καὶ ἐπιτηδειότερον γενόμενον
6τοῖς Θετταλοῖς ξὺν αὐτοῖς τι νεωτερίσαι. καί τι
καὶ θεῖον ἐφόβει αὐτούς. ἔτι γὰρ πολιορκοῦντος
αὐτοῦ Ἀλεξάνδρου Ἁλικαρνασσὸν ἀναπαύεσθαι
μὲν ἐν μεσημβρίᾳ, χελιδόνα δὲ περιπέτεσθαι ὑπὲρ
τῆς κεφαλῆς τρύζουσαν μεγάλα καὶ τῆς εὐνῆς ἄλλῃ
καὶ ἄλλῃ ἐπικαθίζειν, θορυβωδέστερον ἢ κατὰ τὸ
7εἰωθὸς ᾄδουσαν· τὸν δὲ ὑπὸ καμάτου ἐγερθῆναι
μὲν ἀδυνάτως ἔχειν ἐκ τοῦ ὕπνου, ἐνοχλούμενον δὲ
πρὸς τῆς φωνῆς τῇ χειρὶ οὐ βαρέως ἀποσοβῆσαι
τὴν χελιδόνα· τὴν δὲ τοσούτου ἄρα δεῆσαι
ἀποφυγεῖν πληγεῖσαν, ὥστε ἐπὶ τῆς κεφαλῆς αὐτῆς
τοῦ Ἀλεξάνδρου καθημένην μὴ πρόσθεν ἀνεῖναι
8πρὶν παντελῶς ἐξεγερθῆναι Ἀλέξανδρον. καὶ
Ἀλέξανδρος οὐ φαῦλον ποιησάμενος τὸ τῆς
χελιδόνος ἀνεκοίνωσεν Ἀριστάνδρῳ τῷ Τελμισσεῖ,
μάντει· Ἀρίστανδρον δὲ ἐπιβουλὴν μὲν ἔκ του τῶν
φίλων σημαίνεσθαι αὐτῷ εἰπεῖν, σημαίνεσθαι δὲ
καί, ὅτι καταφανὴς ἔσται. τὴν γὰρ χελιδόνα
σύντροφόν τε εἶναι ὄρνιθα καὶ εὔνουν ἀνθρώποις καὶ
λάλον μᾶλλον ἢ ἄλλην ὄρνιθα.
9Ταῦτά τε οὖν καὶ τὰ ἀπὸ τοῦ Πέρσου ξυνθεὶς
πέμπει ὡς Παρμενίωνα Ἀμφοτερὸν τὸν Ἀλεξάνδρου
μὲν παῖδα, ἀδελφὸν δὲ Κρατεροῦ. καὶ
ξυμπέμπει αὐτῷ τῶν Περγαίων τινὰς τὴν ὁδὸν
ἡγησομένους. καὶ ὁ Ἀμφοτερὸς στολὴν ἐνδὺς
ἐπιχώριον, [καὶ] ὡς μὴ γνώριμος εἶναι κατὰ τὴν
10ὁδὸν, λανθάνει ἀφικόμενος παρὰ Παρμενίωνα· καὶ
γράμματα μὲν οὐ κομίζει παρὰ Ἀλεξάνδρου· οὐ
104Anabasis of Alexander I

about Alexander. The Companions held5 334–3 b.c. that he had originally acted unwisely in committing the best of the cavalry to an untrustworthy officer, and that he should now get rid of him as soon as possible, before he became more popular with the Thessalians and secured their help for a revolution. They were also troubled by an omen: while Alexander6 was still besieging Halicarnassus and was taking his midday rest, a swallow circled over his head chattering loudly, and perched here and there on his bed; its song was noisier than the usual swallow’s twittering. Alexander was too weary to7 awaken, but troubled by the sound, he gently brushed the swallow away; but the bird would not fly off when hit; rather it perched on Alexander’s very head and kept on till Alexander was fully awake. Alexander8 took the incident seriously and informed Aristander of Telmissus, a seer; he replied that it meant a plot on the part of one of his friends but also that the plot would come to light. For the swallow is a domestic bird, friendly to man, and more talkative than any other bird.
Putting this together with the Persian’s story, he9 sent Amphoterus son of Alexander, brother of Craterus, to Parmenio with some Pergaeans as guides. Amphoterus wore a native dress, so as not to be recognized on the journey, and so reached Parmenio safely. He brought no letter from King Alexander;10 it was thought unwise to write plainly in a matter
105