Arrian

Σκυθικῶν Τάναϊν, καὶ ῥέειν μὲν ἐκ λίμνης μεγάλης
ἀνίσχοντα, ἐκδιδόναι δὲ ἐς μείζω ἔτι λίμνην, τὴν
καλουμένην Μαιῶτιν· καὶ τὸν Τάναϊν τοῦτον εἰσὶν
9οἳ ὅρον ποιοῦσι τῆς Ἀσίας καὶ τῆς Εὐρώπης, οἷς
δὴ ἀπὸ τοῦ μυχοῦ τοῦ πόντου τοῦ Εὐξείνου ἡ λίμνη
τε ἡ Μαιῶτις καὶ ὁ ἐς ταύτην ἐξιεὶς ποταμὸς ὁ
Τάναϊς οὗτος διείργει τὴν Ἀσίαν καὶ τὴν Εὐρώπην,
καθάπερ ἡ κατὰ Γάδειρά τε καὶ τοὺς ἀντιπέρας
Γαδείρων Λίβυας τοὺς Νομάδας θάλασσα τὴν
Λιβύην αὖ καὶ τὴν Εὐρώπην διείργει, οἷς γε δὴ ἡ
Λιβύη ἀπὸ τῆς Ἀσίας τῆς ἄλλης τῷ Νείλῳ ποταμῷ
διακέκριται.
10Ἐνταῦθα ἀποσκεδασθέντες τινὲς τῶν Μακεδόνων
ἐς προνομὴν κατακόπτονται πρὸς τῶν
βαρβάρων· οἱ δὲ δράσαντες τὸ ἔργον ἀπέφυγον ἐς
ὄρος τραχύτατον καὶ πάντῃ ἀπότομον· ἦσαν δὲ τὸ
πλῆθος ἐς τρισμυρίους. καὶ ἐπὶ τούτους Ἀλέξανδρος
τοὺς κουφοτάτους τῆς στρατιᾶς ἀναλαβὼν
11ἦγεν. ἔνθα δὴ προσβολαὶ πολλαὶ ἐγίγνοντο τοῖς
Μακεδόσιν ἐς τὸ ὄρος· καὶ τὰ μὲν πρῶτα ἀπεκρούοντο
βαλλόμενοι ἐκ τῶν βαρβάρων, καὶ ἄλλοι
τε πολλοὶ τραυματίαι ἐγένοντο καὶ αὐτὸς Ἀλέξανδρος
ἐς τὴν κνήμην τοξεύεται διαμπὰξ καὶ τῆς
περόνης τι ἀποθραύεται αὐτῷ ἐκ τοῦ τοξεύματος.
ἀλλὰ καὶ ὣς ἔλαβέ τε τὸ χωρίον, καὶ τῶν βαρβάρων
οἱ μὲν αὐτοῦ κατεκόπησαν πρὸς τῶν Μακεδόνων,
πολλοὶ δὲ καὶ κατὰ τῶν πετρῶν ῥίψαντες σφᾶς
ἀπέθανον, ὥστε ἐκ τρισμυρίων οὐ πλείους ἀποσωθῆναι
ὀκτακισχιλίων.
332Anabasis of Alexander III

rivers, rising and flowing out of a great lake, 329 b.c. and running into a greater lake, called Maeotis [Sea of Azov], will be a different Tanais. Some make this Tanais the boundary between Asia and Europe; in9 their view, from the corner of the Euxine Sea Lake Maeotis and this river Tanais, which flows into it, separate Asia and Europe, just as the sea between Gadeira [Cadiz] and the nomad Libyans opposite separates Libya in turn from Europe; in their view Libya is divided from the rest of Asia by the river Nile.4
Here some of the Macedonians who had scattered10 for foraging were cut down by the barbarians. The authors of the deed took refuge in a very rugged and completely precipitous mountain; they numbered about thirty thousand. Alexander took his lightest troops and led them to attack the fugitives. Then11 the Macedonians attempted many assaults upon the mountain; at first they were driven back by volleys from the barbarians, and a great many were wounded; notably, Alexander himself was shot right through the leg with an arrow, and a part of his fibula-bone was broken. But even so he captured the position, and some of the barbarians were cut down there and then by the Macedonians, while many perished by throwing themselves down the rocks, so that out of thirty thousand not more than eight thousand saved their lives.5
4In antiquity the division between Asia and ‘Libya’ (Africa) was sometimes placed at the Suez isthmus (e.g. Herodotus ii 16 f.), sometimes at the Nile (e.g. Strabo ii 5, 26); before Herodotus Libya was often included in Asia, but those who regarded it as separate would treat Arrian as meaning that ‘Libya is parted from the rest that is Asia . . .’5With §6–11 cf. QC. vii 6, 1–10; App. VIII 12.333