Arrian

Κουριέως, τὰς δὲ ἄλλας ἐς τὸν αἰγιαλὸν ἐξωθοῦντες
ἔκοπτον.
3Ἀλέξανδρος δὲ ὡς ᾔσθετο τὸν ἔκπλουν τῶν
Τυρίων τριήρων, τὰς μὲν πολλὰς τῶν ξὺν αὐτῷ
νεῶν, ὅπως ἑκάστη πληρωθείη, ἐπὶ τῷ στόματι τοῦ
λιμένος ἀνακωχεύειν ἔταξεν, ὡς μὴ καὶ ἄλλαι
ἐκπλεύσειαν τῶν Τυρίων νῆες· αὐτὸς δὲ πεντήρεις
τε τὰς ξὺν αὐτῷ ἀναλαβὼν καὶ τῶν τριήρων ἐς
πέντε μάλιστα, ὅσαι ἔφθησαν αὐτῷ κατὰ τάχος
πληρωθεῖσαι, περιέπλει τὴν πόλιν ὡς ἐπὶ τοὺς
4ἐκπεπλευκότας τῶν Τυρίων. οἱ δὲ ἀπὸ τοῦ τείχους,
τόν τε ἐπίπλουν τῶν πολεμίων κατιδόντες καὶ
Ἀλέξανδρον αὐτὸν ἐπὶ τῶν νεῶν, βοῇ τε ἐπανάγειν
ἐνεκελεύοντο τοῖς ἐκ τῶν σφετέρων νεῶν καὶ ὡς
οὐκ ἐξακουστὸν ἦν ὑπὸ θορύβου ξυνεχομένων ἐν τῷ
ἔργῳ, σημείοις ἄλλοις καὶ ἄλλοις ἐπεκάλουν ἐς τὴν
ἀναχώρησιν. οἱ δὲ ὀψέ ποτε αἰσθόμενοι τὸν ἐπίπλουν
τῶν ἀμφ᾿ Ἀλέξανδρον ὑποστρέψαντες ἐς τὸν
5λιμένα ἔφευγον. καὶ ὀλίγαι μὲν τῶν νεῶν φθάνουσιν
ὑπεκφυγοῦσαι, ταῖς δὲ πλείοσιν ἐμβαλοῦσαι αἱ
ξὺν Ἀλεξάνδρῳ τὰς μὲν αὐτῶν ἄπλους ἐποίησαν,
πεντήρης δέ τις καὶ τετρήρης αὐτῶν ἐπ᾿ αὐτῷ τῷ
στόματι τοῦ λιμένος ἐλήφθησαν. φόνος δὲ τῶν
ἐπιβατῶν οὐ πολὺς ἐγένετο. ὡς γὰρ ᾔσθοντο
ἐχομένας τὰς ναῦς ἀπενήξαντο οὐ χαλεπῶς ἐς τὸν
λιμένα.
6Ὡς δὲ οὐδεμία ἔτι τοῖς Τυρίοις ἐκ τῶν νεῶν
ὠφέλεια ἦν, ἐπῆγον ἤδη οἱ Μακεδόνες τὰς μηχανὰς
τῷ τείχει αὐτῶν. κατὰ μὲν δὴ τὸ χῶμα προσαγόμεναι
διὰ ἰσχὺν τοῦ τείχους οὐδὲν ἤνυον ὅ τι καὶ
λόγου ἄξιον, οἱ δὲ κατὰ τὸ πρὸς Σιδῶνα τετραμμένον
τῆς πόλεως τῶν νεῶν τινας τῶν μηχανοφόρων
202Anabasis of Alexander II

were sunk and the rest driven ashore and broken 332 b.c.up.
But when Alexander observed the sally of the3 Tyrian triremes, while directing most of the ships with him to lie to at the harbour mouth as soon as each was manned, to prevent any other Tyrian ships sailing out, he took what quinqueremes he had and some five triremes, which had got their crews on board in all haste, and sailed round the city against the Tyrians who had sailed out. The Tyrians on the4 wall, seeing the enemy attack and Alexander himself aboard, shouted orders to the men on their own ships to put about, and as this did not reach the hearing, in the confusion, of men pre-occupied in the action, they used various signals to recall them, but it was too late when they noticed the attack of Alexander’s ships; they went about and made for refuge in the harbour; few of the ships managed to get to safety5 in time, most were rammed by Alexander’s ships, some put out of action, and a quinquereme and quadrireme captured at the very entrance of the harbour. There was no great slaughter of the crews; as soon as they saw that their ships were caught, they swam off without much difficulty into the harbour.
Now that the Tyrians could look for no help from6 their ships, the Macedonians began to bring up their engines against the wall.1 When moved up along the mole, they had no success worth mention, owing to the strength of the wall, while on the side of the city looking towards Sidon, where they brought up some

1Nothing in D. or QC. corresponds to § 6 f.203