Arrian

καὶ προσήψατο ἡ φλὸξ ἀπό τε τῶν στοῶν καὶ τοῦ
πύργου πολλὴ ἀπενεχθεῖσα καί τι καὶ τοῦ ἀνέμου
ταύτῃ ἐπιφέροντος· αὐτῶν δὲ οἱ μὲν ἐς τὴν ἄκραν
τὴν ἐν τῇ νήσῳ ἀπεχώρησαν, οἱ δὲ ἐς τὴν Σαλμακίδα,
4ἄκραν οὕτω καλουμένην. Ἀλεξάνδρῳ δὲ ὡς
ἐξηγγέλθη ταῦτα πρός τινων αὐτομολησάντων ἐκ
τοῦ ἔργου καὶ τὸ πῦρ πολὺ καθεώρα αὐτός, καίτοι
ἀμφὶ μέσας που νύκτας ἦν τὸ γιγνόμενον, ὁ δὲ καὶ
ὣς ἐξαγαγὼν τοὺς Μακεδόνας τοὺς μὲν ἔτι
ἐμπιπράντας τὴν πόλιν ἔκτεινεν, ὅσοι δὲ ἐν ταῖς
οἰκίαις καταλαμβάνοιντο τῶν Ἁλικαρνασσέων,
τούτους δὲ σώζειν παρήγγειλεν.
5Ἤδη τε ἠὼς ὑπέφαινε καὶ κατιδὼν τὰς ἄκρας, ἃς
οἵ τε Πέρσαι καὶ οἱ μισθοφόροι κατειλήφεσαν,
ταύτας μὲν ἀπέγνω πολιορκεῖν, τριβήν τε ἐπινοῶν
οὐκ ὀλίγην ἔσεσθαί οἱ ἀμφ᾿ αὐτὰς τῇ φύσει τῶν
χωρίων καὶ οὐ παρὰ μέγα εἶναι ἐξελόντι οἱ τὴν
6πόλιν ἤδη πᾶσαν. θάψας δὲ τοὺς ἀποθανόντας ἐν
τῇ νυκτὶ τὰς μὲν μηχανὰς ἐς Τράλλεις ἀπαγαγεῖν
ἐκέλευσε τοὺς ἐπ᾿ αὐταῖς τεταγμένους, αὐτὸς δὲ τὴν
πόλιν ἐς ἔδαφος κατασκάψας αὐτῆς τε ταύτης καὶ
τῆς ἄλλης Καρίας φυλακὴν ἐγκαταλιπὼν ξένους
μὲν πεζοὺς τρισχιλίους, ἱππέας δὲ ἐς διακοσίους
καὶ Πτολεμαῖον ἡγεμόνα αὐτῶν ἐπὶ Φρυγίας
7ἐστέλλετο. τῆς δὲ Καρίας ξυμπάσης σατραπεύειν
ἔταξεν Ἄδαν, θυγατέρα μὲν Ἑκατόμνω, γυναῖκα
δὲ Ἱδριέως, ὃς καὶ ἀδελφὸς αὐτῇ ὢν κατὰ νόμον
τῶν Καρῶν ξυνῴκει. καὶ ὁ μὲν Ἱδριεὺς τελευτῶν
ταύτῃ ἐπέτρεψε τὰ πράγματα, νενομισμένον ἐν



96Anabasis of Alexander I

the sheds and the tower, where the blaze was331 b.c. furious and wafted by the wind in this direction. They themselves retreated, some to the citadel on the island and others to the height called Salmacis.1 When this news was reported to Alexander by men4 who deserted in this action, and when he himself saw the fire spreading, though all this took place about midnight, none the less he brought out his Macedonians and put to the sword those who were still setting fire to the city; he gave orders that Halicarnassians found in their houses should be spared.
Dawn was breaking; and observing the heights5 which the Persians and the mercenaries had seized, he decided not to besiege them, considering that it would mean much delay for him round about the heights, owing to the nature of the ground, and no great advantage now he had captured the whole city. He buried those who had fallen during the night,6 ordered the troops placed in charge of the siege engines to remove them to Tralles, himself razed the city to the ground and, to guard it and the rest of Caria, left three thousand mercenary foot and two hundred horse under Ptolemaeus, while he set out for Phrygia.2 As satrap of all Caria he appointed Ada,7 daughter of Hecatomnos, wife of Hidrieus;3 though her brother, he had lived with her in accordance with Carian custom. On his death Hidrieus had handed over affairs to her; from Semiramis4 down, it had



1D. 27, 5 (most of the forces allegedly evacuated to Cos).2Cf. ii 5, 7: Ptolemaeus (Berve no. 674, not the historian) was made general in Caria, as Ada (§ 8), like other ‘native’ satraps Al. appointed, would only have had civil power. Al. proceeded towards Phrygia only by a very devious route.3D. 24, 2 f. puts this before the fall of Halicarnassus. The Carians, and their local dynasty, were partly Hellenized, cf. Tod 138, 155.4A legendary figure probably based on Sammuramat, queen regent of Assyria, 810–805 b.c.97