Appendices

on that city before he began to move east. It is characteristic that A. records that he took a day to reach Anchialus on the route to Soli, and seven days in subduing the highlanders to the north (ii 5, 2 and 6), yet gives no other indication of the passage of time except for the statement that he reached Myriandrus ‘on the second day’ prima facie from Mallus: one instance of the way in which only some of the bematists’ records get into his narrative; in fact it seems probable that the ‘second’ day is counted from a place between Mallus and Myriandrus (cf. ii 6, 2 n.). Perhaps the long delay and diversion to Soli can be explained: Al. may have hoped that Darius would put his army at risk in the Cilician hills and narrow plains; if so, he lost patience and began to advance into Syria at the very moment when his hope was fulfilled. A. provides no explanation and is not even conscious that there was anything to explain.
4. We find exactly the same phenomenon in the campaign of 331. Al. left Egypt at the very beginning of spring (iii 6, 1), presumably in March, but was not at Thapsacus on the Euphrates until some date between 10 July and 8 August (7, 1), and probably at the end of that period (infra), after pausing for an unspecified period at Tyre. QC. iv 9, 12 says that he reached the Euphrates’ in his eleventh camp’; this is another instance of (at best) unintelligent reportage from the bematists’ records, for it naturally suggests that he took 11 days from Tyre to the river, and this is impossible; some intermediate and unrecorded halt is implied. Now the site of Thapsacus is unknown (App. VII), but Eratosthenes said that it was 2,400 stades from the
490Appendices

point at which Al. crossed the Tigris (Strabo ii 1, 38), and wherever either of these places may be located, his estimate of about 440 km is not widely different from those which Marsden 22 gives for the distance between his Thapsacus or mine (App. VII) and any of the probable crossing places of the Tigris. To cover this distance A. needed not 13 days (QC. iv 9, 14), but about 4 weeks; once again, QC. has (at best) omitted some intermediate stage. In fact not less than 43 days elapsed between Al’s arrival at Thapsacus and the lunar eclipse of 20/21 September, which occurred after he had crossed the Tigris and rested his army (7, 6); no doubt several days were occupied in crossing each river, and Al. may himself have reached the Euphrates before most of his army had come up. Thus the time between 8 August and 20 September can readily be filled. But if Al. had marched without delay from the Nile to Thapsacus, he would have been there in June. The campaign in Samaria (QC. iv 8, 9–11) and the alleged inefficiency in making preparations (i.e. collecting supplies) on the part of the satrap of Syria (iii 6, 8) may be relevant, but once again he may have hoped that Darius would leave the broad plains of Mesopotamia and come to meet him in the hilly country of Syria. And once again, A. attempts no explanation of his strategical problems or plans.
5. P. 31, 4 makes the night preceding the battle of Gaugamela the eleventh after the eclipse; thus the battle occurred, if we reckon inclusively, on 1 October; this date is confirmed in his life of Camillus (19; cf. iii 15, 7 n.; Beloch, III, 2, 304 ff., 315), and there is no reason to reject it, especially as it agrees with the detailed time-table in A., given the assumption
491