Arrian
4. Αὐτὸς δὲ τῇ ὑστεραίᾳ ἐπ᾿ Ἀγκύρας τῆς
Γαλατικῆς ἐστέλλετο· κἀκεῖ αὐτῷ πρεσβεία
ἀφικνεῖται Παφλαγόνων, τό τε ἔθνος ἐνδιδόντων
καὶ ἐς ὁμολογίαν ξυμβαινόντων· ἐς δὲ τὴν χώραν
2ξὺν τῇ δυνάμει μὴ ἐσβαλεῖν ἐδέοντο. τούτοις μὲν
δὴ προστάσσει Ἀλέξανδρος ὑπακούειν Κάλᾳ τῷ
σατράπῃ τῷ Φρυγίας. αὐτὸς δὲ ἐπὶ Καππαδοκίας
ἐλάσας ξύμπασαν τὴν ἐντὸς Ἅλυος ποταμοῦ
προσηγάγετο καὶ ἔτι ὑπὲρ τὸν Ἅλυν πολλήν·
καταστήσας δὲ Καππαδοκῶν Σαβίκταν σατράπην
3αὐτὸς προῆγεν ἐπὶ τὰς πύλας τὰς Κιλικίας. καὶ
ἀφικόμενος ἐπὶ τὸ Κύρου τοῦ ξὺν Ξενοφῶντι
στρατόπεδον, ὡς κατεχομένας τὰς πύλας φυλακαῖς
ἰσχυραῖς εἶδε, Παρμενίωνα μὲν αὐτοῦ καταλείπει
σὺν ταῖς τάξεσι τῶν πεζῶν, ὅσοι βαρύτερον
ὡπλισμένοι ἦσαν. αὐτὸς δὲ ἀμφὶ πρώτην φυλακὴν
ἀναλαβὼν τούς τε ὑπασπιστὰς καὶ τοὺς τοξότας καὶ
τοὺς Ἀγριᾶνας προῆγε τῆς νυκτὸς ἐπὶ τὰς πύλας,
4ὡς οὐ προσδεχομένοις τοῖς φύλαξιν ἐπιπεσεῖν. καὶ
προσάγων μὲν οὐκ ἔλαθεν, ἐς ἴσον δὲ αὐτῷ κατέστη
ἡ τόλμα. οἱ γὰρ φύλακες αἰσθόμενοι Ἀλέξανδρον
αὐτὸν προσάγοντα λιπόντες τὴν φυλακὴν ᾤχοντο
φεύγοντες. τῇ δὲ ὑστεραίᾳ ἅμα τῇ ἕῳ ξὺν τῇ
δυνάμει πάσῃ ὑπερβαλὼν τὰς πύλας κατέβαινεν ἐς
5τὴν Κιλικίαν. καὶ ἐνταῦθα ἀγγέλλεται αὐτῷ Ἀρσάμης
ὅτι πρόσθεν μὲν ἐπενόει διασώζειν Πέρσαις
τὴν Ταρσόν, ὡς δὲ ὑπερβεβληκότα ἤδη τὰς πύλας
ἐπύθετο Ἀλέξανδρον ἐκλιπεῖν ἐν νῷ ἔχειν τὴν
πόλιν· δεδιέναι οὖν τοὺς Ταρσέας μὴ ἐφ᾿ ἁρπαγὴν
τραπεὶς οὕτω τὴν ἀπόλειψιν τῆς Ταρσοῦ ποιήσηται.
6ταῦτα ἀκούσας δρόμῳ ἦγεν ἐπὶ τὴν Ταρσὸν τούς τε
132Anabasis of Alexander II
4. Next day Alexander set out for Ancyra in 333 b.c.
Galatia; there a Paphlagonian embassy met him who offered their people’s submission and agreed to terms; they begged him not to enter their country in force. Alexander instructed them to take orders2 from Calas, satrap of Phrygia. He himself marched to Cappadocia, won over all the country this side of the river Halys and much beyond it. He made Sabictas satrap of Cappadocia and pushed on himself to the Cilician Gates.1 When he reached the camp3 of Cyrus, who had been with Xenophon, and saw that the Gates were strongly held, he left Parmenio there with the heavier-armed foot-battalions, while he himself, about the first watch, took the hypaspists, archers and Agrianians, and marched by night to the Gates, meaning to take the guards unawares. His march was detected, but his daring counted just4 as much in his favour; the guards, observing that he was leading in person, left their posts in flight. Next day at dawn he passed the Gates with his full force and descended into Cilicia. There it was5 reported to him that Arsames, who had previously planned to save Tarsus for the Persians, after learning that Alexander had already passed the Gates, was intending to abandon the city, and that the Tarsians were therefore afraid Arsames would resort to plunder before deserting it. Hearing this, Alexander led on6
1QC. iii 1, 22–4; 4,1 (with ‘Abistamenes’ for ‘Sabictas’); P. 18, 3; Introd. 53. Al. never entered Paphlagonia and would have traversed only a small part of Cappadocia on the direct route from Ancyra to the Cilician Gates; the Cappadocians had to be defeated by Antigonus in Phrygia after Issus (QC. iv 1, 34, cf. A. R. Burn, JHS 1952, 81 ff., an important event doubtless ignored in A’s main sources, because it was not part of Al’s own story), fought for Darius at Gaugamela (A. iii 11, 7), and were subdued only after Al’s death (D. xviii 3, 1; 16).133