Arrian

Σογδιανῶν καὶ ὅσοι ἄλλοι μετὰ Ἀμύντου ἐτάχθησαν,
προστάξας ἅπασιν ἀκούειν Κοίνου καὶ
διαχειμάζειν αὐτοῦ ἐν τῇ Σογδιανῇ, τῆς τε χώρας
ἕνεκα τῆς φυλακῆς καὶ εἴ πῃ ἄρα Σπιταμένην
περιφερόμενον κατὰ τὸν χειμῶνα ἐνεδρεύσαντας
ξυλλαβεῖν.
4Σπιταμένης δὲ καὶ οἱ ἀμφ᾿ αὐτὸν ὡς φρουραῖς
τε πάντα κατειλημμένα ἑώρων ἐκ τῶν Μακεδόνων
καί σφιν ἄπορα πάντῃ τὰ τῆς φυγῆς ἐγίγνετο, ὡς
ἐπὶ Κοῖνόν τε καὶ τὴν ξὺν τούτῳ στρατιὰν ἐτράποντο,
ὡς ταύτῃ μᾶλλόν τι ἀξιόμαχοι ἐσόμενοι.
ἀφικόμενοι δὲ ἐς Γαβάς, χωρίον τῆς Σογδιανῆς
ὀχυρὸν ἐν μεθορίῳ τῆς τε Σογδιανῶν γῆς καὶ τῆς
Μασσαγετῶν Σκυθῶν ᾠκισμένον, ἀναπείθουσιν οὐ
χαλεπῶς τῶν Σκυθῶν ἱππέας ἐς τρισχιλίους
5συνεμβάλλειν σφίσιν ἐς τὴν Σογδιανήν. οἱ δὲ
Σκύθαι οὗτοι ἀπορίᾳ τε πολλῇ ἔχονται καὶ ἅμα ὅτι
οὔτε πόλεις εἰσὶν αὐτοῖς οὔτε ἑδραῖοι οἰκοῦσιν, ὡς
δειμαίνειν ἂν περὶ τῶν φιλτάτων, οὐ χαλεποὶ
ἀναπεισθῆναί εἰσιν ἐς ἄλλον καὶ ἄλλον πόλεμον.
ὡς δὲ Κοῖνός τε καὶ οἱ ἀμφ᾿ αὐτὸν ἔμαθον προσιόντας
τοὺς ξὺν Σπιταμένει ἱππέας, ἀπήντων καὶ
6αὐτοὶ μετὰ τῆς στρατιᾶς. καὶ γίγνεται αὐτῶν
μάχη καρτερά, καὶ νικῶσιν οἱ Μακεδόνες, ὥστε
τῶν μὲν βαρβάρων ἱππέων ὑπὲρ τοὺς ὀκτακοσίους
πεσεῖν ἐν τῇ μάχῃ, τῶν δὲ ξὺν Κοίνῳ ἱππέας μὲν ἐς
εἴκοσι καὶ πέντε, πεζοὺς δὲ δώδεκα. οἵ τε οὖν
Σογδιανοὶ οἱ ἔτι ὑπολειπόμενοι ξὺν Σπιταμένει καὶ
τῶν Βακτρίων οἱ πολλοὶ ἀπολείπουσιν ἐν τῇ φυγῇ
Σπιταμένην καὶ ἀφικόμενοι παρὰ Κοῖνον παρέδοσαν
7σφᾶς αὐτοὺς Κοίνῳ, οἵ τε Μασσαγέται οἱ Σκύθαι
κακῶς πεπραγότες τὰ μὲν σκευοφόρα τῶν ξυμπαραταξαμένων
396Anabasis Of Alexander IV

the Bactrians and Sogdianians attached to Amyntas,328 b.c. commanding them all to take their orders from Coenus, and to winter there in Sogdiana, to protectWinter 328–7 b.c. the region and to try to ambush and capture Spitamenes, if he moved around anywhere in the winter.2
Spitamenes and his troops, seeing every place4 occupied by Macedonian garrisons and no means of escape anywhere for themselves, turned against Coenus and his troops, on the basis that they would be rather more equal to fighting there. On arriving at Gabae, a stronghold of Sogdiana, lying on the border of Sogdiana and the land of the Massagetaean Scythians, they easily induced about three thousand Scythian horsemen to join them in a raid on Sogdiana. These Scythians are in the grip of dire poverty, and,5 since they have no cities and no settled habitations, and hence no fear for their loved ones, they are easy to inveigle into one war after another. When Coenus and his colleagues learned that the cavalry with Spitamenes was approaching, they went to meet them with their troops. There was a fierce battle, which6 the Macedonians won, so that over eight hundred of the barbarian cavalry fell in the battle, but of Coenus’ troops only about twenty-five horsemen and twelve foot-soldiers. At this the Sogdianians still left with Spitamenes and the greater number of the Bactrians deserted Spitamenes in the flight, came to Coenus and surrendered to him. The Massagetaean Scythians7 after this disaster plundered the baggage

2In winter 329/8 b.c.Al. had almost evacuated Sogdiana and had then to reconquer it.397