Appendices

no sign that Al. himself had lost his trust in Parmenio, though he was now about 70 (QC. vi 11, 32; vii 2, 33), before Philotas’ ‘plot’ was denounced; his command in Media was important (App. XIII).
5. What A. (and QC.) say of the trial of Amyntas and his brothers tends to give the impression that Al. was more fair minded than the critical reader of ch. 26 might infer. Here too A. draws on Pt. and Ar. He says nothing of the execution of Alexander the Lyncestian after the semblance of a trial, but as our authorities for this event, D. (80, 2) and QC. (vii 1, 5–9, cf. viii 8, 6), betray no uneasiness about his guilt, this is more likely to be an omission by A. than a suppression by Pt. and Ar. of what they thought did Al. no credit. They had presumably told, as A. does (i 25), that Alexander (for whom cf. Introd. 46) had been arrested in winter 334/333 on the ground that Darius had made overtures to him through Sisines. (No words need be wasted here on the fantasy of Lane Fox ch. 10 that Ar. fr. 2 shows that Ar. had killed the man off at Thebes in 335.) Of course this was no better evidence against Alexander than that which Pt. held to be decisive against Philotas; it is not suggested that Alexander had even received, much less responded to Darius’ letter, though QC. viii 8, 6 may mean that he had; this was probably fiction to justify the king’s conduct to the incredulous. D. 32, 1 f. indeed makes out that the Lyncestian was only arrested in 332 in Cilicia on a warning from Olympias; and the same date is implied by QC’s statements that he was kept in bonds for 3 years before trial; on the other hand, QC. evidently mentioned the arrest in one of his first two books (vii 1, 6) before he had brought Al. to Cilicia. Perhaps
520Appendices

he combined two versions, as Berve later did in supposing that the Lyncestian was deposed in 334/333 and arrested only in Cilicia; QC’s two informers against him would then be Sisines (whom he places in a different story in iii 7, 11 f.) and Olympias. Berve argued that Al. would not have arrested the man and still employed his nephew, Amyntas son of Arrhabaeus, in a high command (i 28, 4); he explains Amyntas’ later disappearance from the record by his connection with the Lyncestian. But the identification of Amyntas’ father with the Arrhabaeus
Al. had put to death in 336 is unattested and implausible; would Al. have ever trusted the son of one he had done to death? And would he have continued to trust him after deposing, but not after arresting, his uncle? Berve’s view involves rejection of A. i 25,10, presumably of Pt. Lane Fox does not hesitate to say that Pt’s story in i 25 is fabrication. But Pt. surely had a reason when he concealed or distorted the truth, and here none can be seen. The arrest of the Lyncestian on evidence Olympias supplied would have been easier to justify than the imputation of guilt from Darius’ letter to him. I do not doubt that to Al. and his friends the Lyncestian had always seemed ‘unreliable’ (i 25, 5), to be removed at the first chance. Anything could be believed against a man with good cause for treason. So too his final execution required neither concealment nor apology.
6. See further the important article of E. Badian, Transactions of the American Philological Association 1960, 324 ff.
521