Arrian

αὐτοῖς ἀνδράσιν ἔλαβε, Δατάμης δὲ μετὰ δυοῖν
τριήροιν ἐν τῇ πρώτῃ προσμίξει τῶν ἅμα Πρωτέᾳ
νεῶν ὑπεκφυγὼν ἀπεσώθη πρὸς τὸ ἄλλο ναυτικόν.
3. Ἀλέξανδρος δὲ ὡς ἐς Γόρδιον παρῆλθε, πόθος
λαμβάνει αὐτὸν ἀνελθόντα ἐς τὴν ἄκραν, ἵνα καὶ τὰ
βασίλεια ἦν τὰ Γορδίου καὶ τοῦ παιδὸς αὐτοῦ
Μίδου, τὴν ἅμαξαν ἰδεῖν τὴν Γορδίου καὶ τοῦ ζυγοῦ
2τῆς ἁμάξης τὸν δεσμόν. λόγος δὲ περὶ τῆς ἁμάξης
ἐκείνης παρὰ τοῖς προσχώροις πολὺς κατεῖχε,
Γόρδιον εἶναι τῶν πάλαι Φρυγῶν ἄνδρα πένητα καὶ
ὀλίγην εἶναι αὐτῷ γῆν ἐργάζεσθαι καὶ ζεύγη βοῶν
δύο· καὶ τῷ μὲν ἀροτριᾶν, τῷ δὲ ἁμαξεύειν τὸν
3Γόρδιον. καί ποτε ἀροῦντος αὐτοῦ ἐπιστῆναι ἐπὶ
τὸν ζυγὸν ἀετὸν καὶ ἐπιμεῖναι ἔστε ἐπὶ βουλυτὸν
καθήμενον· τὸν δὲ ἐκπλαγέντα τῇ ὄψει ἰέναι
κοινώσοντα ὑπὲρ τοῦ θείου παρὰ τοὺς Τελμισσέας
τοὺς μάντεις· εἶναι γὰρ τοὺς Τελμισσέας σοφοὺς τὰ
θεῖα ἐξηγεῖσθαι καί σφισιν ἀπὸ γένους δεδόσθαι
αὐτοῖς καὶ γυναιξὶν καὶ παισὶ τὴν μαντείαν.
4προσάγοντα δὲ κώμῃ τινὶ τῶν Τελμισσέων ἐντυχεῖν
παρθένῳ ὑδρευομένῃ καὶ πρὸς ταύτην εἰπεῖν ὅπως
οἱ τὸ τοῦ ἀετοῦ ἔσχε· τὴν δέ, εἶναι γὰρ καὶ αὐτὴν
τοῦ μαντικοῦ γένους, θύειν κελεῦσαι τῷ Διὶ τῷ
βασιλεῖ, ἐπανελθόντα ἐς τὸν τόπον αὐτόν. καὶ,
δεηθῆναι γὰρ αὐτῆς Γόρδιον τὴν θυσίαν ξυνεπισπομένην
οἱ αὐτὴν ἐξηγήσασθαι, θῦσαί τε ὅπως ἐκείνη
ὑπετίθετο τὸν Γόρδιον καὶ ξυγγενέσθαι ἐπὶ γάμῳ
τῇ παιδὶ καὶ γενέσθαι αὐτοῖν παῖδα Μίδαν ὄνομα.
5ἤδη τε ἄνδρα εἶναι τὸν Μίδαν καλὸν καὶ γενναῖον
καὶ ἐν τούτῳ στάσει πιέζεσθαι ἐν σφίσι τοὺς
Φρύγας, καὶ γενέσθαι αὐτοῖς χρησμὸν, ὅτι ἅμαξα
ἄξει αὐτοῖς βασιλέα καὶ ὅτι οὗτος αὐτοῖς καταπαύσει
128Anabasis of Alexander II

captured eight ships with their crews; Datames with333 b.c.
two triremes escaped in the first encounter with Proteas’ ships and safely joined the rest of the fleet.
3. When Alexander reached Gordium, he was seized with a longing1 to ascend to the acropolis, where the palace of Gordius and his son Midas was situated, and to see Gordius’ waggon and the knot of the waggon’s yoke. There was a widespread local2 tradition2 about that waggon; Gordius, they said, was a poor man among the old Phrygians, who tilled a small amount of land with two yoke of oxen, one for the plough and one to drive his waggon. Once,3
as he was ploughing, an eagle settled on the yoke and stayed sitting there, till it was time to loose the oxen; Gordius was astonished at the sight, and went off to consult the Telmissian prophets about the prodigy; for they were skilled in the interpretation of prodigies, inheriting, women and children too, the prophetic gift. Approaching a Telmissian village,4 he met a girl drawing water and told her his story of the eagle; she too was of the prophetic line, and told him to return to the exact spot and sacrifice to Zeus the King. So then Gordius begged her to come along with him and prescribe the sacrifice; he sacrificed as she directed, and married the girl; they had a son called Midas. Midas was already a grown5 man, handsome and noble, when the Phrygians were in trouble among themselves with civil strife; they received an oracle that a waggon would bring them a


1Appendix V 3.2This tale is not from the ‘Vulgate’, but was recounted by at least one of A’s main sources.129