Appendices

founded in Areia, lay on or near the site of the modern Herat. It therefore follows that he did not mean to go by the oasis of Merv, surrounded by deserts; this was a place he never visited, though a city was founded there by his orders (Tarn ii 234). He must have joined the modern (and ancient) highroad from Teheran (Rhagae) via Meshed to Herat. Meshed is 840 km beyond the Caspian Gates and 709 from Astrabad by modern roads, but further from Sari (Strabo reckons roughly 6,000 stades from the Caspian sea to Areia (xi 8, 1; 10, 1) against 6,490 from the Gates to Alexandria in Areia). Hereabouts in a fertile oasis we should expect Al. to pause, and in fact he ‘re-assembled’ his force at Susia (25, 1–4), surely the modern Tus near Meshed, and once the centre of that area. From Meshed to Herat is another 390 km by the modern road. QC. vi 6, 19 says that he marched fast because of shortage of supplies. A. (25, 6) suggests that he would never have visited Herat but for Satibarzanes’ revolt, but this is implausible: Herat with 200,000 cultivated acres has been called ‘a green island in a lifeless sea’, and Al. would have had little choice but to pause here again for rest and supplies, before proceeding on what Strabo (xv 2, 8) calls the most direct route to Bactra (Balkh or Wazirabad), skirting the north side of the Hindu-Kush by Maimana and Mezar-i-Sharif for about 600 km (Foucher I 10 f.). Satibarzanes’ revolt induced him to take Strabo’s more circuitous southern route (below), 1,138 km by the modern road to Kabul with the Hindu-Kush still to cross. No doubt he wished to complete the subjugation of Areia, though the time-table forbids us to accept D’s statement that he spent 30 days doing so (78, 4)—perhaps that was the time the
498Appendices

march to the border of Areia occupied—just as he cannot have taken 60 days to settle Ariaspian affairs (QC. vii 3, 3)—perhaps the time of his march as far as the border of Arachosia. But other considerations may have made him change his original plan. He can hardly have arrived at Herat before late September, nor left until early October. The northern road is harder than the southern, and the climate more severe. It would have been rash to enter a hostile country with no guarantee of supplies and winter coming on, far from any secure base such as Al. had for other winter operations.
12. His march (we are told) lay through the lands of the Zarangaeans (or Drangaeans), Ariaspians, Arachotians and Parapamisadae (A. iii 25–8; Strabo xv 2, 10). In the first of these he rested (for 9 days, according to QC. vi 6, 36) at the ancient capital of Phra or Phrada, where a city was founded by his directions under the name of Prophthasia in memory of the detection there of Philotas’ plot. Two cities, Alexandria and Alexandropolis, also commemorated him in Arachosia. His historians do not mention these foundations, and he certainly had no time to attend to them personally in autumn 330; like Alexandria-Merv and even Alexandria in Areia, they were doubtless founded later by his orders. (Droysen, iii2 193 ff. remains the clearest account, with evidence, for Al’s colonies.) Strabo (xi 8, 9) and Pliny (vi 61), both apparently following the Stathmoi, give distances between Alexandria in Areia, Prophthasia, ‘the Arachotian town’ and Ortospana near the modern Kabul. The modern road, which must always have been in use, since it is fairly easy, takes 1,138 km from Herat to Kabul via Farah (270), Girishk,
499