Arrian

ὅπως εἴκαζεν· οἱ μὲν γὰρ πολλοὶ αὐτῶν ἀπῆλθον,
8αἱ φυλακαὶ δὲ ἐγκατέμειναν. καὶ ἐπὶ τούτους
εὐθὺς ἀναλαβὼν τούς τε τοξότας καὶ τὰς τῶν
ἀκοντιστῶν τάξεις καὶ τῶν ὁπλιτῶν ὅσοι κουφότεροι
ἐπήγαγεν. οἱ δὲ οὐκ ἔμειναν βαλλόμενοι,
ἀλλὰ ἔλιπον τὸ χωρίον· καὶ Ἀλέξανδρος ὑπερβαλὼν
τὰ στενὰ πρὸς τῇ πόλει κατεστρατοπέδευσε.
28. Καὶ ἐνταῦθα ἀφικνοῦνται παρ᾿ αὐτὸν Σελγέων
πρέσβεις. οἱ δέ εἰσι καὶ αὐτοὶ Πισίδαι
βάρβαροι καὶ πόλιν μεγάλην οἰκοῦσιν καὶ αὐτοὶ
μάχιμοί εἰσιν· ὅτι δὲ πολέμιοι τοῖς Τελμισσεῦσιν
ἐκ παλαιοῦ ἐτύγχανον, ὑπὲρ φιλίας πρὸς Ἀλέξανδρον
πεπρεσβευμένοι ἦσαν. καὶ πρὸς τούτους
σπένδεται Ἀλέξανδρος, καὶ ἐκ τούτου πιστοῖς ἐς
2ἅπαντα ἐχρήσατο. τὴν Τελμισσὸν δὲ ἀπέγνω
ἑλεῖν ἂν ἐν ὀλίγῳ χρόνῳ, ἀλλ᾿ ἐπὶ Σαγαλασσοῦ
ἐστέλλετο. ἦν δὲ καὶ αὕτη οὐ μικρὰ πόλις·
Πισίδαι καὶ ταύτην ᾤκουν, καὶ ἐδόκουν πάντων
Πισιδῶν μαχίμων ὄντων αὐτοὶ εἶναι [οἱ] μαχιμώτατοι·
καὶ τότε τὸν λόφον τὸν πρὸ τῆς πόλεως, ὅτι
καὶ οὗτος οὐ μεῖον τοῦ τείχους ὀχυρὸς ἐς τὸ
3ἀπομάχεσθαι ἦν, κατειληφότες προσέμενον. Ἀλέξανδρος
δὲ τὴν μὲν φάλαγγα τῶν Μακεδόνων
τάττει ὧδε· ἐπὶ μὲν τοῦ δεξιοῦ κέρως, ἵνα καὶ
αὐτὸς ἐπετέτακτο, τοὺς ὑπασπιστὰς εἶχεν, ἐχομένους
δὲ τούτων τοὺς πεζεταίρους ἔστε ἐπὶ τὸ
εὐώνυμον παρατείνας, ὡς ἑκάστοις τῶν στρατηγῶν
4ἡ ἡγεμονία τῆς τάξεως ἐν τῇ τότε ἡμέρᾳ ἦν. ἐπὶ
δὲ τῷ εὐωνύμῳ ἐπέταξεν ἡγεμόνα Ἀμύνταν τὸν
Ἀρραβαίου. προετάχθησαν δὲ αὐτῷ τοῦ μὲν
δεξιοῦ κέρως οἵ τε τοξόται καὶ οἱ Ἀγριᾶνες, τοῦ δὲ
εὐωνύμου οἱ ἀκοντισταὶ οἱ Θρᾷκες, ὧν ἡγεῖτο
112Anabasis of Alexander I

His guess proved right; most of them left, the334–3 b.c. guards remained. At once he took the archers, the8 javelin battalions, and the lighter armed hoplites and led them against the guards, who did not stand firm at the volleys but left their position. Alexander passed the narrows and encamped near the city.
28. At this point arrived envoys from the Selgians, who are also barbarian Pisidians with a large city, a warlike people; they were old enemies of the Telmissians and that is why they had sent an embassy to Alexander to ask for his friendship. Alexander made a treaty with them, and thereafter found them wholly trustworthy allies. He concluded that the2 capture of Telmissus would be a long business, and moved on to Sagalassus, also a large city, inhabited by Pisidians who were thought to be the most warlike of this warlike people; on this occasion they had occupied the hill in front of the city which was as strong for defensive operations as the wall itself, and held their ground. Alexander deployed the3 Macedonian phalanx as follows: on the right wing, where he had stationed himself, he had the hypaspists, and next to them the foot-companions, extended to the left wing, each battalion under the commanders in the order of precedence for the day. On the left4 he placed Amyntas son of Arrabaeus in command. In front of the right wing were posted the archers and the Agrianians, of the left the Thracian javelin-men
113