Arrian

ἤδη οἱ σὺν Ἀλεξάνδρῳ τῇ τε ἄλλῃ ῥώμῃ
καὶ ἐμπειρίᾳ καὶ ὅτι ξυστοῖς κρανεΐνοις πρὸς παλτὰ
ἐμάχοντο.
6Ἔνθα δὴ καὶ Ἀλεξάνδρῳ ξυντρίβεται τὸ δόρυ ἐν
τῇ μάχῃ· ὁ δὲ Ἀρέτην ᾔτει δόρυ ἕτερον, ἀναβολέα
τῶν βασιλικῶν· τῷ δὲ καὶ αὐτῷ πονουμένῳ
συντετριμμένον τὸ δόρυ ἦν, ὁ δὲ τῷ ἡμίσει κεκλασμένου
τοῦ δόρατος οὐκ ἀφανῶς ἐμάχετο, καὶ τοῦτο
δείξας Ἀλεξάνδρῳ ἄλλον αἰτεῖν ἐκέλευεν· Δημάρατος
δέ, ἀνὴρ Κορίνθιος, τῶν ἀμφ᾿ αὐτὸν ἑταίρων,
7δίδωσιν αὐτῷ τὸ αὑτοῦ δόρυ. καὶ ὃς ἀναλαβὼν καὶ
ἰδὼν Μιθριδάτην τὸν Δαρείου γαμβρὸν πολὺ πρὸ
τῶν ἄλλων προϊππεύοντα καὶ ἐπάγοντα ἅμα οἷ
ὥσπερ ἔμβολον τῶν ἱππέων ἐξελαύνει καὶ αὐτὸς
πρὸ τῶν ἄλλων, καὶ παίσας ἐς τὸ πρόσωπον τῷ
δόρατι καταβάλλει τὸν Μιθριδάτην. ἐν δὲ τούτῳ
Ῥοισάκης μὲν ἐπελαύνει τῷ Ἀλεξάνδρῳ καὶ παίει
8Ἀλεξάνδρου τὴν κεφαλὴν τῇ κοπίδι· καὶ τοῦ μὲν
κράνους τι ἀπέθραυσε, τὴν πληγὴν δὲ ἔσχε τὸ
κράνος. καὶ καταβάλλει καὶ τοῦτον Ἀλέξανδρος
παίσας τῷ ξυστῷ διὰ τοῦ θώρακος ἐς τὸ στέρνον.
Σπιθριδάτης δὲ ἀνετέτατο μὲν ἤδη ἐπ᾿ Ἀλέξανδρον
ὄπισθεν τὴν κοπίδα, ὑποφθάσας δὲ αὐτὸν Κλεῖτος ὁ
Δρωπίδου παίει κατὰ τοῦ ὤμου καὶ ἀποκόπτει τὸν
ὦμον τοῦ Σπιθριδάτου ξὺν τῇ κοπίδι· καὶ ἐν τούτῳ
ἐπεκβαίνοντες ἀεὶ τῶν ἱππέων ὅσοις προὐχώρει
κατὰ τὸν ποταμὸν προσεγίγνοντο τοῖς ἀμφ᾿
Ἀλέξανδρον.
16. Καὶ οἱ Πέρσαι παιόμενοί τε πανταχόθεν ἤδη
ἐς τὰ πρόσωπα αὐτοί τε καὶ ἵπποι τοῖς ξυστοῖς καὶ
πρὸς τῶν ἱππέων ἐξωθούμενοι, πολλὰ δὲ καὶ πρὸς
τῶν ψιλῶν ἀναμεμιγμένων τοῖς ἱππεῦσι βλαπτόμενοι
64Anabasis of Alexander I

Already, however, Alexander’s men were getting the5 334 b.c. best of it, not only through their strength and experience 
but because they were fighting with cornel-wood lances against short javelins.
At this point in the mêlée Alexander’s lance was6 broken in the battle; he called on Aretas, a groom of the royal suite, for another, but Aretas had also snapped his lance, and was hard pressed, though putting up a brave fight with the half of his broken weapon. Showing this to Alexander, he told him to call on someone else. Demaratus of Corinth, one of his Companions, gave him his own lance. Alexander7 grasped it and seeing Mithridates, son-in-law of Dareius, riding far ahead of the line and leading on a wedge shaped body of Lorse, charged out alone in advance of his own men, thrust his lance into Mithridates’ face and hurled him to the ground. Then Rhoesaces rode at Alexander, and struck him on the head with his scimitar; though he sheared8 off part of the helmet, still the helmet parried the blow. Alexander hurled him too to the ground, piercing with his lance through the cuirass into his chest. Spithridates had already raised his scimitar against Alexander from behind when Clitus son of Dropides, slipping in first, struck Spithridates’ shoulder with his scimitar and cut it off. Meanwhile cavalry who made good their way down stream kept coming up and joining the band round Alexander.1
16. The Persians were now being roughly handled from all quarters; they and their horses were struck in the face with lances, they were being pushed back by the cavalry, and were suffering heavily from

1D’s parallel account (ch. 20) has some differences in names and other details. On weapons used see Introd. 63f.65