Arrian

ἄνευ σοφίσματος χρῆναι νικῆσαι Ἀλέξανδρον.
καὶ τὸ μεγαλήγορον αὐτοῦ τοῦτο οὐχ ὑπέρογκον
μᾶλλόν τι ἢ εὐθαρσὲς ἐν τοῖς κινδύνοις ἐφαίνετο·
δοκεῖν δ᾿ ἔμοιγε, καὶ λογισμῷ ἀκριβεῖ ἐχρήσατο ἐν
3τῷ τοιῷδε· ἐν νυκτὶ γὰρ τοῖς τε ἀποχρώντως καὶ
τοῖς ἐνδεῶς πρὸς τὰς μάχας παρεσκευασμένοις
πολλὰ ἐκ τοῦ παραλόγου ξυμβάντα τοὺς μὲν
ἔσφηλε, τοὺς κρείσσονας, τοῖς χείροσι δὲ παρὰ τὰ
ἐξ ἀμφοῖν ἐλπισθέντα τὴν νίκην παρέδωκεν.
αὐτῷ τε κινδυνεύοντι τὸ πολὺ ἐν ταῖς μάχαις
σφαλερὰ ἡ νὺξ κατεφαίνετο, καὶ ἅμα ἡσσηθέντι τε
αὖθις Δαρείῳ τὴν ξυγχώρησιν τοῦ χείρονι ὄντι
χειρόνων ἡγεῖσθαι ἡ λαθραία τε καὶ νυκτερινὴ ἐκ
4σφῶν ἐπίθεσις ἀφῃρεῖτο, εἴ τέ τι ἐκ τοῦ παραλόγου
πταῖσμα σφίσι ξυμπέσοι, τοῖς μὲν πολεμίοις τὰ
κύκλῳ φίλια καὶ αὐτοὶ τῆς χώρας ἔμπειροι, σφεῖς
δὲ ἄπειροι ἐν πολεμίοις τοῖς πᾶσιν, ὧν οὐ μικρὰ
μοῖρα οἱ αἰχμάλωτοι ἦσαν, ξυνεπιθησόμενοι ἐν
νυκτὶ μὴ ὅτι πταίσασιν, ἀλλὰ καὶ εἰ μὴ παρὰ πολὺ
νικῶντες φαίνοιντο. τούτων τε τῶν λογισμῶν
ἕνεκα ἐπαινῶ Ἀλέξανδρον καὶ τοῦ ἐς τὸ φανερὸν
ὑπερόγκου οὐ μεῖον.
11. Δαρεῖος δὲ καὶ ὁ ξὺν Δαρείῳ στρατὸς οὕτως
ὅπως τὴν ἀρχὴν ἐτάξαντο ἔμειναν τῆς νυκτὸς
ξυντεταγμένοι, ὅτι οὔτε στρατόπεδον αὐτοῖς περιεβέβλητο
ἀκριβὲς καὶ ἅμα ἐφοβοῦντο μή σφισι
2νύκτωρ ἐπιθοῖντο οἱ πολέμιοι. καὶ εἴπερ τι ἄλλο,
καὶ τοῦτο ἐκάκωσε τοῖς Πέρσαις ἐν τῷ τότε τὰ
πράγματα, ἡ στάσις ἡ πολλὴ ἡ ξὺν τοῖς ὅπλοις καὶ
τὸ δέος, ὅ τι περ φιλεῖ πρὸ τῶν μεγάλων κινδύνων
γίγνεσθαι, οὐκ ἐκ τοῦ παραυτίκα σχεδιασθέν, ἀλλ᾿
254Anabasis of Alexander III

and that Alexander had to win his victory openly 331 b.c. and without stratagem.2 This grandiloquence looked like confidence in danger rather than arrogance,3 but in my own view he made a careful calculation on some such principle as this: at night, whether forces are3 adequately or deficiently prepared for battle, things have so often turned out contrary to rational expectation that the stronger side has been foiled and victory gone to the weaker, contrary to the expectations of both. Though Alexander commonly ran risks in battle, the hazards of the night were manifest to him; moreover, if Darius were again defeated, the fact that their attack had been covert and nocturnal would prevent him conceding his inferiority and that of the troops he commanded, but if his own Macedonian4 forces were to incur any incalculable reverse, all the country round was friendly to the enemy and familiar to them, while his own men had no knowledge of it, and enemies in everyone, no small part of whom were the prisoners of war, and these would join in attack by night, if the Macedonians should not be clearly and decisively victorious, let alone if they were to fail. These considerations, not less than the arrogance he paraded, lead me to commend Alexander.
11. Darius and his army remained during the night marshalled in their original order; for they had no proper camp surrounding them, and they also feared that the enemy would make a night attack. It did2 more harm than anything else to the Persian cause at this crisis, that they stood so long under arms and that the fear, which usually precedes great dangers,


2So too QC. and P.3A. probably means that the reply seemed arrogant, yet really snowed confidence, and in his own view prudence; his comments were not original, cf. P. 31, 7 f.255