Appendices
3. All our authorities except J., whose account is totally vague, agree that Darius placed himself in Al’s rear. A. tells that at Tarsus, before marching west to Soli, Al. sent Parmenio east to seize the ‘Gates’ dividing Cilicia from Syria (ii 5, 1). These comprise (a) a sandy defile between mount Amanus and the sea, through which runs the river Merkes Su; (b) the Jonah Pass, immediately to the south, a path zigzagging up an outrunner of Amanus; (c) the Beilan Pass a few kilometres south-east. QC. iii 7, 6 f. suggests that Parmenio got no further than Issus, through the Kara Kapu coastal pass between Mallus and Issus, on the route to the Syrian Gates, but this may not be true. It was after Al. had himself returned to Tarsus and moved east to Mallus that he heard from Parmenio that Darius was at Sochi (unidentified), two days march from the Syrian Gates, and evidently in the wide plain of the Melas or Kara Su (6, 1 cf. 6, 3); he then marched from Mallus, whose precise site on the Pyramus is not established, to Myriandros, which must have been south of the Jonah Pass near Alexandretta, since he had to descend on his return march to the Merkes Su plain (cf. 8, 2). These places can hardly have been less than about 105 km apart. A. seems to say that he covered this distance in two days, only to return and fight Darius, after a further march of 18.5 km according to C., but more probably of 31 km. Fuller (156) reports that a French corps in 1797 marched 72 miles and fought a battle in 48 hours, but this was in the north Italian plain, not in rough Cilician terrain. I doubt if Al. had any need to exhaust his men in this way, and suspect that as in other cases (App. VIII 3) an intermediate stage has been omitted; probably he paused at Issus, where
458Appendices

the sick were left, and reached Myriandrus on the second day thereafter. Meanwhile Darius had marched via the Arslan Boghaz through the Toprak Kalessi pass over the interior of Amanus (the Amanian Gates of 7, 1) and encamped just north of the mouth of the Pinarus; this must have taken rather over a week. Janke identified the Pinarus with the Deli Chai; Lane Fox revives the view that it was the Pay as further south. This fits C’s statement that Al. at Myriandrus was 100 stades away, i.e. about 18.5 km (the Deli Chai is 31 km from Alexandretta); moreover, C. gave the breadth of the Pinarus plain where the battle was to be fought as 14 stades, i.e. 2∙59 km, whereas that of the Deli Chai is 6∙7 km; the plain of the Payas, 4∙4 km wide, is at least nearer to his estimate. However, the banks of the Payas are too steep to fit the course of the battle, and the deployment of Al’s army, as described by C., could only have taken place between the Payas and the Deli Chai. Again, although A. (8, 1) supposed that Al’s ‘whole army’ had reached Myriandrus, it may well be that much of it was really still north of the Jonah Pass at the time when he turned to meet Darius, and this may account for C’s figure of 100 stades, while his estimate of the breadth of the battle plain is on any view too low. Janke’s judgement should be accepted.
4. Thus, starting at nightfall from Myriandros, when he had heard of Darius’ presence behind him, i.e. about 6.30 p.m., Al. had to cover 31 km before the battle; he rested his men on the heights north of the Merkes-Su plain; the battle cannot have begun till the afternoon. Polybius criticizes C’s account of the evolutions of both armies, on the ground that
459