Appendices

vii 1, 1; 2, 2; 16, 2; in Ind. 20, 1, Nearchus paraphrases
it (20, 2) as ‘a desire (epithymia) to do something
always new and extraordinary’; for epithymia cf. also v 25, 2. (The use of pothos and its related verb in invented speeches in v 26, 1 and 27, 6 cannot be regarded as of much significance.) The ‘ingens cupido’ in QC. iv 7, 8 (cf. iv 8, 3; vii 11, 4) probably represents pothos; in ix 2, 2 he writes: ‘vicit cupido rationem’. Ehrenberg (Al. and the Greeks ch. II) conjectured that Al. himself used to speak of his pothos and that this illustrates an irrational part of his character which led him to undertake extraordinary enterprises. K. Kraft, Der ‘rationale’ Alexander, ch. IV treats it in each case as either representing a desire that was per se reasonable for a general and statesman, or more often as referring to a natural curiosity, which still did not interfere with his political and military objectives; apart from the remarks of Nearchus, which he does not discuss, the texts fit this interpretation well enough, and better than the most high-flown interpretations which he contests. On this occasion it was reasonable enough for Al. to wish to consult an oracle reputed infallible, given that he had no need to leave Egypt for the Euphrates till the spring. As Kraft observes, he seems to have abandoned as untimely his desire to see Upper Egypt and Ethiopia (QC iv 8, 3).
4. As to the journey, all accounts broadly agree and, miracles apart, are credible. Whether or not present in person, C., Pt. and Ar. could all have come by reliable reports. But once Al. reaches the shrine, C. disagrees with the vulgate, though not with A., who provides virtually no explicit information at all. (a) In the ‘vulgate’ (D. 51; QC. iv 7, 25; P. 27, 3;
470Appendices

J. xi 11, 7) Al. is first greeted by the priest as son of ‘God ’ or ‘Zeus’; P. 27, 5 also reports a tale that his words ‘O paidion’ (‘My son’) were misheard as ‘O pai Dios’ (‘Son of Zeus’). In answer to his enquiries he was then told (all versions in varying order) that (b) he had punished all the assassins of Philip (Introd. § 46), though Philip was not his father, and (c) that he would rule the whole world, as an unconquerable god; J. alone adds that his companions were bidden by the oracle to honour him as a god. It is clear that C. cannot have had (c); the oracle from Branchidae, which he did report, would have been an anti-climax, if Ammon had already predicted world-rule. This being so, it is imprudent to use the vulgate to establish what C. said or meant, even though the details given by D. and QC. of the oracular procedure amplify Strabo’s allusion to the god’s ‘nods and signs’ and may also derive from C. (The details accord with the known ritual in Egyptian oracles, cf. Lane Fox 208 f.; 523 f.) It is generally held that C, like the vulgate, told that Al. was greeted as son of Zeus by the priest, and not that the sonship was revealed in an oracular response, since the responses were heard by Al. alone and not made known by him nor reported by C., Pt. or Ar. It would probably have made little difference to Al’s later view of his relation to Ammon, if this interpretation of the evidence were correct, but it is at least open to question. (i) C., according to Strabo, directly stated that Al’s companions could hear what went on inside the temple, though they remained without, and he is naturally taken to mean that it was within the temple that he heard that he was son of Zeus, nor does the vulgate, for what it is worth, contradict this. (ii) Strabo’s summary of C. naturally suggests, by giving
471