Arrian

οὔκουν προσέχειν τὸν νοῦν, εἰ καὶ τὰ τῆς προσκυνήσεως
5ἐπιτελῆ τῷ Καλλισθένει ἐγένετο. ἀλλὰ
Δημήτριον γὰρ τὸν Πυθώνακτος, ἕνα τῶν ἑταίρων,
ὡς προσῄει αὐτῷ ὁ Καλλισθένης φιλήσων, φάναι
ὅτι οὐ προσκυνήσας πρόσεισιν. καὶ τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον
οὐ παρασχεῖν φιλῆσαι ἑαυτόν· τὸν δὲ Καλλισθένην,
φιλήματι, φάναι, ἔλαττον ἔχων ἄπειμι.
6Καὶ τούτων ἐγώ, ὅσα ἐς ὕβριν τε τὴν Ἀλεξάνδρου
τὴν ἐν τῷ παραυτίκα καὶ ἐς σκαιότητα τὴν
Καλλισθένους φέροντα, οὐδὲν οὐδαμῇ ἐπαινῶ, ἀλλὰ
τὸ καθ᾿ αὑτὸν γὰρ κοσμίως τίθεσθαι ἐξαρκεῖν
φημί, αὔξοντα ὡς ἀνυστὸν τὰ βασιλέως πράγματα
7ὅτῳ τις ξυνεῖναι οὐκ ἀπηξίωσεν. οὔκουν ἀπεικότως
δι᾿ ἀπεχθείας γενέσθαι Ἀλεξάνδρῳ Καλλισθένην
τίθεμαι ἐπὶ τῇ ἀκαίρῳ τε παρρησίᾳ καὶ
ὑπερόγκῳ ἀβελτερίᾳ. ἐφ᾿ ὅτῳ τεκμαίρομαι μὴ
χαλεπῶς πιστευθῆναι τοὺς κατειπόντας Καλλισθένους,
ὅτι μετέσχε τῆς ἐπιβουλῆς τῆς γενομένης
Ἀλεξάνδρῳ ἐκ τῶν παίδων, τοὺς δέ, ὅτι καὶ ἐπῆρεν
αὐτὸς ἐς τὸ ἐπιβουλεῦσαι. ξυνέβη δὲ τὰ τῆς
ἐπιβουλῆς ὧδε.
13. Ἐκ Φιλίππου ἦν ἤδη καθεστηκὸς τῶν ἐν
τέλει Μακεδόνων τοὺς παῖδας ὅσοι ἐς ἡλικίαν
ἐμειρακιεύοντο καταλέγεσθαι ἐς θεραπείαν τοῦ
βασιλέως, τά τε περὶ τὴν ἄλλην δίαιταν τοῦ
σώματος διακονεῖσθαι βασιλεῖ καὶ κοιμώμενον
φυλάσσειν τούτοις ἐπετέτραπτο. καὶ ὁπότε ἐξελαύνοι
βασιλεύς, τοὺς ἵππους παρὰ τῶν ἱπποκόμων
δεχόμενοι ἐκεῖνοι προσῆγον καὶ ἀνέβαλλον οὗτοι
βασιλέα τὸν Περσικὸν τρόπον καὶ τῆς ἐπὶ θήρᾳ
2φιλοτιμίας βασιλεῖ κοινωνοὶ ἦσαν. τούτων καὶ
Ἑρμόλαος ἦν, Σωπόλιδος μὲν παῖς, φιλοσοφίᾳ δὲ
380Anabasis Of Alexander IV

whether the ceremony of obeisance had been carried328 b.c. out by Callisthenes himself. But as Callisthenes5 approached to kiss Alexander, Demetrius son of Pythonax, one of the Companions, remarked that he was coming without having done obeisance. Alexander did not permit Callisthenes to kiss him; and Callisthenes remarked, ‘I shall go away short of a kiss.’
In these incidents I do not at all approve either of6 Alexander’s arrogance at the time or of Callisthenes’ tactlessness, but in fact I think it enough for a man to show moderation in his own individual conduct, and that he should be ready to exalt royalty as far as practicable, once he has consented to attend on a king. So I think that Alexander’s hostility to7 Callisthenes was not unreasonable in view of his untimely freedom of speech and arrogant folly, and on this account I infer that Callisthenes’ detractors were readily believed that he had a part in the plot laid against Alexander by his pages, some of them even saying that Callisthenes had incited them to the plot. The plot occurred as follows.1327 b.c.
13. It was a practice going back to Philip’s time that the sons of Macedonian notables who had reached adolescence should be enlisted for the service of the king; and besides general attendance on his person the duty of guarding him when asleep had been entrusted to them. Again, whenever the king rode out, they received the horses from the grooms and led them up, and they mounted the king in Persian fashion, and were his companions in the rivalry of the chase. One of them was Hermolaus2 son of Sopolis; he was reputed to be a zealous student

1Cf. 22, 1 for the date.381