Arrian

ἥδιστον ἦν δοξασθέν, ἐς τοῦτο οὐκ ἀκουσίως
ὑπήχθη καὶ ὑπὸ τῶν καθ᾿ ἡδονὴν ξυνόντων τε καὶ
ξυνεσομένων ἐπὶ κακῷ τοῖς ἀεὶ βασιλεύουσιν
ἐπαιρόμενος ἔγνω μηκέτι Ἀλέξανδρον ἐθέλειν
5προϊέναι τοῦ πρόσω, ἀλλ᾿ ὀκνεῖν γὰρ πυνθανόμενον
ὅτι αὐτὸς προσάγοι· καταπατήσειν τε τῇ ἵππῳ
τῶν Μακεδόνων τὴν στρατιὰν ἄλλος ἄλλοθεν αὐτῷ
6ἐπαίροντες ἔλεγον· καίτοι γε Ἀμύντας ἥξειν τε
Ἀλέξανδρον ἰσχυρίζετο, ὅπου ἂν πύθηται Δαρεῖον
ὄντα, καὶ αὐτοῦ προσμένειν ἐκέλευεν. ἀλλὰ τὰ
χείρω μᾶλλον, ὅτι καὶ ἐν τῷ παραυτίκα ἡδίω
ἀκοῦσαι ἦν, ἔπειθε· καί τι καὶ δαιμόνιον τυχὸν
ἦγεν αὐτὸν εἰς ἐκεῖνον τὸν χῶρον, οὗ μήτε ἐκ τῆς
ἵππου πολλὴ ὠφέλεια αὐτῷ ἐγένετο, μήτε ἐκ τοῦ
πλήθους αὐτοῦ τῶν τε ἀνθρώπων καὶ τῶν ἀκοντίων
τε καὶ τοξευμάτων, μηδὲ τὴν λαμπρότητα αὐτὴν
τῆς στρατιᾶς ἐπιδεῖξαι ἠδυνήθη, ἀλλὰ Ἀλεξάνδρῳ
τε καὶ τοῖς ἀμφ᾿ αὐτὸν εὐμαρῶς τὴν νίκην παρέδωκεν.
7ἐχρῆν γὰρ ἤδη καὶ Πέρσας πρὸς Μακεδόνων
ἀφαιρεθῆναι τῆς Ἀσίας τὴν ἀρχήν, καθάπερ
οὖν Μῆδοι μὲν πρὸς Περσῶν ἀφῃρέθησαν, πρὸς
Μήδων δὲ ἔτι ἔμπροσθεν Ἀσσύριοι.
7. Ὑπερβαλὼν δὴ τὸ ὄρος Δαρεῖος τὸ κατὰ τὰς
πύλας τὰς Ἀμανικὰς καλουμένας ὡς ἐπὶ Ἰσσὸν
προῆγε· καὶ ἐγένετο κατόπιν Ἀλεξάνδρου λαθών.
τὴν δὲ Ἰσσὸν κατασχών, ὅσους διὰ νόσον ὑπολελειμμένους
αὐτοῦ τῶν Μακεδόνων κατέλαβε,
τούτους χαλεπῶς αἰκισάμενος ἀπέκτεινεν· ἐς δὲ
τὴν ὑστεραίαν προὐχώρει ἐπὶ τὸν ποταμὸν τὸν
2Πίναρον. καὶ Ἀλέξανδρος ὡς ἤκουσεν ἐν τῷ
ὄπισθεν αὑτοῦ ὄντα Δαρεῖον, ἐπεὶ οὐ πιστὸς αὐτῷ
ὁ λόγος ἐφαίνετο, ἀναβιβάσας εἰς τριακόντορον τῶν
142Anabasis of Alexander II

readily induced to adopt any opinion it was most 333 b.c. agreeable to hold; and ingratiating courtiers, such as do and will haunt each successive king to his detriment,4 encouraged him to conclude that Alexander was no longer willing to advance further, but5 was hesitating on hearing of Darius’ own approach. On all sides they egged him on, telling him that he would trample the Macedonian force underfoot with his cavalry.5 Amyntas, however, persisted that6 Alexander would come wherever he found Darius to be, and urged him to remain where he was. But the worse counsels prevailed, as they were more agreeable to hear at the time; moreover, some divine power led Darius into the very position where his cavalry did not much help him, nor the number of his men and javelins and arrows, where he could make no display even of the splendour of his army, but delivered the victory easily to Alexander and his force. In fact it was destined that the Persians7 should forfeit the sovereignty of Asia to Macedonians, just as Medes had lost it to Persians, and Assyrians even earlier to Medes.6
7. Darius then crossed the mountains by the so-called Amanian Gates, advanced towards Issus and slipped in behind Alexander. On seizing Issus, he savagely tortured and killed all the invalid Macedonians left behind there whom he captured. Next day he advanced to the river Pinarus.1 Alexander2 heard that Darius was in his rear but did not credit the report; he embarked some of the Companions




4A’s own comment, cf. iv 8, 3.5So at this time Demosthene was predicting, Aeschines, iii 164.6More of A’s own comment.1QC. 8, 13–15.143