Arrian

ἄρχειν, τοῦ δὲ ξύμπαντος εὐωνύμου Παρμενίων
ἡγεῖτο· καὶ παρήγγελτο αὐτῷ μὴ ἀπολείπειν τὴν
θάλασσαν, ὡς μὴ κυκλωθεῖεν ἐκ τῶν βαρβάρων,
ὅτι πάντῃ ὑπερφαλαγγήσειν αὐτῶν διὰ πλῆθος
ἤμελλον.
5Δαρεῖος δέ, ἐπειδὴ ἐξηγγέλθη αὐτῷ προσάγων
ἤδη Ἀλέξανδρος ὡς ἐς μάχην, τῶν μὲν ἱππέων
διαβιβάζει πέραν τοῦ ποταμοῦ τοῦ Πινάρου ἐς
τρισμυρίους μάλιστα τὸν ἀριθμὸν καὶ μετὰ τούτων
τῶν ψιλῶν ἐς δισμυρίους, ὅπως τὴν λοιπὴν δύναμιν
6καθ᾿ ἡσυχίαν συντάξειε. καὶ πρώτους μὲν τοῦ
ὁπλιτικοῦ τοὺς Ἕλληνας τοὺς μισθοφόρους ἔταξεν
ἐς τρισμυρίους κατὰ τὴν φάλαγγα τῶν Μακεδόνων·
ἐπὶ δὲ τούτοις τῶν Καρδάκ[κ]ων καλουμένων
ἔνθεν καὶ ἔνθεν ἐς ἑξακισμυρίους· ὁπλῖται δὲ ἦσαν
καὶ οὗτοι. τοσούτους γὰρ ἐπὶ φάλαγγος ἁπλῆς
7ἐδέχετο τὸ χωρίον, ἵνα ἐτάσσοντο. ἐπέταξε δὲ καὶ
τῷ ὄρει τῷ ἐν ἀριστερᾷ σφῶν κατὰ τὸ Ἀλεξάνδρου
δεξιὸν ἐς δισμυρίους· καὶ τούτων ἔστιν οἳ κατὰ
νώτου ἐγένοντο τῆς Ἀλεξάνδρου στρατιᾶς. τὸ γὰρ
ὄρος ἵνα ἐπετάχθησαν πῇ μὲν διεχώρει ἐς βάθος καὶ
κολπῶδές τι αὐτοῦ ὥσπερ ἐν θαλάσσῃ ἐγίγνετο,
ἔπειτα ἐς ἐπικαμπὴν προϊὸν τοὺς ἐπὶ ταῖς ὑπωρείαις
τεταγμένους κατόπιν τοῦ δεξιοῦ κέρως τοῦ
8Ἀλεξάνδρου ἐποίει. τὸ δὲ ἄλλο πλῆθος αὐτοῦ
ψιλῶν τε καὶ ὁπλιτῶν, κατὰ ἔθνη συντεταγμένον ἐς
βάθος οὐκ ὠφέλιμον, ὄπισθεν ἦν τῶν Ἑλλήνων τῶν
μισθοφόρων καὶ τοῦ ἐπὶ φάλαγγος τεταγμένου
βαρβαρικοῦ. ἐλέγετο γὰρ ἡ πᾶσα ξὺν Δαρείῳ
στρατιὰ μάλιστα ἐς ἑξήκοντα μυριάδας μαχίμους
εἶναι.
9Ἀλέξανδρος δέ, ὡς αὐτῷ πρόσω ἰόντι τὸ
150Anabasis of Alexander II

and Parmenio of the entire left wing, with orders 333 b.c. not to edge away from the sea, for fear the barbarians should surround them, since with their great numbers they were likely to overlap them on all sides.
When the approach of Alexander in battle order5 was reported to Darius, he sent about 30,000 of his cavalry across the river Pinarus with 20,000 light infantry, so that he might deploy the rest at his leisure. He placed the Greek mercenaries, about6 30,000, foremost of his hoplites facing the Macedonian phalanx; next, on either side, 60,000 of the so-called Cardaces, who were also hoplites; this was the number which the ground where they stood allowed to be posted in one line. He also stationed about7 20,000 men on the ridge on his left over against Alexander’s right; some of these actually got to the rear of Alexander’s force, since the mountain ridge where they were posted was deeply indented in one part and formed something like a bay as in the sea; then bending outwards again it brought those posted on the foothills to the rear of Alexander’s right wing. The general mass of his light and heavy troops, arranged8 by their nations in such depth that they were useless, was behind the Greek mercenaries and the barbarian4 force drawn up in phalanx formation. Darius’ whole force was said to amount to some 600,000 fighting men.5
Alexander, however, finding the ground opening9
4Darius’ dispositions: QC. 8, 24–9, 6 (cf. 2 passim). On numbers cf. App. III 5. The mercenaries are unlikely to have numbered 30,000, cf. H. W. Parke, Greek Mercenary Soldiers 183 f.5Not ‘Vulgate’ but a report in A’s main source(s).151