Arrian
7πόλιν παραμείψας. σκοποὶ δὲ αὐτῷ ἐπέμποντο
πρὸ τοῦ στρατεύματος· καὶ τούτων ἡγεμὼν ἦν
Ἀμύντας ὁ Ἀρραβαίου, ἔχων τῶν τε ἑταίρων τὴν
ἴλην τὴν ἐξ Ἀπολλωνίας, ἧς ἰλάρχης ἦν Σωκράτης
ὁ Σάθωνος, καὶ τῶν προδρόμων καλουμένων ἴλας
τέσσαρας. κατὰ δὲ τὴν πάροδον Πρίαπον πόλιν
ἐνδοθεῖσαν πρὸς τῶν ἐνοικούντων τοὺς παραληψομένους
ἀπέστειλε σὺν Πανηγόρῳ τῷ Λυκαγόρου,
ἑνὶ τῶν ἑταίρων.
8Περσῶν δὲ στρατηγοὶ ἦσαν Ἀρσάμης καὶ
Ῥεομίθρης καὶ Πετήνης καὶ Νιφάτης καὶ ξὺν
τούτοις Σπιθριδάτης ὁ Λυδίας καὶ Ἰωνίας σατράπης
καὶ Ἀρσίτης ὁ τῆς πρὸς Ἑλλησπόντῳ Φρυγίας
ὕπαρχος. οὗτοι δὲ πρὸς Ζελείᾳ πόλει κατεστρατοπεδευκότες
ἦσαν ξὺν τῇ ἵππῳ τε τῇ βαρβαρικῇ καὶ
9τοῖς Ἕλλησι τοῖς μισθοφόροις. βουλευομένοις δὲ
αὐτοῖς ὑπὲρ τῶν παρόντων, ἐπειδὴ Ἀλέξανδρος
διαβεβηκὼς ἠγγέλλετο, Μέμνων ὁ Ῥόδιος παρῄνει
μὴ διὰ κινδύνου ἰέναι πρὸς τοὺς Μακεδόνας, τῷ τε
πεζῷ πολὺ περιόντας σφῶν καὶ αὐτοῦ Ἀλεξάνδρου
παρόντος, αὐτοῖς δὲ ἀπόντος Δαρείου· προϊόντας
δὲ τόν τε χιλὸν ἀφανίζειν καταπατοῦντας τῇ ἵππῳ
καὶ τὸν ἐν τῇ γῇ καρπὸν ἐμπιπράναι, μηδὲ τῶν
πόλεων αὐτῶν φειδομένους. οὐ γὰρ μενεῖν ἐν
τῇ χώρᾳ Ἀλέξανδρον ἀπορίᾳ τῶν ἐπιτηδείων.
10Ἀρσίτην δέ λέγεται εἰπεῖν ἐν τῷ συλλόγῳ τῶν
Περσῶν, ὅτι οὐκ ἂν περιίδοι μίαν οἰκίαν ἐμπρησθεῖσαν
τῶν ὑπὸ οἷ τεταγμένων ἀνθρώπων· καὶ τοὺς
Πέρσας Ἀρσίτῃ προσθέσθαι, ὅτι καὶ ὕποπτόν τι
αὐτοῖς ἦν ἐς τὸν Μέμνονα τριβὰς ἐμποιεῖν ἑκόντα
τῷ πολέμῳ τῆς ἐκ βασιλέως τιμῆς οὕνεκα.
54Anabasis of Alexander I

He sent scouts ahead of the army; Amyntas, son of7 334 b.c. Arrabaeus, led them with the squadron of Companions
from Apollonia, whose squadron leader was Socrates, son of Sathon, with four squadrons of the so-called prodromoi On his march the city of Priapus was surrendered to him by the citizens, and he sent a party to take it over under Panegorus son of Lycagorus, one of the Companions.
The Persian commanders were Arsames, Rheomithres,8 Petenes, Niphates, and with them Spithridates the satrap of Lydia and Ionia and Arsites the hyparch5 of Hellespontine Phrygia. They had already encamped by the city of Zeleia with the barbarian cavalry and the mercenary Greeks. They9 held a council of war when Alexander’s crossing was reported and Memnon of Rhodes advised them to run no risk against the Macedonians, as the latter were far superior in infantry, while Alexander was present and Darius absent on their own side; they had far best march on, destroying the fodder by trampling it with their cavalry, and burning the growing crops, not even sparing the very cities; then Alexander would not stay in the country for want of provisions. However, it is said that Arsites stated10 in the Persian council that he would not suffer one house to be burned belonging to his subjects, and that the Persians supported Arsites, suspecting Memnon of deliberately holding up warlike operations for the sake of the honour he held from the king.6
5Properly an official subordinate to a satrap, but here, as in iv 18, 3 (cf. iii 16, 4), meaning a satrap.6On Memnon (brother-in-law of Artabazus, iii 21, 4 n.) and his strategy cf. Introd. § 45; 54.55