Arrian

τάξεις, τετραμμένους ἤδη τοὺς κατὰ σφᾶς τῶν
Περσῶν ὁρῶντες, ἐπὶ τοὺς ξένους τε τοὺς μισθοφόρους
τοὺς Δαρείου καὶ τὸ πονούμενον σφῶν
ἐπικάμψαντες ἀπό τε τοῦ ποταμοῦ ἀπώσαντο
αὐτούς, καὶ κατὰ τὸ παρερρωγὸς τοῦ Περσικοῦ
στρατεύματος ὑπερφαλαγγήσαντες ἐς τὰ πλάγια
2ἐμβεβληκότες ἤδη ἔκοπτον τοὺς ξένους· καὶ οἱ
ἱππεῖς δὲ οἱ τῶν Περσῶν κατὰ τοὺς Θεσσαλοὺς
τεταγμένοι οὐκ ἔμειναν ἐντὸς τοῦ ποταμοῦ ἐν αὐτῷ
τῷ ἔργῳ, ἀλλ᾿ ἐπιδιαβάντες εὐρώστως ἐνέβαλον ἐς
τὰς ἴλας τῶν Θετταλῶν. καὶ ταύτῃ ξυνέστη
ἱππομαχία καρτερά, οὐδὲ πρόσθεν ἐνέκλιναν οἱ
Πέρσαι πρὶν Δαρεῖόν τε πεφευγότα ᾔσθοντο καὶ
πρὶν ἀπορραγῆναι σφῶν τοὺς μισθοφόρους συγκοπέντας
3ὑπὸ τῆς φάλαγγος. τότε δὲ ἤδη λαμπρά τε
καὶ ἐκ πάντων ἡ φυγὴ ἐγίγνετο· καὶ οἵ τε τῶν
Περσῶν ἵπποι ἐν τῇ ἀναχωρήσει ἐκακοπάθουν
βαρέως ὡπλισμένους τοὺς ἀμβάτας σφῶν φέροντες,
καὶ αὐτοὶ οἱ ἱππεῖς κατὰ στενὰς ὁδοὺς πλήθει τε
πολλοὶ καὶ πεφοβημένως ξὺν ἀταξίᾳ ἀποχωροῦντες
οὐ μεῖον ἀπ᾿ ἀλλήλων καταπατούμενοι ἢ πρὸς τῶν
διωκόντων πολεμίων ἐβλάπτοντο. καὶ οἱ Θεσσαλοὶ
εὐρώστως αὐτοῖς ἐπέκειντο, ὥστε οὐ μείων ἢ
τῶν πεζῶν φόνος ἐν τῇ φυγῇ τῶν ἱππέων ἐγίγνετο.
4Δαρεῖος δέ, ὡς αὐτῷ τὸ πρῶτον ὑπ᾿ Ἀλεξάνδρου
ἐφοβήθη τὸ κέρας τὸ εὐώνυμον καὶ ταύτῃ
ἀπορρηγνύμενον κατεῖδε τοῦ ἄλλου στρατοπέδου,
εὐθὺς ὡς εἶχεν ἐπὶ τοῦ ἅρματος ξὺν τοῖς πρώτοις
5ἔφευγε. καὶ ἔστε μὲν ὁμαλοῖς χωρίοις ἐν τῇ φυγῇ



160Anabasis of Alexander II

seeing that the Persians opposed to them were 333 b.c. already routed, bent round towards Darius’ foreign mercenaries, where their own centre was hard pressed, drove them from the river, and then overlapping the now broken part of the Persian army, attacked in the flank and in a trice were cutting down the mercenaries. The Persian cavalry posted opposite2 to the Thessalians did not keep their ground behind the river, once the engagement had actually begun, but crossed manfully and charged the Thessalian squadrons, and here there was a desperate cavalry fight;1 the Persians did not give way till they realized that Darius had fled and till their mercenaries were cut off, mowed down by the phalanx.23 But then the rout was patent and universal. The Persian horses suffered much in the retreat, with their riders heavily armoured, while the riders too, hurrying by narrow paths in a crowded horde in terror and disorder, suffered as heavy losses from being ridden over by one another as from the pursuit of their enemies. The Thessalians fell on them with vigour, and there was as much slaughter in the cavalry-flight as in the infantry.
As for Darius, the moment his left wing was panic-stricken4 by Alexander and he saw it thus cut off from the rest of his army, he fled just as he was in his chariot, in the van of the fugitives.3 So long as he5
1Cf. D. 33, 2; QC. 11, 14 f.; P. 24, 1.2QC. 11, 18 says that they got away in good order; for survivors App. VI 2.3A’s sources make Darius a poltroon; in the ‘Vulgate’ (D. and QC.) he fights bravely; the contemporary, Chares (P. 20, 4), made him give Al. the wound he received in the battle (A. 12, 1); this must be false, though not refuted by a so-called letter of Al. (P. 20, 5, cf. Introd. 15); but it tended to Al’s greater glory, if Darius was a Hector to his Achilles, and Al. himself treated Darius with posthumous respect (iii 22, 1; 23, 7; 25, 8; 30, 4), thus perhaps stimulating Chares’ invention. Cf. App. IX 4.161