Arrian

ἐλθόντες· καὶ οἱ μὲν αὐτῶν ὑπὸ τῶν ἀμφ᾿ Ἀλέξανδρον
ἐν τῇ φυγῇ ἀπέθανον, πολλοὶ δὲ καὶ κατὰ
τὴν ὁδὸν κρημνώδη οὖσαν· οἱ πλεῖστοι δὲ ἐπὶ τὰ
ὄρη ἀναφεύγοντες ἐμπίπτουσιν ἐς τοὺς ἀμφὶ
6Κρατερὸν καὶ ὑπὸ τούτων ἀπώλοντο. ταῦτα τὰ
γέρα παρ᾿ Ἀλεξάνδρου λαβόντες χαλεπῶς εὕροντο
δεόμενοι παρ᾿ αὐτοῦ τὴν χώραν τὴν σφῶν ἔχοντες
φόρους ὅσα ἔτη Ἀλεξάνδρῳ ἀποφέρειν. Πτολεμαῖος
δὲ ὁ Λάγου λέγει τὴν Δαρείου μητέρα
δεηθῆναι ὑπὲρ αὐτῶν Ἀλεξάνδρου δοῦναί σφισι τὴν
χώραν οἰκεῖν. ὁ φόρος δὲ ὁ συνταχθεὶς ἦν ἵπποι ἐς
ἔτος ἑκατὸν καὶ ὑποζύγια πεντακόσια καὶ πρόβατα
τρισμύρια. χρήματα γὰρ οὐκ ἦν Οὐξίοις οὐδὲ ἡ γῆ
οἵα ἐργάζεσθαι, ἀλλὰ νομεῖς αὐτῶν οἱ πολλοὶ ἦσαν.
18. Ἐκ δὲ τούτου τὰ μὲν σκευοφόρα καὶ τοὺς
Θεσσαλοὺς ἱππέας καὶ τοὺς ξυμμάχους καὶ τοὺς
μισθοφόρους τοὺς ξένους καὶ ὅσοι ἄλλοι τοῦ
στρατεύματος βαρύτερον ὡπλισμένοι ξὺν Παρμενίωνι
ἐκπέμπει ὡς ἐπὶ Πέρσας ἄγειν κατὰ τὴν
2ἁμαξιτὸν τὴν ἐς Πέρσας φέρουσαν. αὐτὸς δὲ τούς
τε Μακεδόνας τοὺς πεζοὺς ἀναλαβὼν καὶ τὴν ἵππον
τὴν ἑταιρικὴν καὶ τοὺς προδρόμους ἱππέας καὶ τοὺς
Ἀγριᾶνας καὶ τοὺς τοξότας ᾔει σπουδῇ τὴν διὰ
τῶν ὀρῶν. ὡς δὲ ἐπὶ τὰς πύλας τὰς Περσίδας
ἀφίκετο, καταλαμβάνει αὐτοῦ Ἀριοβαρζάνην τὸν
Περσῶν σατράπην πεζοὺς μὲν ἐς τετρακισμυρίους
ἔχοντα, ἱππέας δὲ ἐς ἑπτακοσίους, διατετειχικότα
τὰς πύλας καὶ αὐτοῦ πρὸς τῷ τείχει ἐστρατοπεδευκότα,
ὡς εἴργειν τῆς παρόδου Ἀλέξανδρον.
282Anabasis of Alexander III

Some of them were killed by Alexander’s troops in 330 b.c. the flight, and many too perished on the precipitous path. The greater number escaped to the hills, only to encounter Craterus’ forces and be destroyed by them. These were the gifts of honour they received6 from Alexander; and it was only with difficulty that they obtained from him their request to retain their own territory, paying annual tribute to Alexander. Ptolemy son of Lagus says that the mother of Darius implored Alexander on their behalf to give them their territory to dwell in.2 The tribute assessed was a hundred horses every year with five hundred transport animals and thirty thousand from their flocks and herds. For the Uxians had no money or arable land, but were mostly herdsmen.
18. After this,1 Alexander sent off the baggage train, the Thessalian cavalry, the allies, the foreign mercenaries, and all the other heavier-armed troops of his army with Parmenio, who was to lead them against the Persians by the carriage way that goes into their country. He himself took with him the 2 Macedonian foot, the Companion cavalry and prodromoi,
the Agrianians and the archers, and marched at full speed over the mountain route. When he arrived at the Persian Gates,2 he found there Ariobarzanes,
the satrap of Persia,3 with some forty thousand infantry and seven hundred horse;4 he had built a wall across the Gates and was encamped there by the wall, to bar Alexander’s passage.
2A’s specific reference to Pt. may suggest that this detail,
unlike others, was not in Ar.1D. 68; QC. v 3, 16–4, 34 differ on various points from A. on this campaign, for which see Fuller 228 ff., with map; Al’s route is not certain. Cf. Strabo xv 3, 6.3The province of Persia proper.4D. gives 25,000 (so QC) + 300.283