Arrian
4Τότε μὲν δὴ ἵνα ἐπιμαχώτατον τοῦ τείχους
ἐφαίνετο ἐστρατοπεδεύσατο πρὸς τῇ πόλει· τῇ δὲ
ὑστεραίᾳ ὑπὸ τὴν ἕω, διπλοῦν γὰρ τεῖχος περιεβέβλητο
τῇ πόλει, ἐς μὲν τὸ πρῶτον ἅτε οὐκ
ἀκριβῶς τετειχισμένον οὐ χαλεπῶς ἐβιάσαντο οἱ
Μακεδόνες, πρὸς δὲ τῷ δευτέρῳ ὀλίγον ἀντισχόντες
οἱ βάρβαροι, ὡς αἵ τε κλίμακες προσέκειντο ἤδη
καὶ ὑπὸ τῶν βελῶν πάντοθεν ἐτιτρώσκοντο οἱ
προμαχόμενοι, οὐκ ἔμειναν, ἀλλὰ κατὰ τὰς πύλας
5ὡς ἐπὶ τὰ ὄρη ἐκπίπτουσιν ἐκ τῆς πόλεως. καὶ
τούτων οἱ μὲν ἐν τῇ φυγῇ ἀποθνήσκουσιν, ὅσους δὲ
ζῶντας ἔλαβον αὐτῶν, ξύμπαντας ἀποκτείνουσιν οἱ
Μακεδόνες, ὅτι ἐτρώθη ὑπ᾿ αὐτῶν Ἀλέξανδρος
ὀργιζόμενοι· οἱ πολλοὶ δὲ ἐς τὰ ὄρη, ὅτι οὐ
μακρὰν τῆς πόλεως τὰ ὄρη ἦν, ἀπέφυγον. τὴν
πόλιν δὲ κατασκάψας ἐς Ἄνδακα ἄλλην πόλιν ἦγε.
ταύτην δὲ ὁμολογίᾳ ἐνδοθεῖσαν κατασχὼν Κρατερὸν
μὲν ξὺν τοῖς ἄλλοις ἡγεμόσι τῶν πεζῶν καταλείπει
αὐτοῦ ἐξαιρεῖν ὅσαι ἂν ἄλλαι πόλεις μὴ ἑκοῦσαι
προσχωρῶσι καὶ τὰ κατὰ τὴν χώραν ὅπως ξυμφορώτατον
ἐς τὰ παρόντα κοσμεῖν.
24. Αὐτὸς δὲ ἄγων τοὺς ὑπασπιστάς τε καὶ τοὺς
τοξότας καὶ τοὺς Ἀγριᾶνας καὶ τὴν Κοίνου τε καὶ
Ἀττάλου τάξιν καὶ τῶν ἱππέων τὸ ἄγημα καὶ τῶν
ἄλλων ἑταίρων ἐς τέσσαρας μάλιστα ἱππαρχίας καὶ
τῶν ἱπποτοξοτῶν τοὺς ἡμίσεας ὡς ἐπὶ τὸν ποταμὸν
τὸν † Εὐασ . . . πόλεως προὐχώρει, ἵνα ὁ τῶν
Ἀσπασίων ὕπαρχος ἦν· καὶ διελθὼν πολλὴν ὁδὸν
2δευτεραῖος ἀφίκετο πρὸς τὴν πόλιν. οἱ δὲ βάρβαροι


418Anabasis Of Alexander IV
Alexander then placed his camp by the city where4 327–6 b.c. the wall appeared easiest to assault, and next day about dawn, there being a double wall about the city, the Macedonians easily forced their way through the first, as it had not been built with care; at the second wall the barbarians made a short stand, yet once the ladders had been put up and the defenders were being wounded on all sides by the missiles, they did not stand their ground, but came tumbling out of the city by the gates in the direction of the hills. Some5 of them perished in the flight, and the Macedonians killed all they captured alive, out of anger that they had wounded Alexander; however, most of them escaped to the hills, as they were not far from the city.4 Alexander razed the city to the ground and went on to another named Andaca. When it had surrendered on terms and was in his possession, he left Craterus there with the other infantry commanders to destroy any other cities that did not come over of their free will, and to make the arrangements in the country most advantageous for the time being.
24. He himself took the hypaspists, archers, and Agrianians, with Coenus’ and Attalus’ battalions, the agêma of cavalry and other Companions up to about four hipparchies1 and half the mounted archers, and advanced towards the river . . . a city2 where the hyparch of the Aspasians was; after a long road-march, he reached the city on the second day. When the barbarians learned of Alexander’s2
4QC. 10, 3–6 makes Al. defer attack till Craterus arrived with the foot, and order the massacre. He then inserts the surrender of Nysa, see A. v 1 ff.1Introd. 58–60.2In the lacuna the letters ‘Euas . . .’ may belong to the name of a river or a city.419