Appendices
the city was founded on 25 Tybi = 7 April. But 25 Tybi is probably 20 January, as in the Roman period when Ps-Callisthenes wrote (P. M. Fraser, Ptolemaic Alexandria ii p. 3). Welles supposes that Al. wished to consult the oracle about the foundation, but he had already ascertained the divine will on this matter (1, 5), and felt no need for oracular sanction when founding other cities. Finally, 6, 1 shows that he left Egypt before 7 April.
2. Strabo (l.c.) summarizes the account of Callisthenes (C.). Of course C. gave much more detail (cf. P. 27, 3); Strabo preserves only the following points.
(a) Al. wished to visit Siwah from ‘love of glory’, to emulate Perseus and Heracles (cf. 3, 1).
(b) He went by Paraetonium (cf. 3, 3).
(c) The army was assisted by rain but impeded by a sandstorm (cf. 3, 3 f.).
(d) It was guided by two crows. (So Ar. and most writers, 3, 4; QC. has a flock of birds appearing near the oasis—where their presence would be natural; Pt’s serpents are his own fabrication, perhaps somehow
related to their association with the cult of Ammon.)
(e) Al. entered the inner shrine alone in his customary
garb, whereas his entourage had to change their clothes and remain outside, where they could, none the less, hear what was said.
(f) The god gave his responses mainly by nods and signs.
(g) However, the prophet ‘acted the part of Zeus’ or ‘interpreted Zeus’ (τὸν Δία ὑποκριναμένου) and told Al.
expressly that he was ‘son of Zeus’. (He clearly spoke Greek, being accustomed to Greek enquirers.)
468Appendices
(h) Subsequently envoys arrived at Memphis from the oracle of Branchidae near Miletus with oracles ‘about the genesis (cf. 5 below) of Al. from Zeus, the future victory near Arbela, the death of Darius and the Spartan revolt’, and the Sibyl of Erythrae also spoke about Al’s noble birth. Contra Tarn (ii 357) C. cannot simply have invented these oracular responses. No doubt they were ambiguous in the usual manner, and were interpreted post eventum in C.’s sense; it follows that C. at least amended his history of Al. in Egypt after Gaugamela. ‘Arbela’ is not the correct name for the battle (cf. iii 8, 7 n.; vi 11, 4), as Strabo also knew (xvi 1, 3 f.); but despite his own polemic on the topic, A. could use it himself (iii 22, 4), and Strabo may have preferred to give the name most easily intelligible to his readers; we are not to infer that C. was unreliable in his location of the battle, and therefore in other ways.
3. In (a)–(d) C. seems to have told a story
substantially similar to A’s (apart from Pt’s serpents). Both connect the expedition with Al’s romantic emulation of heroes (cf. App. IV). The difficulties of the journey were probably magnified in all sources, to make it seem more heroic; the journey was in fact often performed by Greeks and others, and it was the right season, winter, when rain could be expected; at most it may have been harder for Al., if he had a considerable force with him (its size is not recorded). Strabo’s summary is so brief that we should not infer that C. mentioned no other motive for the expedition but Al’s love of glory (A. 3, 2) nor that he neglected to record that Al. ‘was possessed by a longing (pothos) to go to Ammon’ (ib.). For pothos cf. i 3, 5; ii 3, 1; iii 1, 5; iv 28, 4; v 2, 5;
469