Arrian

πρὸς γήλοφόν τινα ἀπέχοντα ἀπὸ τοῦ χωρίου,
ἵναπερ στρατοπεδεύειν ἐγνώκει, ἑπτά που μάλιστα
3σταδίους. καὶ οἱ πολέμιοι ἀναθαρσήσαντες, ὡς
ἐγκεκλικότων ἤδη τῶν Μακεδόνων, δρόμῳ τε καὶ
ξὺν οὐδενὶ κόσμῳ ἐφέροντο ἐς αὐτούς. ὡς δὲ
ἐξικνεῖτο ἤδη τὰ τοξεύματα, ἐνταῦθα Ἀλέξανδρος
ἀπὸ ξυνθήματος ἐπιστρέψας ἐς αὐτοὺς τὴν φάλαγγα
4δρόμῳ ἀντεπῆγε. πρῶτοι δὲ οἱ ἱππακοντισταί τε
αὐτῷ καὶ οἱ Ἀγριᾶνες καὶ οἱ τοξόται ἐκδραμόντες
ξυνέμιξαν τοῖς βαρβάροις· αὐτὸς δὲ τὴν φάλαγγα
ἐν τάξει ἦγεν. οἱ δὲ Ἰνδοὶ τῷ τε παραλόγῳ
ἐκπλαγέντες καὶ ἅμα ἐν χερσὶ γεγενημένης τῆς
μάχης ἐγκλίναντες ἔφευγον ἐς τὴν πόλιν. καὶ
ἀπέθανον μὲν αὐτῶν ἀμφὶ τοὺς διακοσίους, οἱ δὲ
λοιποὶ ἐς τὰ τείχη κατεκλείσθησαν. καὶ Ἀλέξανδρος
προσῆγε τῷ τείχει τὴν φάλαγγα, καὶ ἐντεῦθεν
τοξεύεται μὲν ἀπὸ τοῦ τείχους ἐς τὸ σφυρὸν οὐ
5χαλεπῶς. ἐπαγαγὼν δὲ τὰς μηχανὰς τῇ ὑστεραίᾳ
τῶν μὲν τειχῶν τι εὐμαρῶς κατέσεισε, βιαζομένους
δὲ ταύτῃ τοὺς Μακεδόνας ᾗ παρέρρηκτο τοῦ τείχους
οὐκ ἀτόλμως οἱ Ἰνδοὶ ἠμύνοντο, ὥστε ταύτῃ
μὲν τῇ ἡμέρᾳ ἀνεκαλέσατο τὴν στρατιάν. τῇ δὲ
ὑστεραίᾳ τῶν τε Μακεδόνων αὐτῶν ἡ προσβολὴ
καρτερωτέρα ἐγίγνετο καὶ πύργος ἐπήχθη ξύλινος
τοῖς τείχεσιν, ὅθεν ἐκτοξεύοντες οἱ τοξόται καὶ
βέλη ἀπὸ μηχανῶν ἀφιέμενα ἀνέστελλεν ἐπὶ πολὺ
τοὺς Ἰνδούς. ἀλλ᾿ οὐδὲ ὣς βιάσασθαι εἴσω τοῦ
τείχους οἷοί τε ἐγένοντο.
6Τῇ δὲ τρίτῃ προσαγαγὼν αὖθις τὴν φάλαγγα καὶ
ἀπὸ μηχανῆς γέφυραν ἐπιβαλὼν τοῦ τείχους ᾗ
παρερρωγὸς ἦν, ταύτῃ ἐπῆγε τοὺς ὑπασπιστάς,
οἵπερ αὐτῷ καὶ Τύρον ὡσαύτως ἐξεῖλον. πολλῶν
428Anabasis Of Alexander IV

Macedonians to turn right about and withdraw327–6 b.c. towards a hill, just about seven stades away from the place where he had decided to camp. Emboldened3 by the belief that the Macedonians had already given way, the enemy rushed on them at full speed and in disorder. When the arrows were just reaching his troops, Alexander wheeled his phalanx towards them by a signal and led it on at the double. The mounted4 javelin-men, the Agrianians and the archers first dashed forward and joined battle with the barbarians, while Alexander himself kept the phalanx in formation. The Indians were appalled at what they had never reckoned on, and as soon as it had come to hand to hand fighting, they turned and fled to the city. Some two hundred perished, but the rest were shut up inside their walls. Alexander brought up his phalanx to the wall, and was then wounded in his ankle by an arrow from the wall, but not seriously. Next day he brought up the engines and easily5 destroyed a part of the walls; the Macedonians pressed in at the breach made, but the Indians resisted bravely, and so that day Alexander recalled his troops. On the next the Macedonian attack was stronger, and a wooden tower was brought up against the walls, from which the archers shot volleys, while the engines hurled missiles; they pushed the Indians a long way back, but even so they could not force their way inside the wall.
However, on the third day Alexander brought up6 the phalanx and threw a bridge from an engine on to the breach in the wall, over which he led the hypaspists, who had helped him in the same way to capture
429