Arrian

τείχους καὶ βέλη ἀπὸ μηχανῶν ἠφίετο, ὥστε ὀξέως
μὲν ὑπὸ τοῦ πλήθους τῶν βελῶν ἐγυμνώθη τὸ
τεῖχος τῶν προμαχομένων, ταχεῖα δὲ ἡ πρόσθεσις
τῶν κλιμάκων καὶ ἡ ἀνάβασις τῶν Μακεδόνων ἡ
4ἐπὶ τὸ τεῖχος ἐγίγνετο. τοὺς μὲν δὴ ἄνδρας πάντας
ἀπέκτειναν, οὕτως ἐξ Ἀλεξάνδρου προστεταγμένον,
γυναῖκας δὲ καὶ παῖδας καὶ τὴν ἄλλην λείαν
διήρπασαν. ἔνθεν δὲ εὐθὺς ἦγεν ἐπὶ τὴν δευτέραν
ἀπ᾿ ἐκείνης πόλιν ᾠκισμένην, καὶ ταύτην τῷ αὐτῷ
τε τρόπῳ καὶ τῇ αὐτῇ ἡμέρᾳ λαμβάνει καὶ τοὺς
ἁλόντας τὰ αὐτὰ ἔπραξεν. ὁ δὲ ἦγεν ἐπὶ τὴν τρίτην
πόλιν, καὶ ταύτην τῇ ὑστεραίᾳ ἐπὶ τῇ πρώτῃ
προσβολῇ εἷλεν.
5Ἐν ᾧ δὲ αὐτὸς ξὺν τοῖς πεζοῖς ἀμφὶ ταῦτα εἶχε,
τοὺς ἱππέας ἐκπέμπει ἐς τὰς δύο τὰς πλησίον
πόλεις προστάξας παραφυλάττειν τοὺς ἀνθρώπους
τοὺς ἔνδον, μήποτε τὴν ἅλωσιν αἰσθόμενοι τῶν
πλησίον πόλεων καὶ ἅμα τὴν αὑτοῦ οὐ διὰ μακροῦ
ἔφοδον οἱ δὲ ἐς φυγὴν τραπέντες ἄποροι αὐτῷ
διώκειν γένωνται. καὶ ξυνέβη τε οὕτως ὅπως
εἴκασε, καὶ ἐν δέοντι ἐγένετο αὐτῷ ἡ πομπὴ τῶν
6ἱππέων. οἱ γὰρ τὰς δύο τὰς οὔπω ἑαλωκυίας
πόλεις ἔχοντες τῶν βαρβάρων, ὡς καπνόν τε εἶδον
ἀπὸ τῆς πρὸ[ς] σφῶν πόλεως ἐμπιπραμένης καί
τινες καὶ ἀπὸ τοῦ πάθους αὐτοῦ διαφυγόντες
αὐτάγγελοι τῆς ἁλώσεως ἐγένοντο, ὡς τάχους
ἕκαστοι εἶχον ἀθρόοι ἐκ τῶν πόλεως φεύγοντες
ἐμπίπτουσιν ἐς τὸ στῖφος τῶν ἱππέων ξυντεταγμένον
καὶ κατεκόπησαν οἱ πλεῖστοι αὐτῶν.
3. Οὕτω δὴ τὰς πέντε πόλεις ἐν δυσὶν ἡμέραις
ἑλών τε καὶ ἐξανδραποδισάμενος ᾔει ἐπὶ τὴν
μεγίστην αὐτῶν τὴν Κύρου πόλιν. ἡ δὲ τετειχισμένη
340Anabasis Of Alexander IV

upon the defenders on the walls, and missiles were 329 b.c. hurled from the catapults, so that the wall was soon cleared of defenders by the great shower of missiles, and it was quick work for the Macedonians to set up the ladders and ascend the wall. They put all the4 men to the sword according to Alexander’s orders and seized as plunder the women, children and other spoils. Thence Alexander marched at once to the second city, which lay next to this one, captured it too in the same fashion on the same day, and gave his captives the same treatment. He advanced then to the third city, and took it next day at the first assault.
While he himself was thus busied with his infantry,5 he despatched the cavalry to the two next cities, with instructions to watch the men within carefully, in case they learned of the capture of the neighbouring cities and also of his own impending approach, and took to flight, and then pursuit might be impracticable. Things turned out just as he guessed, and the despatch of the cavalry came none too soon. For the6 barbarians who held the two yet untaken cities saw the smoke rising, as the city next in front of them was ablaze, and when a few who escaped the catastrophe itself gave first-hand information of the capture, they attempted as fast as they could to escape from these cities in a mass, but ran straight into the close array of cavalry, and most of them were cut down.
3. After thus capturing the five cities in two days and enslaving the survivors, Alexander marched against the largest of them, Cyropolis [Ura-Tyube].
341