Arrian

ὤν Ἀλέξανδρος, διαβὰς τὸν Ὄξον ποταμὸν τὰ μὲν
πλοῖα ἐφ᾿ ὧν διέβη κατέκαυσεν, αὐτὸς δὲ ἐς
10Ναύτακα τῆς Σογδιανῆς χώρας ἀπεχώρει. εἵποντο
δὲ αὐτῷ οἵ τε ἀμφὶ Σπιταμένην καὶ Ὀξυάρτην,
ἔχοντες τοὺς ἐκ τῆς Σογδιανῆς ἱππέας, καὶ Δάαι οἱ
ἀπὸ τοῦ Τανάϊδος. οἱ δὲ τῶν Βακτρίων ἱππεῖς ὡς
φεύγειν ἐγνωκότα ἔμαθον Βῆσσον, ἄλλος ἄλλῃ ἐπὶ
τὰ σφῶν ἕκαστοι ἀπηλλάγησαν.
29. Ἀλέξανδρος δὲ ἐς Δράψακα ἀφικόμενος καὶ
ἀναπαύσας τὴν στρατιὰν ἐς Ἄορνόν τε ἦγε καὶ
Βάκτρα, αἳ δὴ μέγισταί εἰσι πόλεις ἐν τῇ Βακτρίων
χώρᾳ. καὶ ταύτας τε ἐξ ἐφόδου ἔλαβε καὶ
φυλακὴν ἐν τῇ ἄκρᾳ τῆς Ἀόρνου ἀπέλιπε καὶ ἐπὶ
ταύτης Ἀρχέλαον τὸν Ἀνδρόκλου τῶν ἑταίρων·
τοῖς δὲ ἄλλοις Βακτρίοις οὐ χαλεπῶς προσχωρήσασιν
ἐπέταξε σατράπην Ἀρτάβαζον τὸν Πέρσην.
2Αὐτὸς δὲ ἦγεν ὡς ἐπὶ τὸν Ὄξον ποταμόν. ὁ δὲ
Ὄξος ῥέει μὲν ἐκ τοῦ ὄρους τοῦ Καυκάσου, ἔστι δὲ
ποταμῶν μέγιστος τῶν ἐν τῇ Ἀσίᾳ, ὅσους γε δὴ
Ἀλέξανδρος καὶ οἱ ξὺν Ἀλεξάνδρῳ ἐπῆλθον, πλὴν
τῶν Ἰνδῶν ποταμῶν· οἱ δὲ Ἰνδοὶ πάντων ποταμῶν
μέγιστοί εἰσιν. ἐξίησι δὲ ὁ Ὄξος ἐς τὴν μεγάλην
3θάλασσαν τὴν κατὰ Ὑρκανίαν. διαβάλλειν δὲ
ἐπιχειροῦντι αὐτῷ τὸν ποταμὸν πάντῃ ἄπορον
ἐφαίνετο· τὸ μὲν γὰρ εὖρος ἦν ἐς ἓξ μάλιστα
σταδίους, βάθος δὲ οὐ πρὸς λόγον τοῦ εὔρους, ἀλλὰ
πολὺ δή τι βαθύτερος καὶ ψαμμώδης καὶ ῥεῦμα
ὀξύ<ς>, ὡς τὰ καταπηγνύμενα πρὸς αὐτοῦ τοῦ ῥοῦ
ἐκστρέφεσθαι ἐκ τῆς γῆς οὐ χαλεπῶς, οἷα δὴ οὐδὲ
4βεβαίως κατὰ τῆς ψάμμου ἱδρυμένα. ἄλλως τε καὶ
ἀπορία ὕλης ἐν τοῖς πόνοις ἦν καὶ τριβὴ πολλὴ
324Anabasis of Alexander III

was now not far off, he crossed the river Oxus [Amudarya], 329 b.c. burned the boats on which he had crossed, and himself retreated towards Nautaca in the Sogdianian country, accompanied by the followers of Spitamenes10 and Oxyartes with the horsemen from Sogdiana, and by the Dahae from the Tanais, though the Bactrian cavalry, when they learnt that he had determined on flight, dispersed in different directions to their homes.9
29. Alexander arrived at Drapsaca, and after resting his army led them on to Aornos and Bactra, the greatest cities of Bactria, which he took at his first attempt. He left a garrison in the citadel of Aornos under command of Archelaus son of Androcles, one of the Companions. To govern the rest of the Bactrians, who readily adhered to him, he appointed Artabazus the Persian as satrap.1
He himself marched towards the river Oxus, which2 flows from Mount Caucasus and is the greatest of the Asian rivers Alexander and his followers reached, except the rivers of India; they are the greatest of all rivers. The Oxus flows into the Great Sea in its Hyrcanian part.2 When Alexander attempted to3 cross the river it appeared impossible at every point. It was about six stades broad, but disproportionately deeper, in fact far deeper, sandy and fast-flowing, so that piles fixed into the bed were easily twisted out of the ground by the stream alone, not getting a firm hold in the sand. Apart from this, want of timber4 was another difficulty, and it was clear that there



9Cf. D. 83; QC. vii 3, 22–4, 25.1QC. vii 5, 1. (For operations against Bessus, D. 83; QC. vii 5; App. VIII 16.)2App. XII.325