Arrian

ἀνθρώπων Κῦρον καὶ ἐπὶ τῷδε ἐμμεῖναι
Πέρσαις τε καὶ Μήδοις τήνδε τὴν ταπεινότητα,
χρὴ ἐνθυμεῖσθαι ὅτι τὸν Κῦρον ἐκεῖνον
Σκύθαι ἐσωφρόνισαν, πένητες ἄνδρες καὶ αὐτόνομοι,
καὶ Δαρεῖον ἄλλοι αὖ Σκύθαι, καὶ Ξέρξην
Ἀθηναῖοι καὶ Λακεδαιμόνιοι, καὶ Ἀρτοξέρξην
Κλέαρχος καὶ Ξενοφῶν καὶ οἱ ξὺν τούτοις μύριοι,
καὶ Δαρεῖον τοῦτον Ἀλέξανδρος μὴ προσκυνούμενος.
12. Ταῦτα δὴ καὶ τοιαῦτα εἰπόντα Καλλισθένην
ἀνιᾶσαι μὲν μεγαλωστὶ Ἀλέξανδρον, Μακεδόσι δὲ
πρὸς θυμοῦ εἰπεῖν. καὶ τοῦτο γνόντα Ἀλέξανδρον
πέμψαντα κωλῦσαι Μακεδόνας1 μεμνῆσθαι ἔτι τῆς
2προσκυνήσεως. ἀλλὰ σιγῆς γὰρ γενομένης ἐπὶ
τοῖς λόγοις ἀναστάντας Περσῶν τοὺς πρεσβυτάτους
ἐφεξῆς προσκυνεῖν. Λεοννάτον δέ, ἕνα τῶν
ἑταίρων, ἐπειδή τις ἐδόκει τῶν Περσῶν αὐτῷ οὐκ
ἐν κόσμῳ προσκυνῆσαι, τὸν δὲ ἐπιγελάσαι τῷ
σχήματι τοῦ Περσοῦ ὡς ταπεινῷ· καὶ τούτῳ
χαλεπήναντα τότε Ἀλέξανδρον ξυναλλαγῆναι αὖθις.
3ἀναγέγραπται δὲ δὴ καὶ τοιόσδε λόγος. προπίνειν
φιάλην χρυσῆν ἐν κύκλῳ Ἀλέξανδρον πρώτοις μὲν
τούτοις πρὸς οὕστινας ξυνέκειτο αὐτῷ τὰ τῆς
προσκυνήσεως, τὸν δὲ πρῶτον ἐκπιόντα τὴν φιάλην
προσκυνῆσαί τε ἀναστάντα καὶ φιληθῆναι πρὸς
αὐτοῦ, καὶ τοῦτο ἐφεξῆς διὰ πάντων χωρῆσαι.
4ὡς δὲ ἐς Καλλισθένην ἧκεν ἡ πρόποσις, ἀναστῆναι
μὲν Καλλισθένην καὶ ἐκπιεῖν τὴν φιάλην, καὶ
προσελθόντα ἐθέλειν φιλῆσαι οὐ προσκυνήσαντα.
τὸν δὲ τυχεῖν μὲν τότε διαλεγόμενον Ἡφαιστίωνι·

1Roos bracketed this word.378Anabasis Of Alexander IV

first of men to receive obeisance and that therefore 328 b.c. this humiliation became traditional with Persians and Medes, you must remember that this very Cyrus was brought to his senses by Scythians, a people poor but free, Darius too by other Scythians,2 Xerxes by Athenians and Lacedaemonians,3 and Artaxerxes by Clearchus, Xenophon and their Ten Thousand,4 and Darius by Alexander here, who does not receive obeisance.’
12. By these and the like words Callisthenes greatly provoked Alexander, but pleased the Macedonians, and realizing this, Alexander sent and told the Macedonians to think no more of obeisance. When,2 however, a silence fell after these words, the senior Persians arose and did obeisance one by one. Leonnatus, one of the Companions, thinking that one of the Persians made his obeisance ungracefully, mocked his posture as abject; Alexander was angry with him at the time, though reconciled later. The following story has also been recorded. Alexander3 sent round a loving cup of gold, first to those with whom he had made an agreement about obeisance; the first who drank from it rose, did obeisance, and received a kiss from Alexander, and this went round all in turn. But when the pledge came to Callisthenes,4 he rose, drank from the cup, went up to Alexander and made to kiss him without having done obeisance. At the moment Alexander was talking to Hephaestion, and therefore was not attending to see



2For the defeat and death of Cyrus, the founder of the Persian empire, in 529 b.c. by the Scythian Massagetae see Herodotus i 208–214; for the defeat of Darius I by the European Scythians c. 513 b.c., ib. iv 1, 83–142.3480–479 b.c.4401–400 b.c.379