Arrian
5τριάκοντα. καὶ τούτους τῇ ὑστεραίᾳ ἔθαψεν
Ἀλέξανδρος ξὺν τοῖς ὅπλοις τε καὶ ἄλλῳ κόσμῳ·
γονεῦσι δὲ αὐτῶν καὶ παισὶ τῶν τε κατὰ τὴν χώραν
ἀτέλειαν ἔδωκε καὶ ὅσαι ἄλλαι ἢ τῷ σώματι
λειτουργίαι ἢ κατὰ τὰς κτήσεις ἑκάστων εἰσφοραί.
καὶ τῶν τετρωμένων δὲ πολλὴν πρόνοιαν ἔσχεν,
ἐπελθών τε αὐτὸς ἑκάστους καὶ τὰ τραύματα ἰδὼν
καὶ ὅπως τις ἐτρώθη ἐρόμενος καὶ ὅ τι πράττων
6εἰπεῖν τε καὶ ἀλαζονεύσασθαί οἱ παρασχών. ὁ δὲ
καὶ τῶν Περσῶν τοὺς ἡγεμόνας ἔθαψεν· ἔθαψε δὲ
καὶ τοὺς μισθοφόρους Ἕλληνας, οἳ ξὺν τοῖς πολεμίοις
στρατεύοντες ἀπέθανον· ὅσους δὲ αὐτῶν
αἰχμαλώτους ἔλαβε, τούτους δὲ δήσας ἐν πέδαις
εἰς Μακεδονίαν ἀπέπεμψεν ἐργάζεσθαι, ὅτι παρὰ
τὰ κοινῇ δόξαντα τοῖς Ἕλλησιν Ἕλληνες ὄντες
ἐναντία τῇ Ἑλλάδι ὑπὲρ τῶν βαρβάρων ἐμάχοντο.
7ἀποπέμπει δὲ καὶ εἰς Ἀθήνας τριακοσίας πανοπλίας
Περσικὰς ἀνάθημα εἶναι τῇ Ἀθηνᾷ ἐν πόλει·
καὶ ἐπίγραμμα ἐπιγραφῆναι ἐκέλευσε τόδε· Ἀλέξανδρος
Φιλίππου καὶ οἱ Ἕλληνες πλὴν Λακεδαιμονίων
ἀπὸ τῶν βαρβάρων τῶν τὴν Ἀσίαν
κατοικούντων.
17. Καταστήσας δὲ Κάλαν σατραπεύειν ἧς
Ἀρσίτης ἦρχε καὶ τοὺς φόρους τοὺς αὐτοὺς ἀποφέρειν
τάξας, οὕσπερ Δαρείῳ ἔφερον, ὅσοι μὲν τῶν
βαρβάρων κατιόντες, ἐκ τῶν ὀρῶν ἐνεχείριζον
σφᾶς, τούτους μὲν ἀπαλλάττεσθαι ἐπὶ τὰ αὑτῶν
2ἑκάστους ἐκέλευεν, Ζελείτας δὲ ἀφῆκε τῆς αἰτίας,
ὅτι πρὸς βίαν ἔγνω συστρατεῦσαι τοῖς βαρβάροις·
Δασκύλιον δὲ παραληψόμενον Παρμενίωνα ἐκπέμπει·


68Anabasis of Alexander I

than sixty perished, and about thirty infantry.3 334 b.c. Alexander buried them next day with their arms5 and other accoutrements; to their parents and children he gave remission of land taxes and of all other personal services and property taxes. He took great care of the wounded, visiting each man himself, examining their wounds, asking how they were received, and allowing them to recount and boast of their exploits. He also buried the Persian6 commanders and the mercenary Greeks who fell in the enemy ranks; the prisoners were sent in chains to Macedonia to hard labour, because though Greeks they had violated the common resolutions of the Greeks by fighting with barbarians against Greece. He sent to Athens three hundred Persian7 panoplies to be set up to Athena in the acropolis; he ordered this inscription to be attached: ‘Alexander son of Philip and the Greeks, except the Lacedaemonians, set up these spoils from the barbarians dwelling in Asia’.4
17. Alexander then made Galas satrap of the territory Arsites ruled, ordering the inhabitants to pay the same taxes as they used to pay to Darius;1 natives who came down from the hills and gave themselves up were told to return home. He exempted 2 the city of Zeleia2 from blame, because he recognized that it had been impressed to fight on the barbarian side. He also sent Parmenio to take over




3Ar. ap. P. 16, 7 said that Al. lost only 25 of his cavalry and
9 footmen. Probably he did not include any non-Macedonians, for the first figure coincides with A’s 25 Companions. It looks as if A’s data come from Pt. as his other main source.4P. 16, 8 has the same formula (from Ar.?). Cf. Introd. §28; 38. For Athenian prisoners see i 29, 5; Introd n. 69.1See Introd. §41; Badian, GR 166 ff.2By implication, not otherwise confirmed, Zeleia ranked as Greek.69