Arrian

καὶ Σωκράτην προσέσχον τῇ ὄχθη, ταύτῃ καὶ αὐτοὶ
ἄνωθεν ἔβαλλον, οἱ μὲν αὐτῶν ἀπὸ τῆς ὄχθης ἐξ
ὑπερδεξίου ἐς τὸν ποταμὸν ἐσακοντίζοντες, οἱ δὲ
κατὰ τὰ χθαμαλώτερα αὐτῆς ἔστε ἐπὶ τὸ ὕδωρ
2καταβαίνοντες. καὶ ἦν τῶν τε ἱππέων ὠθισμός,
τῶν μὲν ἐκβαίνειν ἐκ τοῦ ποταμοῦ, τῶν δ᾿ εἴργειν
τὴν ἔκβασιν, καὶ παλτῶν ἀπὸ μὲν τῶν Περσῶν
πολλὴ ἄφεσις, οἱ Μακεδόνες δὲ ξὺν τοῖς δόρασιν
ἐμάχοντο. ἀλλὰ τῷ τε πλήθει πολὺ ἐλαττούμενοι
<οἱ> Μακεδόνες ἐκακοπάθουν ἐν τῇ πρώτῃ προσβολῇ,
καὶ αὐτοὶ ἐξ οὐ βεβαίου τε καὶ ἅμα κάτωθεν
ἐκ τοῦ ποταμοῦ ἀμυνόμενοι, οἱ δὲ Πέρσαι ἐξ
ὑπερδεξίου τῆς ὄχθης· ἄλλως τε καὶ τὸ κράτιστον
τῆς Περσικῆς ἵππου ταύτῃ ἐπετέτακτο, οἵ τε
Μέμνονος παῖδες καὶ αὐτὸς Μέμνων μετὰ τούτων
3ἐκινδύνευε. καὶ οἱ μὲν πρῶτοι τῶν Μακεδόνων
ξυμμίξαντες τοῖς Πέρσαις κατεκόπησαν πρὸς
αὐτῶν, ἄνδρες ἀγαθοὶ γενόμενοι, ὅσοι γε μὴ πρὸς
Ἀλέξανδρον πελάζοντα ἀπέκλιναν αὐτῶν. Ἀλέξανδρος
γὰρ ἤδη πλησίον ἦν, ἅμα οἷ ἄγων τὸ κέρας
τὸ δεξιόν, καὶ ἐμβάλλει ἐς τοὺς Πέρσας πρῶτος,
ἵνα τὸ πᾶν στῖφος τῆς ἵππου καὶ αὐτοὶ οἱ ἡγεμόνες
τῶν Περσῶν τεταγμένοι ἦσαν· καὶ περὶ αὐτὸν
4ξυνειστήκει μάχη καρτερά· καὶ ἐν τούτῳ ἄλλαι ἐπ᾿
ἄλλαις τῶν τάξεων τοῖς Μακεδόσι διέβαινον οὐ
χαλεπῶς ἤδη. καὶ ἦν μὲν ἀπὸ τῶν ἵππων ἡ μάχη,
πεζομαχίᾳ δὲ μᾶλλόν τι ἐῴκει. ξυνεχόμενοι γὰρ
ἵπποι τε ἵπποις καὶ ἄνδρες ἀνδράσιν ἠγωνίζοντο, οἱ
μέν ἐξῶσαι εἰς ἅπαν ἀπὸ τῆς ὄχθης καὶ ἐς τὸ
πεδίον βιάσασθαι τοὺς Πέρσας, οἱ Μακεδόνες, οἱ δὲ
εἶρξαί τε αὐτῶν τὴν ἔκβασιν, οἱ Πέρσαι, καὶ ἐς τὸν
5ποταμὸν αὖθις ἀπώσασθαι. καὶ ἐκ τούτου ἐπλεονέκτουν
62Anabasis of Alexander I

and Socrates touched the bank, the Persians shot volleys 334 b.c.
on them from above, some hurling their javelins into the river from their commanding position on the bank, others going down to the stream on the more level ground. There was a great shoving by2 the cavalry, as some were trying to get out of the river, others to stop them, great showers of Persian javelins, much thrusting of Macedonian spears. But the Macedonians, much outnumbered, came off badly in the first onslaught; they were defending themselves from the river on ground that was not firm and was beneath the enemy’s while the Persians had the advantage of the bank; in particular, the flower of the Persian cavalry was posted here, and Memnon’s sons and Memnon himself ventured their lives with them. The first Macedonians who came to grips with the Persians were cut down, despite their valour,3 save those of them who fell back on Alexander as he approached. For he was already near, with the right wing which he was leading, and he charged the Persians at the head of his men just where cavalry were massed and the Persian commanders were posted. A fierce fight raged round him; and meanwhile the4 Macedonians, battalion after battalion, kept crossing, a task now not so difficult. Though the fighting was on horseback, it was more like an infantry battle, horse entangled with horse, man with man in the struggle, the Macedonians trying to push the Persians once and for all from the bank and force them on to the level ground, the Persians trying to bar their landing and thrust them back again into the river.
63