Arrian
3καὶ ἐνταῦθα καταλαβόντες τὰς ναῦς νενεωλκημένας
ἐφ᾿ ὧν πρόσθεν ἐκ Λέσβου διακεκομισμένοι ἦσαν,
τούτων ὅσαι μὲν ἱκαναί σφισιν ἐς τὴν κομιδὴν
ἐδόκουν, ταύτας καθελκύσαντες, τὰς δὲ ἄλλας
αὐτοῦ ἐν τοῖς νεωρίοις κατακαύσαντες, ὡς μὴ
παρασχεῖν ταχεῖαν σφῶν τὴν δίωξιν, ἐπὶ Κύπρου
ἔφευγον καὶ ἐκεῖθεν εἰς Αἴγυπτον, ἵναπερ ὀλίγον
ὕστερον πολυπραγμονῶν τι Ἀμύντας ἀποθνήσκει
ὑπὸ τῶν ἐγχωρίων.
4Φαρνάβαζος δὲ καὶ Αὐτοφραδάτης τέως μὲν περὶ
τὴν Χίον διέτριβον· καταστήσαντες δὲ φρουρὰν τῆς
Χίου τὰς μέν τινας τῶν νεῶν ἐς Κῶν καὶ Ἁλικαρνασσὸν
ἔστειλαν, αὐτοὶ δὲ ἑκατὸν ναυσὶ ταῖς
ἄριστα πλεούσαις ἀναγ<αγ>όμενοι ἐς Σίφνον
κατέσχον. καὶ παρ᾿ αὐτοὺς ἀφικνεῖται Ἆγις ὁ
Λακεδαιμονίων βασιλεὺς ἐπὶ μιᾶς τριήρους, χρήματά
τε αἰτήσων ἐς τὸν πόλεμον καὶ δύναμιν
ναυτικήν τε καὶ πεζικὴν ὅσην πλείστην ἀξιώσων
5συμπέμψαι οἱ ἐς τὴν Πελοπόννησον. καὶ ἐν τούτῳ
ἀγγελία αὐτοῖς ἔρχεται τῆς μάχης τῆς πρὸς Ἰσσῷ
γενομένης. ἐκπλαγέντες δὲ πρὸς τὰ ἐξαγγελθέντα
Φαρνάβαζος μὲν σὺν δώδεκα τριήρεσι καὶ τῶν
μισθοφόρων ξένων ξὺν χιλίοις καὶ πεντακοσίοις
ἐπὶ Χίου ἐστάλη, δείσας μή τι πρὸς τὴν
6ἀγγελίαν τῆς ἥττης οἱ Χῖοι νεωτερίσωσιν. Ἆγις
δὲ παρ᾿ Αὐτοφραδάτου τάλαντα ἀργυρίου λαβὼν
τριάκοντα καὶ τριήρεις δέκα, ταύτας μὲν Ἱππίαν
ἄξοντα ἀποστέλλει παρὰ τὸν ἀδελφὸν τὸν αὑτοῦ
Ἀγησίλαον ἐπὶ Ταίναρον· καὶ παραγγέλλειν
ἐκέλευσεν Ἀγησιλάῳ, διδόντα τοῖς ναύταις ἐντελῆ
τὸν μισθὸν πλεῖν τὴν ταχίστην ἐπὶ Κρήτης, ὡς τὰ
ἐκεῖ καταστησόμενον. αὐτὸς δὲ τότε μὲν αὐτοῦ ἐν
170Anabasis of Alexander II

up, and reached Tripolis in Phoenicia. There they3 333 b.c. seized the ships that had been hauled ashore and had previously brought them from Lesbos, launched as many of them as they thought enough for their transport, burnt the rest there in the dockyards, to prevent speedy pursuit of them, and fled to Cyprus and thence to Egypt, where a little later Amyntas, stirring up some trouble or other, was killed by the natives.2
Meanwhile Pharnabazus and Autophradates had4 been waiting at Chios; after installing a garrison at Chios, they sent part of their fleet to Cos and Halicarnassus, while they themselves put to sea with the hundred best-sailing ships and arrived at Siphnus. They were met by Agis king of Sparta with a single5 trireme; he came to ask them to give him funds for the war and to send as many ships and men as possible to him in the Peloponnese. Just at this moment came the news of the battle of Issus. Utterly dumbfounded at the news, Pharnabazus with twelve triremes and fifteen hundred of the foreign mercenaries made for Chios, fearing that the Chians would rebel on the news of the defeat. Agis got thirty6 silver Talents from Autophradates and ten triremes and despatched Hippias to take them to his brother Agesilaus at Taenarum. He ordered him to tell Agesilaus to pay the crews in full and sail as quickly as possible to Crete, to settle things there. He himself remained for the present there at Siphnos

2D. 48, 1–3; QC. iv 1, 27–33; App. VI 2.171