Arrian

δεόμενος Ὀξυάρτην οἱ ἀναπέμψαι. καὶ
7πέμπει Ὀξυάρτην Ἀλέξανδρος. ὁ δὲ ἀφικόμενος
πείθει Χοριήνην ἐπιτρέψαι Ἀλεξάνδρῳ αὑτόν τε
καὶ τὸ χωρίον. βίᾳ μὲν γὰρ οὐδὲν ὅ τι οὐχ ἁλωτὸν
εἶναι Ἀλεξάνδρῳ καὶ τῇ στρατιᾷ τῇ ἐκείνου, ἐς
πίστιν δὲ ἐλθόντος καὶ φιλίαν, . . .1 τὴν πίστιν τε
καὶ δικαιότητα μεγαλωστὶ ἐπῄνει τοῦ βασιλέως, τά
τε ἄλλα καὶ τὸ αὑτοῦ ἐν πρώτοις ἐς βεβαίωσιν τοῦ
8λόγου προφέρων. τούτοις πεισθεὶς ὁ Χοριήνης
αὐτός τε ἧκε παρ᾿ Ἀλέξανδρον καὶ τῶν οἰκείων
τινὲς καὶ ἑταίρων αὐτοῦ. ἐλθόντι δὲ τῷ Χοριήνῃ
φιλάνθρωπά τε ἀποκρινάμενος καὶ πίστιν ἐς φιλίαν
δοὺς αὐτὸν μὲν κατέχει, πέμψαι δὲ κελεύει τῶν
συγκατελθόντων τινὰς αὐτῷ ἐς τὴν πέτραν τοὺς
9κελεύσοντας ἐνδοῦναι τὸ χωρίον. καὶ ἐνδίδοται
ὑπὸ τῶν ξυμπεφευγότων, ὥστε καὶ αὐτὸς Ἀλέξανδρος
ἀναλαβὼν τῶν ὑπασπιστῶν ἐς πεντακοσίους
ἀνέβη κατὰ θέαν τῆς πέτρας, καὶ τοσούτου
ἐδέησεν ἀνεπιεικές τι ἐς τὸν Χοριήνην ἔργον
ἀποδείξασθαι, ὥστε καὶ αὐτὸ τὸ χωρίον ἐκεῖνο
ἐπιτρέπει Χοριήνῃ καὶ ὕπαρχον εἶναι ὅσωνπερ καὶ
πρόσθεν ἔδωκεν.
10Ξυνέβη δὲ χειμῶνί τε κακοπαθῆσαι αὐτῷ τὴν
στρατιὰν πολλῆς χιόνος ἐπιπεσούσης ἐν τῇ πολιορκίᾳ
καὶ ἅμα ἀπορίᾳ τῶν ἐπιτηδείων ἐπιέσθησαν.
ἀλλὰ Χοριήνης ἐς δίμηνον σιτία ἔφη δώσειν τῇ
στρατιᾷ καὶ ἔδωκεν σῖτόν τε καὶ οἶνον τῶν ἐν τῇ
πέτρᾳ ἀποθέτων κρέα τε ταριχηρὰ κατὰ σκηνήν.
καὶ ταῦτα δοὺς οὐκ ἔφασκεν ἀναλῶσαι τῶν παρεσκευασμένων
ἐς τὴν πολιορκίαν οὐδὲ τὴν δεκάτην
μοῖραν. ἔνθεν ἐν τιμῇ μᾶλλον τῷ Ἀλεξάνδρῳ ἦν

1I agree with Krüger that there is a lacuna after φιλίαν.410Anabasis Of Alexander IV

Oxyartes4 to him. Alexander complied, and when7 327 b.c. Oxyartes arrived, he urged Chorienes to surrender himself and the stronghold to Alexander; there was not a place in the world Alexander and his army could not take by force, but if Chorienes tried his good faith and friendship . . . He commended highly the good faith and justice of the King, chiefly adducing his own treatment as proof of his contention. Chorienes was persuaded by his words, and presented8 himself to Alexander with some of his kinsfolk and friends. On his arrival Alexander gave him a friendly reply and an assurance of his friendship, retaining Chorienes himself, but telling him to send some of those who came down with him to the rock to order the stronghold to be given up. And it was9 surrendered by the refugees, so that Alexander himself could actually take five hundred of the hypaspists and go up to view the rock. Far from maltreating Chorienes, he even entrusted this very stronghold to him and made him hyparch of the people he had previously administered.
The army, as it happened, had suffered much in the10 winter, a great deal of snow having fallen during the siege, and they were also distressed by want of provisions. But Chorienes said he would furnish the army with provisions for two months, gave them corn and wine from the stores in the rock, and distributed dried meat among the tents.5 After all these gifts he said he had not used up even a tenth of what they had laid in for the siege. This made Alexander regard him with the greater respect as a man who


4QC., ‘Oxartes’, Oxyartes having not yet submitted!5Cf. anecdote in QC. viii 4, 18 ff. in different context.411