Arrian

Ἰνδοὺς ἐν μέσῳ ἀπολαβών, τήν τε πόλιν αἱρεῖ κατὰ
κράτος ἐρημωθεῖσαν τῶν προμαχομένων, καὶ τὴν
μητέρα τὴν Ἀσσακάνου καὶ τὴν παῖδα ἔλαβεν.
ἀπέθανον δὲ ἐν τῇ πάσῃ πολιορκίᾳ τῶν ξὺν
Ἀλεξάνδρῳ ἐς πέντε καὶ εἴκοσιν.
5Ἔνθεν δὲ Κοῖνον μὲν ὡς ἐπὶ Βάζιρα ἐκπέμπει,
γνώμην ποιησάμενος ὅτι μαθόντες τῶν Μασσακανῶν
τὴν ἅλωσιν ἐνδώσουσι σφᾶς αὐτούς. Ἄτταλον
δὲ καὶ Ἀλκέταν καὶ Δημήτριον τὸν ἱππάρχην ἐπὶ
Ὦρα στέλλει, ἄλλην πόλιν, παραγγείλας περιτειχίζειν
6τὴν πόλιν ἔστ᾿ ἂν ἀφίκηται αὐτός. καὶ
γίγνεται ἐκδρομὴ τῶν ἐκ τῆς πόλεως ἐπὶ τοὺς
ἀμφὶ Ἀλκέταν. οὐ χαλεπῶς δὲ τρεψάμενοι αὐτοὺς
οἱ Μακεδόνες εἴσω τοῦ τείχους ἐς τὴν πόλιν
ἀποστρέφουσι. καὶ Κοίνῳ οὐ προχωρεῖ τὰ ἐν τοῖς
Βαζίροις, ἀλλὰ πιστεύοντες γὰρ τοῦ χωρίου τῇ
ὀχυρότητι, ὅτι ὑπερύψηλόν τε ἦν καὶ πάντῃ ἀκριβῶς
τετειχισμένον, οὐδὲν ξυμβατικὸν ἐνεδίδοσαν.
7Ταῦτα μαθὼν Ἀλέξανδρος ὥρμητο μὲν ὡς ἐπὶ
Βάζιρα, γνοὺς δὲ ὅτι τῶν προσοίκων τινὲς βαρβάρων
παριέναι ἐς τὰ Ὦρα τὴν πόλιν λαθόντες μέλλουσι,
πρὸς Ἀβισάρου ἐπὶ τῷδε ἐσταλμένοι, ἐπὶ
τὰ Ὦρα πρῶτον ἦγε· Κοῖνον δὲ ἐπιτειχίσαι τῇ
πόλει τῶν Βαζιρέων καρτερόν τι χωρίον προτέταξε,
καὶ ἐν τούτῳ φυλακὴν καταλιπόντα ἀποχρῶσαν,
ὡς μὴ ἄδεια εἴη τοῖς ἐν τῇ πόλει χρῆσθαι τῇ χώρᾳ,
αὐτὸν ἄγοντα τῆς στρατιᾶς τὴν λοιπὴν παρ᾿ αὑτὸν
8ἰέναι. οἱ δὲ ἐκ τῶν Βαζίρων ὡς εἶδον ἀπιόντα ξὺν


432Anabasis Of Alexander IV

Indians whom he had thus enclosed, took their city327–6 b.c. by assault, deprived as it was of its defenders, and captured Assacenus’ mother and daughter.1 In the entire siege some twenty-five of Alexander’s men perished.2
From this place he sent Coenus to Bazira, having5 formed the belief that on learning of the capture of Massaga it would surrender, while Attalus, Alcetas and Demetrius the hipparch3 were sent against another city, Ora, and directed to throw a wall round it pending his own arrival. The townsmen made a6 sally against Alcetas’ forces, but the Macedonians easily repulsed them and drove them back into the city within the wall. Coenus was not successful at Bazira, where the townspeople, trusting in the strength of their site, since it was very high and fortified carefully all round, gave no signs of surrendering on terms.
On learning this, Alexander started towards7 Bazira; but knowing that some of the neighbouring barbarians were preparing to slip unseen into the city of Ora, as Abisares4 had despatched them for this purpose, he advanced first against Ora, and commanded Coenus to fortify a strong position near the city of Bazira and leave a sufficient garrison in it, to prevent the townsmen having the use of the country without risk, and then himself to bring the rest of the army to join him. The men in Bazira, on seeing8
1D. 84 (after long lacuna), cf. QC. viii 10, 34 ff, tells of
surrender of the ‘queen’; QC. and J. xii 7 suggest that Al.
had a son by her. The massacre, ignored by QC. and differently
described by D., is condemned by P. 59, 3 f.; not all ancients need have shared his view, cf. Caesar, Gallic Wars iv 13–15.2QC. viii 10, 22 wrongly makes the siege begin before that of Massaga.3QC. viii 11, 1 makes Polyperchon sole commander (cf. 22, 1 n.).4He ruled in Hazara; for his covert hostility cf. iv 30, 7; v 8, 3; 20, 5; 22, 2; 29, 4 f.433