Arrian

τὸν στόλον, γυναῖκας μὲν καὶ παῖδας τῶν Τριβαλλῶν
προὔπεμψεν ἐπὶ τὸν Ἴστρον διαβαίνειν κελεύσας
τὸν ποταμὸν ἐς νῆσόν τινα τῶν ἐν τῷ
3Ἴστρῳ· Πεύκη ὄνομα τῇ νήσῳ ἐστίν. ἐς ταύτην
δὲ τὴν νῆσον καὶ οἱ Θρᾷκες οἱ πρόσχωροι τοῖς
Τριβαλλοῖς προσάγοντος Ἀλεξάνδρου ἐκ πολλοῦ
συμπεφευγότες ἦσαν καὶ αὐτὸς ὁ Σύρμος ἐς ταύτην
ξυμπεφεύγει ξὺν τοῖς ἀμφ᾿ αὐτόν· τὸ δὲ πολὺ
πλῆθος τῶν Τριβαλλῶν ἔφυγεν ὀπίσω ἐπὶ τὸν
ποταμόν, ἔνθενπερ τῇ προτεραίᾳ ὡρμήθη
Ἀλέξανδρος.
4Ὡς δὲ ἔμαθεν αὐτῶν τὴν ὁρμήν, καὶ αὐτὸς ὑποστρέψας
τὸ ἔμπαλιν ἐπὶ τοὺς Τριβαλλοὺς ἦγεν, καὶ
καταλαμβάνει καταστρατοπεδεύοντας ἤδη. καὶ οἱ
μὲν καταληφθέντες πρὸς τῷ νάπει τῷ παρὰ τὸν
ποταμὸν παρετάσσοντο· Ἀλέξανδρος δὲ καὶ αὐτὸς
τὴν μὲν φάλαγγα ἐς βάθος ἐκτάξας ἐπῆγε, τοὺς
τοξότας δὲ καὶ τοὺς σφενδονήτας προεκθέοντας
ἐκέλευσεν ἐκτοξεύειν τε καὶ σφενδονᾶν ἐς τοὺς
βαρβάρους, εἴ πως προκαλέσαιτο αὐτοὺς ἐς τὰ ψιλὰ
5ἐκ τοῦ νάπους. οἱ δὲ ὡς ἐντὸς βέλους ἐγένοντο,
παιόμενοι ἐξέθεον ἐπὶ τοὺς τοξότας, ὅπως ἐς
χεῖρας ξυμμίξειαν γυμνοῖς οὖσι τοῖς τοξόταις.
Ἀλέξανδρος δὲ ὡς προήγαγεν αὐτοὺς ἐκ τῆς νάπης
ἔξω, Φιλώταν μὲν ἀναλαβόντα τοὺς ἐκ τῆς ἄνωθεν
Μακεδονίας ἱππέας προσέταξεν ἐμβάλλειν κατὰ τὸ
κέρας τὸ δεξιόν, ᾗπερ μάλιστα προὐκεχωρήκεσαν
ἐν τῇ ἐκδρομῇ. Ἡρακλείδην δὲ καὶ Σώπολιν τοὺς
ἐκ Βοττιαίας τε καὶ Ἀμφιπόλεως ἱππέας κατὰ τὸ
6εὐώνυμον κέρας ἐπάγειν ἔταξε. τὴν δὲ φάλαγγα
τῶν πεζῶν καὶ τὴν ἄλλην ἵππον πρὸ τῆς φάλαγγος
παρατείνας κατὰ μέσους ἐπῆγε. καὶ ἔστε μὲν
10Anabasis of Alexander I

of Alexander’s march, sent on the women and 335 b.c. children to the Ister, ordering them to cross to an island in the river called Peuce. To this island the3 Thracians who are neighbours to the Triballians had also fled some time before on Alexander’s approach, and Syrmus and his men now joined them there; but the mass of the Triballians fled back to the river from which Alexander had started out the day before.
Hearing of their move, Alexander turned back in4 person to attack the Triballians, and found them already encamping. Caught as they were, they formed line near the glen by the river; but Alexander threw his phalanx into deep formation and led it against them in person, ordering the bowmen and slingers to run out ahead and discharge their arrows and stones on the barbarians, to see if he could provoke them into the open out of the glen. When5 they were in range and came under fire, they ran out against the bowmen to come to grips with them, unarmed as bowmen are. But having drawn them out of the glen, Alexander ordered Philotas to take the cavalry of upper Macedonia and charge their right wing, where they had advanced farthest in their outward rush. Heracleides and Sopolis were ordered to lead the cavalry from Bottiaea and Amphipolis against the left wing. The infantry phalanx and6 the remaining cavalry, which he deployed in advance of the phalanx, he led against the centre. While the
11