Appendices

kept as hostages. Al’s ships were mainly Greek (Introd. 44), and to judge from Tod 192, league members should have borne the cost themselves of their naval contingents. However, they may have failed to provide enough funds; Al. lacked money for the time, and ships manned by mutinous crews would have been of little use. Probably his financial shortage was the vital cause of his decision, since even an inferior fleet, if it could have been kept at sea at all, would have hampered Persian naval activity, preventing the enemy admirals from sending out squadrons simultaneously to the Hellespont, the Macedonian coast and Greece. In 333 Al. saw that it was necessary to provide some naval force, though it would still be outnumbered. For other consequences of his decision see Introd. 44.
2. As A. always tends to concentrate on Al’s own actions, we have to turn for supplementary information about Persian naval operations to D. and QC. According to D. Memnon (= M.), who had received large funds from Darius, mobilized 300 ships early in 333, with a substantial mercenary force, won over Chios and all the Lesbian cities except Mitylene which he took by force (29, 1 f.; A. ii 1 makes Chios fall by treachery, and Mitylene surrender but after M’s death); most of the Cyclades sent envoys to him, and among the Greeks who favoured Persia (the majority, 31, 3), especially the Spartans, his successes raised hopes which he fomented by paying subsidies; at this point he died (29, 2–4). QC. iii 1, 19–21 tells that at Gordium Al., who had not yet heard of M’s death, appointed Amphoterus as admiral and Hegelochus as general to recover Lesbos, Chios and Cos and provided
454Appendices

money and instructions for Antipater to defend the homeland and Hellespont. Like D., he probably put the fall of Mitylene (his ‘Lesbos’) in M’s lifetime. (For Cos cf. A. ii 5, 7; 13, 4; iii 2, 6.) In ii 1 f. A. does not give a full account of Persian naval successes before or after M’s death; ii 13, 6 implies that the lower town of Halicarnassus was lost; so was Miletus, QC. iv 1, 37; 5, 13, and the land forces of the Persians in Caria ventured on a battle with the Macedonians there, in which they were indeed decisively beaten; both A. ii 5, 7 and QC. iii 7, 4 recount this only indirectly by telling how Al. heard of it at Soli. From A. ii 2, 3; iii 2, 6 we can see that Amphoterus was subordinate to Hegelochus; ii 2, 3 also shows that he received his commission early in 333, and presumably, as QC. says, before Al. moved east from Gordium. But as he was still there in May (i 29, 4 n.), M’s operations must have begun in March or April, earlier and not later than the arrival of ‘the newly-wed’ at Gordium from Macedon. D. 31, 3 ff. also says that Al. heard of the loss of Chios and Lesbos and of the danger to Macedon and Greece before M. died; he dates the news of the last event, which greatly relieved Al., just before he fell ill; this must be his illness at Tarsus (ii 4)—and D. 27, 7 has already brought Al. to Cilicia in 334! If M. died in May, or even June, Darius had ample time after hearing the news (surely at Babylon, QC iii 2, 1, and not earlier at Susa, D. 30, 1; 31, 1) to recall the mercenaries who were to fight at Issus under Thymondas (ii 2, 1; 13, 2, etc.), having joined the Grand Army in Syria shortly before the battle (QC. iii 8, 1).
3. A’s account of the Persian naval operations does
455