Arrian

ὁδὸν οὔτε που ὄρος οὔτε δένδρον οὔτε γήλοφοι
βέβαιοι ἀνεστηκότες, οἷστισιν οἱ ὁδῖται τεκμαίροιντο
ἂν τὴν πορείαν, καθάπερ οἱ ναῦται τοῖς ἄστροις·
ἀλλὰ ἐπλανᾶτο γὰρ ἡ στρατιὰ Ἀλεξάνδρῳ καὶ οἱ
5ἡγεμόνες τῆς ὁδοῦ ἀμφίβολοι ἦσαν. Πτολεμαῖος
μὲν δὴ ὁ Λάγου λέγει δράκοντας δύο ἰέναι πρὸ τοῦ
στρατεύματος φωνὴν ἱέντας, καὶ τούτοις Ἀλέξανδρον
κελεῦσαι ἕπεσθαι τοὺς ἡγεμόνας πιστεύσαντας
τῷ θείῳ, τοὺς δὲ ἡγήσασθαι τὴν ὁδὸν τήν
6τε ἐς τὸ μαντεῖον καὶ ὀπίσω αὖθις· Ἀριστόβουλος
δέ, καὶ ὁ πλείων λόγος ταύτῃ κατέχει, κόρακας δύο
προπετομένους πρὸ τῆς στρατιᾶς, τούτους γενέσθαι
Ἀλεξάνδρῳ τοὺς ἡγεμόνας. καὶ ὅτι μὲν θεῖόν τι
ξυνεπέλαβεν αὐτῷ ἔχω ἰσχυρίσασθαι, ὅτι καὶ τὸ
εἰκὸς ταύτῃ ἔχει, τὸ δὲ ἀτρεκὲς τοῦ λόγου ἀφείλοντο
οἱ ἄλλῃ καὶ ἄλλῃ ὑπὲρ αὐτοῦ ἐξηγησάμενοι.
4. Ὁ δὲ χῶρος, ἵναπερ τοῦ Ἄμμωνος τὸ ἱερόν
ἐστι, τὰ μὲν κύκλῳ πάντα ἔρημα καὶ ψάμμον τὸ
πᾶν ἔχει καὶ ἄνυδρον, αὐτὸς δὲ ἐν μέσῳ ὀλίγος ὢν
(ὅσον γὰρ πλεῖστον αὐτοῦ ἐς πλάτος διέχει ἐς
τεσσαράκοντα μάλιστα σταδίους ἔρχεται) κατάπλεώς
ἐστιν ἡμέρων δένδρων, ἐλαιῶν καὶ φοινίκων,
2καὶ ἔνδροσος μόνος τῶν πέριξ. καὶ πηγὴ ἐξ αὐτοῦ
ἀνίσχει οὐδέν τι ἐοικυῖα ταῖς πηγαῖς, ὅσαι ἄλλαι ἐκ
γῆς ἀνίσχουσιν. ἐν μὲν γὰρ μεσημβρίᾳ ψυχρὸν τὸ
ὕδωρ γευσαμένῳ τε καὶ ἔτι μᾶλλον ἁψαμένῳ οἷον
ψυχρότατον· ἐγκλίναντος δὲ τοῦ ἡλίου ἐς ἑσπέραν
θερμότερον, καὶ ἀπὸ τῆς ἑσπέρας ἔτι θερμότερον
ἔστε ἐπὶ μέσας τὰς νύκτας, μέσων δὲ νυκτῶν
ἑαυτοῦ θερμότατον· ἀπὸ δὲ μέσων νυκτῶν ψύχεται
ἐν τάξει, καὶ ἕωθεν ψυχρὸν ἤδη ἐστί, ψυχρότατον
δὲ μεσημβρίας· καὶ τοῦτο ἀμείβει ἐν τάξει ἐπὶ
230Anabasis of Alexander III

there are no marks along the route, no mountain anywhere, 331 b.c. no tree, no solid hillocks standing up, by which the wayfarers might judge their proper course, as sailors do from the stars; in fact Alexander’s army went astray, and the guides were in doubt as to the route. Now Ptolemy son of Lagos says that two5 serpents preceded the army giving voice, and Alexander told his leaders to follow them and trust the divinity; and the serpents led the way to the oracle and back again. But Aristobulus agrees with the6 more common and prevalent version, that two crows, flying in advance of the army, acted as guides to Alexander. That some divine help was given him I can confidently assert, because probability suggests it too; but the exact truth of the story cannot be told; that is precluded by the way in which different writers about Alexander have given different accounts.
4. The district [Siwah] in which the Temple of Amnion lies is desert all round, covered with sand, and without water. But the site in the centre, which is small (for its broadest stretch only comes to about forty stades), is full of garden trees, olives and palms, and of all the surrounding country it alone catches the dew. A spring, too, rises from it, not at all like2 other springs which rise from the ground. For at midday the water is cold to the taste and even more to the touch, as cold as can be, but when the sun sinks towards evening it is warmer, and from evening on it grows warmer and warmer till midnight, and at midnight it is at its warmest; but after midnight it cools off in turn, and from dawn onwards it is already cold, but coldest at midday. This change occurs
231