Arrian

Περσῶν τὸ κέρας ἐμβαλόντων ἐς αὐτοὺς εὐρώστως
τῶν ἀμφὶ Ἀρέτην.
4Ταύτῃ μὲν δὴ τῶν Περσῶν φυγὴ καρτερὰ ἦν,
καὶ οἱ Μακεδόνες ἐφεπόμενοι ἐφόνευον τοὺς
φεύγοντας. οἱ δὲ ἀμφὶ Σιμμίαν καὶ ἡ τούτου τάξις
οὐκέτι ξυνεξορμῆσαι Ἀλεξάνδρῳ δυνατοὶ ἐγένοντο
ἐς τὴν δίωξιν, ἀλλ᾿ ἐπιστήσαντες τὴν φάλαγγα
αὐτοῦ ἠγωνίζοντο, ὅτι τὸ εὐώνυμον τῶν Μακεδόνων
5πονεῖσθαι ἠγγέλλετο. καὶ ταύτῃ παραρραγείσης
αὐτοῖς τῆς τάξεως κατὰ τὸ διέχον
διεκπαίουσι τῶν τε Ἰνδῶν τινες καὶ τῆς Περσικῆς
ἵππου ὡς ἐπὶ τὰ σκευοφόρα τῶν Μακεδόνων· καὶ
τὸ ἔργον ἐκεῖ καρτερὸν ἐγίγνετο. οἵ τε γὰρ
Πέρσαι θρασέως προσέκειντο ἀνόπλοις τοῖς πολλοῖς
καὶ οὐ προσδοκήσασιν ἐπὶ σφᾶς διεκπεσεῖσθαί
τινας διακόψαντας διπλῆν τὴν φάλαγγα, καὶ οἱ
αἰχμάλωτοι βάρβαροι ἐμβαλόντων τῶν Περσῶν
ξυνεπέθεντο καὶ αὐτοὶ τοῖς Μακεδόσιν ἐν τῷ ἔργῳ.
6τῶν δὲ ἐπιτεταγμένων τῇ πρώτῃ φάλαγγι οἱ
ἡγεμόνες ὀξέως μαθόντες τὸ γιγνόμενον μεταβαλόντες,
ᾗπερ παρήγγελτο αὐτοῖς, τὴν τάξιν ἐπιγίγνονται
κατὰ νώτου τοῖς Πέρσαις, καὶ πολλοὺς μὲν
αὐτῶν αὐτοῦ ἀμφὶ τοῖς σκευοφόροις ξυνεχομένους
ἀπέκτειναν, οἱ δὲ αὐτῶν ἐγκλίναντες ἔφευγον. οἱ
δ᾿ ἐπὶ τοῦ δεξιοῦ κέρως τῶν Περσῶν οὔπω τῆς
φυγῆς τῆς Δαρείου ᾐσθημένοι περιϊππεύσαντες τὸ
Ἀλεξάνδρου εὐώνυμον κατὰ κέρας τοῖς ἀμφὶ τὸν
Παρμενίωνα ἐνέβαλλον.
15. Καὶ ἐν τούτῳ ἀμφιβόλων τὰ πρῶτα γενομένων
τῶν Μακεδόνων πέμπει Παρμενίων παρ᾿
Ἀλέξανδρον σπουδῇ ἀγγελοῦντα, ὅτι ἐν ἀγῶνι
ξυνέχεται τὸ κατὰ σφᾶς καὶ βοηθεῖν δεῖ. ταῦτα
268Anabasis of Alexander III

envelop the Macedonian right also took fright at the 331 b.c. vigorous charge of Aretas and his men.
At this place indeed the Persian rout was complete,4 and the Macedonians in pursuit were slaughtering the fugitives. But Simmias and his battalion were no longer able to join Alexander in the pursuit, but had halted their phalanx and were righting where they stood, since the Macedonian left was reported to be in difficulties. At this point their line had been5 broken, and into the gap some Indians and Persian cavalry made a thrust right up to the Macedonians’ baggage animals. There the action was becoming severe, for the Persians fell boldly on men who were mostly unarmed and had never expected that anyone would cut through the double line of the phalanx and get right through to attack them; what is more, the captive barbarians themselves, as the Persians broke in, joined with them in the action and attacked the Macedonians. However, the commanders of the6 troops which formed the reserve to the first phalanx quickly learned what had happened, turned about face, according to previous orders, appeared in the rear of the Persians, and killed large numbers of them there, crowded together round the baggage animals. Some, however, gave way and escaped. The Persians of the right wing, who had not yet noticed Darius’ flight, wheeling round Alexander’s left, were assailing Parmenio’s troops.
15. At this juncture, since at first the Macedonians were between two fires, Parmenio sent a despatch rider to Alexander to report with all haste that his troops were in distress and needed help. On receiving
269