Arrian

πρὸς τῶν Περσῶν χῶρον. ἔνθα δὴ δείσας Δαρεῖος
μὴ προχωρησάντων ἐς τὰ οὐχ ὁμαλὰ τῶν Μακεδόνων
ἀχρεῖά σφισι γένηται τὰ ἅρματα, κελεύει
τοὺς προτεταγμένους τοῦ εὐωνύμου περιϊππεύειν τὸ
κέρας τὸ δεξιόν, ᾗ Ἀλέξανδρος ἦγε, τοῦ μηκέτι
3προσωτέρω αὐτοὺς ἐξάγειν τὸ κέρας. τούτου δὲ
γενομένου Ἀλέξανδρος ἐμβάλλειν κελεύει ἐς αὐτοὺς
τοὺς μισθοφόρους ἱππέας, ὧν Μενίδας ἡγεῖτο.
ἀντεκδραμόντες δὲ ἐπ᾿ αὐτοὺς οἵ τε Σκύθαι ἱππεῖς
καὶ τῶν Βακτρίων οἱ ξυντεταγμένοι τοῖς Σκύθαις
τρέπουσιν ὀλίγους ὄντας πολλῷ πλείονες. Ἀλέξανδρος
δὲ τοὺς περὶ Ἀρίστωνα1 τε, τοὺς Παίονας,
καὶ τοὺς ξένους ἐμβαλεῖν τοῖς Σκύθαις ἐκέλευσε·
4καὶ ἐγκλίνουσιν οἱ βάρβαροι. Βάκτριοι δὲ οἱ ἄλλοι
πελάσαντες τοῖς Παίοσί τε καὶ ξένοις τούς τε
σφῶν φεύγοντας ἤδη ἀνέστρεψαν ἐς τὴν μάχην καὶ
τὴν ἱππομαχίαν ξυστῆναι ἐποίησαν. καὶ ἔπιπτον
μὲν πλείονες τῶν Ἀλεξάνδρου, τῷ τε πλήθει τῶν
βαρβάρων βιαζόμενοι καὶ ὅτι αὐτοί τε οἱ Σκύθαι
καὶ οἱ ἵπποι αὐτοῖς ἀκριβέστερον εἰς φυλακὴν
πεφραγμένοι ἦσαν. ἀλλὰ καὶ ὣς τάς τε προσβολὰς
αὐτῶν ἐδέχοντο οἱ Μακεδόνες καὶ βίᾳ κατ᾿ ἴλας
προσπίπτοντες ἐξώθουν ἐκ τῆς τάξεως.
5Καὶ ἐν τούτῳ τὰ ἅρματα τὰ δρεπανηφόρα ἐφῆκαν
οἱ βάρβαροι κατ᾿ αὐτὸν Ἀλέξανδρον, ὡς ἀναταράξοντες
αὐτῷ τὴν φάλαγγα. καὶ ταύτῃ μάλιστα
ἐψεύσθησαν· τὰ μὲν γὰρ εὐθὺς ὡς προσεφέρετο
κατηκόντισαν οἵ τε Ἀγριᾶνες καὶ οἱ ξὺν Βαλάκρῳ



1Ἀρίστωνα Schmeider: Ἀρέτην codd.264Anabasis of Alexander III

had been made a treadable level by the Persians. 331 b.c. This made Darius fear that if the Macedonians reached the uneven ground his chariots would cease to be of service, and he ordered the troops in advance of his left wing to ride round the Macedonian right, where Alexander was leading, so that they might not prolong their wing any farther. In reply Alexander3 ordered his mercenary cavalry under Menidas to charge them. At once the Scythian cavalry and those of the Bactrians brigaded with them rushed out in a counter-charge, and drove them back, as they were far more numerous than Menidas’ small squadron. But Alexander ordered the Paeonians with Ariston2 and the mercenaries to charge the Scythians, and the barbarians wavered. The rest of the Bactrians,4 however, came up against the Paeonians and mercenaries, restored to the battle those on their own side who were then turning to flight, and made the cavalry engagement a close one. Alexander’s men fell in greater numbers, under pressure from the number of the barbarians, and also because the Scythians, riders and horses alike, were better protected by defensive armour. Yet even so the Macedonians3 stood up against their onsets, attacked vigorously, squadron after squadron,4 and broke their formation.
At this point the Persians launched their scythe-carrying5 chariots direct against Alexander, to throw his line out of formation; but in this they were signally disappointed. For first, as they approached, the Agrianians and the javelin-men under Balacrus, who


2Aretas in the manuscripts, but the prodromoi are not
named, and cf. 14, 1, which, however, Schwartz (Introd. n. 24)
took to be Pt’s version of 13, 1–4 (Ar.). And cf. § 4 n. 4.3i.e. Al’s troops, cf. 14, 5 for lack of ethnic meaning.4Odd, if only Menidas’ and Ariston’s squadrons were engaged.265