Arrian

θείου ἐντυχεῖν, καὶ δεῖσθαι ἐπανελθόντα πίνειν ὅλην
τὴν νύκτα· καὶ Ἀλέξανδρον θεῖόν τι εἶναι νομίσαντα
ἐπανελθεῖν τε καὶ πίνειν, καὶ οὕτως τοῖς
παισὶ διαπεσεῖν τὸ ἔργον.
7Τῇ δὲ ὑστεραίᾳ Ἐπιμένης ὁ Ἀρσαίου τῶν
μετεχόντων τῆς ἐπιβουλῆς φράξει τὴν πρᾶξιν
Χαρικλεῖ τῷ Μενάνδρου, ἐραστῇ ἑαυτοῦ γεγονότι·
Χαρικλῆς δὲ φράζει Εὐρυλόχῳ τῷ ἀδελφῷ τῷ
Ἐπιμένους. καὶ ὁ Εὐρύλοχος ἐλθὼν ἐπὶ τὴν
σκηνὴν τὴν Ἀλεξάνδρου Πτολεμαίῳ τῷ Λάγου τῷ
σωματοφύλακι καταλέγει ἅπαν τὸ πρᾶγμα· ὁ δὲ
Ἀλεξάνδρῳ ἔφρασε. καὶ ὁ Ἀλέξανδρος ξυλλαβεῖν
κελεύει ὧν τὰ ὀνόματα εἶπεν ὁ Εὐρύλοχος· καὶ
οὗτοι στρεβλούμενοι σφῶν τε αὐτῶν κατεῖπον τὴν
ἐπιβουλὴν καί τινας καὶ ἄλλους ὠνόμασαν.
14. Ἀριστόβουλος μὲν λέγει ὅτι καὶ Καλλισθένην
ἐπᾶραι σφᾶς ἔφασαν ἐς τὸ τόλμημα· καὶ Πτολεμαῖος
ὡσαύτως λέγει. οἱ δὲ πολλοὶ οὐ ταύτῃ
λέγουσιν, ἀλλὰ διὰ μῖσος γὰρ τὸ ἤδη ὂν πρὸς Καλλισθένην
ἐξ Ἀλεξάνδρου καὶ ὅτι ὁ Ἑρμόλαος ἐς τὰ
μάλιστα ἐπιτήδειος ἦν τῷ Καλλισθένει, οὐ χαλεπῶς
πιστεῦσαι τὰ χείρω ὑπὲρ Καλλισθένους Ἀλέξανδρον.
2ἤδη δέ τινες καὶ τάδε ἀνέγραψαν, τὸν
Ἑρμόλαον προαχθέντα ἐς τοὺς Μακεδόνας ὁμολογεῖν
τε ἐπιβουλεῦσαι—καὶ γὰρ οὐκ εἶναι ἔτι
ἐλευθέρῳ ἀνδρὶ φέρειν τὴν ὕβριν τὴν Ἀλεξάνδρου—πάντα
καταλέγοντα, τὴν τε Φιλώτα οὐκ ἔνδικον
τελευτὴν καὶ <τὴν> τοῦ πατρὸς αὐτοῦ Παρμενίωνος
ἔτι ἐκνομωτέραν καὶ τῶν ἄλλων τῶν τότε ἀποθανόντων,
καὶ τὴν Κλείτου ἐν μέθῃ ἀναίρεσιν, καὶ τὴν
ἐσθῆτα τὴν Μηδικήν, καὶ τὴν προσκύνησιν τὴν
βουλευθεῖσαν καὶ οὔπω πεπαυμένην, καὶ πότους τε
384Anabasis Of Alexander IV

the divine spirit, and begged him to return and327 b.c. continue drinking all night long; Alexander believed this to be a divine sign, returned to his cups, and so the boys’ plot came to nothing.
Next day Epimenes son of Arseus, one of the7 conspirators, told Charicles son of Menander, his lover, of the plot, Charicles told Eurylochus brother of Epimenes, and Eurylochus went to Alexander’s tent, and revealed the whole affair to Ptolemy son of Lagus who told Alexander, and Alexander ordered the arrest of all whose names Eurylochus had given; they were put on the rack, revealed their own plot and implicated others as well.
14. Aristobulus tells that they said Callisthenes had urged them on to the attempt, and Ptolemy agrees. But most authorities have a different version, that it was only because he had already come to hate Callisthenes and because Hermolaus was particularly close to Callisthenes, that Alexander readily believed the worst of Callisthenes. Some have also recorded that2 Hermolaus, when summoned before the Macedonians, confessed his plot, for (he said) no free man could longer endure Alexander’s arrogance, and went over the whole story, the unjust end of Philotas, and the still more illegal death of Parmenio and of the others who perished at that time, the drunken murder of Clitus, the Median dress, the plan not yet abandoned
385