Arrian

ἐπιόντες, οἱ δὲ πρόσθεν ἀναπαυόμενοι, μόγις δὴ
ἀμφὶ δείλην ἐκράτησαν τῆς παρόδου καὶ ξυνέμιξαν
τοῖς ξὺν Πτολεμαίῳ. ἐκεῖθεν δὲ ὁμοῦ ἤδη γενομένη
ἡ στρατιὰ πᾶσα ἐπήγετο αὖθις ὡς ἐπ᾿ αὐτὴν
τὴν πέτραν· ἀλλὰ γὰρ ἔτι ἄπορος ἦν αὐτῇ ἡ
προσβολή, ταύτῃ μὲν δὴ τῇ ἡμέρᾳ τοῦτο τὸ τέλος
γίγνεται.
7Ὑπὸ δὲ τὴν ἕω παραγγέλλει στρατιώτῃ ἑκάστῳ
κόπτειν χάρακας ἑκατὸν κατ᾿ ἄνδρα. καὶ οὗτοι
κεκομμένοι ἦσαν καὶ αὐτὸς ἐχώννυεν ἀρξάμενος
ἀπὸ τῆς κορυφῆς τοῦ λόφου, ἵνα ἐστρατοπεδευκότες
ἦσαν, ὥς ἐπὶ τὴν πέτραν χῶμα μέγα, ἔνθεν τοξεύματά
τε ἂν ἐξικνεῖσθαι ἐς τοὺς προμαχομένους
[δυνατὰ] αὐτῷ ἐφαίνετο καὶ ἀπὸ μηχανῶν βέλη
ἀφιέμενα· καὶ ἐχώννυον αὐτῷ πᾶς τις ἀντιλαμβανόμενος
τοῦ ἔργου· καὶ αὐτὸς ἐφειστήκει
θεατὴς καὶ ἐπαινέτης τοῦ ξύν προθυμίᾳ περαινομένου,
κολαστὴς δὲ τοῦ ἐν τῷ παραχρῆμα ἐκλιποῦς.
30. Τῇ μὲν δὴ πρώτῃ ἡμέρᾳ ὡς ἐπὶ στάδιον
ἔχωσεν αὐτῷ ὁ στρατός. ἐς δὲ τὴν ὑστεραίαν οἵ
τε σφενδονῆται σφενδονῶντες ἐς τοὺς Ἰνδοὺς ἐκ
τοῦ ἤδη κεχωσμένου καὶ ἀπὸ τῶν μηχανῶν βέλη
ἀφιέμενα ἀνέστελλε τῶν Ἰνδῶν τὰς ἐκδρομὰς τὰς
ἐπὶ τοὺς χωννύοντας. καὶ ἐχώννυτο αὐτῷ ἐς τρεῖς
ἡμέρας ξυνεχῶς τὸ χωρίον. τῇ τετάρτῃ δὲ βιασάμενοι
τῶν Μακεδόνων οὐ πολλοὶ κατέσχον
ὀλίγον γήλοφον ἰσόπεδον τῇ πέτρᾳ. καὶ Ἀλέξανδρος
οὐδέν τι ἐλινύων ἐπῆγε τὸ χῶμα ξυνάψαι
ἐθέλων τὸ χωννύμενον τῷ γηλόφῳ, ὅντινα οἱ ὀλίγοι
αὐτῷ ἤδη κατεῖχον.
2Οἱ δὲ Ἰνδοὶ πρός τε τὴν ἀδιήγητον τόλμαν τῶν
ἐς τὸν γήλοφον βιασαμένων Μακεδόνων ἐκπλαγέντες
442Anabasis Of Alexander IV

predecessors rested from the attack, with much326 b.c. difficulty they mastered the ascent in the afternoon and joined up with Ptolemy’s force. From that moment the army, now united, made a renewed onslaught as a whole on the rock itself. But the attack there still proved impracticable. This was the close of operations that day.
At dawn Alexander told each soldier to cut a7 hundred stakes; when they had all been cut, he himself started to raise a great mound, beginning from the top of the crest of the hill on which they had encamped and extending up to the rock; from this he thought arrows and missiles hurled from the engines would reach the defenders. All hands took part in the work of building the mound; Alexander himself stood by, watching and approving where it proceeded with vigour, and punishing failures to make immediate progress.
30. On the first day the army built the mound to about a stade in length. On the next, the slingers fired on the Indians from the mound so far as it had been built, and missiles were flung from the engines; this checked the sallies the Indians made against the builders of the mound. The pile went on growing for three days continuously on the chosen spot. On the fourth a few Macedonians made a rush and held a small hill on the same level as the rock, and Alexander without a moment’s delay extended the mound, anxious to connect it with the hill this small party was already holding for him.
The Indians were astounded at the indescribable2 boldness of the Macedonians who had forced their
443