Arrian

ἐφύλασσον, ὡς μὴ ἐς τῶν λιμένων τινὰ ἐγκαθορμισθῆναι
τῶν πολεμίων τὸν στόλον.
9Ἀλέξανδρος δέ, ὡς οὐκ ἀντανήγοντο οἱ Τύριοι,
ἐπέπλει τῇ πόλει· καὶ ἐς μὲν τὸν λιμένα τὸν πρὸς
Σιδῶνος βιάζεσθαι ἀπέγνω διὰ στενότητα τοῦ
στόματος καὶ ἅμα ἀντιπρώροις τριήρεσι πολλαῖς
ὁρῶν πεφραγμένον τὸν ἔσπλουν, τρεῖς δὲ τὰς
ἐξωτάτω ἐφορμούσας τῷ στόματι τριήρεις προσπεσόντες
οἱ Φοίνικες καὶ ἀντίπρωροι ἐμβαλόντες
καταδύουσιν· οἱ δὲ ἐν ταῖς ναυσὶν οὐ χαλεπῶς
10ἀπενήξαντο ἐς τὴν γῆν φιλίαν οὖσαν. τότε μὲν δὴ
οὐ πόρρω τοῦ ποιητοῦ χώματος κατὰ τὸν αἰγιαλόν,
ἵνα σκέπη τῶν ἀνέμων ἐφαίνετο, οἱ σὺν Ἀλεξάνδρῳ
ὡρμίσαντο· τῇ δὲ ὑστεραίᾳ τοὺς μὲν Κυπρίους ξὺν
ταῖς σφετέραις ναυσὶ καὶ Ἀνδρομάχῳ τῷ ναυάρχῳ
κατὰ τὸν λιμένα τὸν ἐκ Σιδῶνος φέροντα ἐκέλευσεν
ἐφορμεῖν τῇ πόλει, τοὺς δὲ Φοίνικας κατὰ τὸν
ἐπέκεινα τοῦ χώματος τὸν πρὸς Αἴγυπτον ἀνέχοντα,
ἵνα καὶ αὐτῷ ἡ σκηνὴ ἦν.
21. Ἤδη δὲ καὶ μηχανοποιῶν αὐτῷ πολλῶν ἔκ
τε Κύπρου καὶ Φοινίκης ἁπάσης συλλελεγμένων
μηχαναὶ πολλαὶ συμπεπηγμέναι ἦσαν, αἱ μὲν ἐπὶ
τοῦ χώματος, αἱ δὲ ἐπὶ τῶν ἱππαγωγῶν νεῶν, ἃς
ἐκ Σιδῶνος ἅμα οἷ ἐκόμισεν, αἱ δὲ ἐπὶ τῶν τριήρων
2ὅσαι αὐτῶν οὐ ταχυναυτοῦσαι ἦσαν. ὡς δὲ παρεσκεύαστο
ἤδη ξύμπαντα, προσῆγον τὰς μηχανὰς
κατά τε τὸ ποιητὸν χῶμα καὶ ἀπὸ τῶν νεῶν
ἄλλῃ καὶ ἄλλῃ τοῦ τείχους προσορμιζομένων τε καὶ
ἀποπειρωμένων τοῦ τείχους.
3Οἱ δὲ Τύριοι ἐπί τε τῶν ἐπάλξεων τῶν κατὰ τὸ


196Anabasis of Alexander II

closely, and kept guard to prevent the enemy fleet 332 b.c. from anchoring in any of the harbours.4
When the Tyrians refused battle, Alexander sailed9 against the city; he decided not to force an entry into the harbour facing Sidon because of the narrowness of its mouth, and also because entry was blocked with numerous triremes, bows on, though the Phoenicians did charge, bow to bow, the three triremes moored farthest out and sank them; their crews swam away comfortably to the friendly shore. For10 the time being Alexander’s fleet came to anchor near the new-made mole along the shore, where there seemed to be protection from the winds. Next day Alexander ordered the Cyprians, with their contingent
of ships and with Andromachus the admiral, to blockade the city at the harbour that faced Sidon, and the Phoenicians to do the same at the harbour on the other side of the mole, facing Egypt, where his own tent was.
21. By this time many engineers had been collected from Cyprus and the whole of Phoenicia,1 and many engines had been fitted together on the mole or on the horse-transports Alexander had brought with him from Sidon or on the slower triremes. When everything was now ready, they2 brought forward the engines down the new-made mole and from the ships which were anchored alongside the wall at various points and were testing it out.2
The Tyrians set wooden towers on the battlements3
4With § 6–9 cf. D. 42, 3; QC. 3, 11 f. D. 42, 3 puts the incident in 9 rather later.1D. 41, 3, 43, 1 and 44, 7 stresses the importance to the defence of the number of engineers at Tyre.2QC. 3, 13 makes the battering begin the day after the ships arrived; but 3, 13–4, 4, like D. 42, 5–45, 7 (divergent in details), ignore the operations A. describes (§ 3–7) and describe others.197