Arrian

Φήβας, ἐπαγ<αγ>ομένων τινῶν αὐτοὺς ἐπὶ νεωτερισμῷ
ἐκ τῆς πόλεως, Ἀμύνταν μὲν καὶ Τιμόλαον
τῶν τὴν Καδμείαν ἐχόντων οὐδὲν ὑποτοπήσαντας
πολέμιον ἔξω τῆς Καδμείας ἀπέκτειναν ξυλλαβόντες·
2ἐς δὲ τὴν ἐκκλησίαν παρελθόντες ἐπῆραν
τοὺς Θηβαίους ἀποστῆναι ἀπὸ Ἀλεξάνδρου, ἐλευθερίαν
τε <καὶ παρρησίαν1> προϊσχόμενοι, παλαιὰ
καὶ καλὰ ὀνόματα, καὶ τῆς βαρύτητος τῶν Μακεδόνων
ἤδη ποτὲ ἀπαλλαγῆναι. πιθανώτεροι δὲ ἐς
τὸ πλῆθος ἐφαίνοντο τεθνηκέναι Ἀλέξανδρον
3ἰσχυριζόμενοι ἐν Ἰλλυριοῖς· καὶ γὰρ καὶ πολὺς ὁ
λόγος οὗτος καὶ παρὰ πολλῶν ἐφοίτα, ὅτι τε
χρόνον ἀπῆν οὐκ ὀλίγον καὶ ὅτι οὐδεμία ἀγγελία
παρ᾿ αὐτοῦ ἀφῖκτο, ὥστε, ὅπερ φιλεῖ ἐν τοῖς
τοιοῖσδε, οὐ γιγνώσκοντες τὰ ὄντα τὰ μάλιστα καθ᾿
ἡδονήν σφισιν εἴκαζον.
4Πυθομένῳ δὲ Ἀλεξάνδρῳ τὰ τῶν Θηβαίων
οὐδαμῶς ἐδόκει ἀμελητέα εἶναι, τήν τε τῶν
Ἀθηναίων πόλιν δι᾿ ὑποψίας ἐκ πολλοῦ ἔχοντι καὶ
τῶν Θηβαίων τὸ τόλμημα οὐ φαῦλον ποιουμένῳ, εἰ
Λακεδαιμόνιοί τε πάλαι ἤδη ταῖς γνώμαις ἀφεστηκότες
καί τινες καὶ ἄλλοι τῶν ἐν Πελοποννήσῳ
καὶ Αἰτωλοὶ οὐ βέβαιοι ὄντες συνεπιλήψονται τοῦ
5νεωτερισμοῦ τοῖς Θηβαίοις. ἄγων δὴ παρὰ τὴν
Ἐορδαίαν τε καὶ τὴν Ἐλιμιῶτιν καὶ παρὰ τὰ τῆς
Στυμφαίας καὶ Παρ<α>υαίας ἄκρα ἑβδομαῖος
ἀφικνεῖται ἐς Πέλινναν τῆς Θετταλίας. ἔνθεν δὲ
ὁρμηθεὶς ἕκτῃ ἡμέρᾳ ἐσβάλλει ἐς τὴν Βοιωτίαν,
ὥστε οὐ πρόσθεν οἱ Θηβαῖοι ἔμαθον εἴσω Πυλῶν
παρεληλυθότα αὐτὸν πρὶν ἐν Ὀγχηστῷ γενέσθαι

1So Krüger.30Anabasis of Alexander I

persons in the city with revolutionary designs, and 335 b.c. seized and killed Amyntas and Timolaus, members of the force occupying the Cadmea, who had no suspicion of hostile movement outside.1 Then2 appearing in the assembly they incited the Thebans to rebel against Alexander, on the pretence of freedom and of liberty of speech—time-honoured and fine sounding words: now at last had come the time to shake off Macedon’s heavy yoke. They won readier trust from the populace by affirming that Alexander had died in Illyria: in fact this was common3 talk, and many put it about; he had been long away and no word had come from him, so that, in ignorance of the facts, they conjectured (as often happens in such cases) what they most desired.2
Alexander hearing of what occurred at Thebes was4 fully convinced that it had to be taken seriously; for he had long had suspicions of Athens, and was much concerned about the Theban coup, in case the Lacedaemonians (long ago rebels at heart) as well as some other Peloponnesians and the Aetolians, who were unreliable, should join in the revolutionary movement of the Thebans.3 He marched, therefore,5 past Eordaea and Elimiotis, and the heights of Stymphaea and Paravaea, and on the seventh day reached Pelinna in Thessaly. Thence in five days he entered Boeotia, so that the Thebans did not learn that he was within the Gates until he arrived, with



1For other accounts of and allusions to the revolt of Thebes see Aeschines iii 239 f.; Dinarchus, contra Demosthenem 10; 18; D. 8–14; P. 11–13 (and his life of Demosthenes 23); J xi 3 f. Cf. Introd. 37 f.; 43; 49. A. omits the story of Timoclea from Ar. (F. 2), though it illustrates Al’s magnanimity.2Cf. Thuc. iv 108, 4.3Introd. 37; 49.31