Arrian

σατράπην, ὃς τὴν ἐν Σάρδεσιν ἀκρόπολιν
Ἀλεξάνδρῳ ἐνέδωκεν. ἔνθα δὴ καὶ τοῖς Χαλδαίοις
ἐνέτυχεν, καὶ ὅσα ἐδόκει Χαλδαίοις ἀμφὶ τὰ ἱερὰ τὰ
ἐν Βαβυλῶνι ἔπραξε, τά τε ἄλλα καὶ τῷ Βήλῳ
καθ᾿ ἃ ἐκεῖνοι ἐξηγοῦντο ἔθυσεν.
6Αὐτὸς δὲ ἐπὶ Σούσων ἐστέλλετο· καὶ ἐντυγχάνει
αὐτῷ κατὰ τὴν ὁδὸν ὅ τε παῖς τοῦ Σουσίων
σατράπου καὶ παρὰ Φιλοξένου ἐπιστολεύς. Φιλόξενον
γὰρ εὐθὺς ἐκ τῆς μάχης ἐπὶ Σούσων ἐστάλκει
Ἀλέξανδρος. τῇ δὲ ἐπιστολῇ τῇ παρὰ Φιλοξένου
ἐνεγέγραπτο, ὅτι τήν τε πόλιν οἱ Σούσιοι παραδεδώκασιν
καὶ τὰ χρήματα πάντα σῶά ἐστιν Ἀλεξάνδρῳ.
7ἀφίκετο δὲ ἐς Σοῦσα Ἀλέξανδρος ἐκ
Βαβυλῶνος ἐν ἡμέραις εἴκοσι· καὶ παρελθὼν ἐς
τὴν πόλιν τά τε χρήματα παρέλαβεν ὄντα ἀργυρίου
τάλαντα ἐς πεντακισμύρια καὶ τὴν ἄλλην κατασκευὴν
τὴν βασιλικήν. πολλὰ δὲ καὶ ἄλλα κατελήφθη
αὐτοῦ, ὅσα Ξέρξης ἀπὸ τῆς Ἑλλάδος ἄγων
ἦλθε, τά τε ἄλλα καὶ Ἁρμοδίου καὶ Ἀριστογείτονος
8χαλκαῖ εἰκόνες. καὶ ταύτας Ἀθηναίοις
ὀπίσω πέμπει Ἀλέξανδρος, καὶ νῦν κεῖνται Ἀθήνησιν
ἐν Κεραμεικῷ αἱ εἰκόνες, ᾗ ἄνιμεν ἐς πόλιν,
καταντικρὺ μάλιστα τοῦ Μητρῴου, <οὐ> μακρὰν
τῶν Εὐδανέμων τοῦ βωμοῦ· ὅστις δὲ μεμύηται
ταῖν θεαῖν ἐν Ἐλευσῖνι, οἶδε τοῦ Εὐδανέμου τὸν
βωμὸν ἐπὶ τοῦ δαπέδου ὄντα.
9Ἐνταῦθα θύσας τῷ πατρίῳ νόμῳ Ἀλέξανδρος
καὶ λαμπάδα ποιήσας καὶ ἀγῶνα γυμνικόν, καταλιπὼν
σατράπην μὲν τῆς Σουσιανῆς Ἀβουλίτην
ἄνδρα Πέρσην, φρούραρχον δὲ ἐν τῇ ἄκρᾳ τῶν


276Anabasis of Alexander III

Mithrenes, who had surrendered the acropolis of 331 b.c. Sardis to Alexander. At Babylon too he met the Chaldaeans, and carried out all their recommendations on the Babylonian temples, and in particular sacrificed to Baal, according to their instructions.5
He himself set out for Susa.6 On the way he was6 met by the son of the satrap of Susa7 and a letter-carrier from Philoxenus, whom Alexander had sent to Susa directly after the battle. In Philoxenus’ letter it was stated that the people of Susa had handed over the city and that all the treasure was in safekeeping for Alexander. Alexander reached Susa in7 twenty days from Babylon; he entered the city and took over the treasure, up to fifty thousand Talents of silver,8 and all the rest of the royal belongings. A good deal was captured there in addition, all that Xerxes brought back from Greece, notably bronze [480–79 b.c.] statues of Harmodius and Aristogeiton, which Alexander8 sent back to the Athenians; they are now set up at Athens in the Cerameicus, on the way by which we ascend the Acropolis, just opposite the Metroön, not far from the altar of the Eudanemoi. Anyone who has been initiated into the mysteries of the Two Goddesses at Eleusis is aware that the altar of Eudanemos is in the plain.9
There Alexander sacrificed in accordance with9 ancestral custom, and held a relay torch race and athletic contest. He left behind Abulites, a Persian, as satrap of Susiana, Mazarus one of the Companions as garrison commandant in the citadel of Susa and




5Cf. i 17, 6; ii 24, 6; iii 1,4 f.; vii 17.6D. 65; QC. v 2, 1 ff. See App. VIII 6.7Abulites, vii 4, 1; D. 65, 5; QC. v 2, 8 ff; cf. §9 below.8App. X 3.9Contrast vii 19, 2 (‘vulgate’). No proof here that A. was yet domiciled at Athens.277