Arrian

ἄλλως τε ἐπενόει, κατέχων ἤδη τῷ πεζῷ
τὴν Ἀσίαν, ὅτι οὔτε ναυτικοῦ ἔτι δέοιτο, τάς τε
παραλίους πόλεις λαβὼν καταλύσει τὸ Περσῶν
ναυτικόν, οὔτε ὁπόθεν τὰς ὑπηρεσίας συμπληρώσουσιν
οὔτε ὅποι τῆς Ἀσίας προσέξουσιν ἔχοντας.
καὶ τὸν ἀετὸν ταύτῃ συνέβαλλεν, ὅτι ἐσήμηνεν
αὐτῷ ἐκ τῆς γῆς κρατήσειν τῶν νεῶν.
2Ταῦτα δὲ διαπραξάμενος ἐπὶ Καρίας ἐστέλλετο,
ὅτι ἐν Ἁλικαρνασσῷ συνεστηκέναι οὐ φαύλην
δύναμιν τῶν τε βαρβάρων καὶ ξένων ἐξηγγέλλετο.
ὅσαι δὲ ἐν μέσῳ πόλεις Μιλήτου τε καὶ Ἁλικαρνασσοῦ,
ταύτας ἐξ ἐφόδου λαβὼν καταστρατοπεδεύει
πρὸς Ἁλικαρνασσῷ, ἀπέχων τῆς πόλεως ἐς πέντε
3μάλιστα σταδίους, ὡς ἐπὶ χρονίῳ πολιορκίᾳ. ἥ τε
γὰρ φύσις τοῦ χωρίου ὀχυρὸν ἐποίει αὐτὸ καὶ ὅπῃ
τι ἐνδεῖν ὡς πρὸς ἀσφάλειαν ἐφαίνετο, ξύμπαντα
ταῦτα Μέμνων τε αὐτὸς παρών, ἤδη ἀποδεδειγμένος
πρὸς Δαρείου τῆς τε κάτω Ἀσίας καὶ τοῦ
ναυτικοῦ παντὸς ἡγεμών, ἐκ πολλοῦ παρεσκευάκει,
καὶ στρατιῶται πολλοὶ μὲν ξένοι μισθοφόροι ἐν
τῇ πόλει ἐγκατελείφθησαν, πολλοὶ δὲ καὶ Περσῶν
αὐτῶν, αἵ τε τριήρεις ἐφώρμουν τῷ λιμένι, ὡς καὶ
ἀπὸ τῶν ναυτῶν πολλὴν ὠφέλειαν γίγνεσθαι ἐς τὰ
ἔργα.
4Τῇ μὲν δὴ πρώτῃ ἡμέρᾳ προσάγοντος Ἀλεξάνδρου
τῷ τείχει κατὰ τὰς ἐπὶ Μύλασα φερούσας
πύλας ἐκδρομή τε γίγνεται τῶν ἐκ τῆς πόλεως καὶ
ἀκροβολισμός· καὶ τούτους οὐ χαλεπῶς ἀνέστειλάν
τε οἱ παρ᾿ Ἀλεξάνδρου ἀντεκδραμόντες καὶ ἐς τὴν
πόλιν κατέκλεισαν.
5Οὐ πολλαῖς δὲ ὕστερον ἡμέραις Ἀλέξανδρος
ἀναλαβὼν τούς τε ὑπασπιστὰς καὶ τὴν τῶν ἑταίρων
84Anabasis of Alexander I

controlled Asia with his land troops, he no longer334 b.c. needed a navy, and that by capturing the cities on the coast he would break up the Persian fleet, since they would have nowhere to make up their crews from, and no place in Asia where they could put in. This was what he took the eagle to mean; he was to overcome the ships from dry land.1
When he had carried out this decision, he marched2 towards Caria, on reports that a considerable force of barbarians and mercenaries had mustered at Halicarnassus.2
He captured on the march the cities between Miletus and Halicarnassus, and encamped against Halicarnassus, at about five stades distance, settling down for a long siege. For the nature of the3 site made it strong, and where any defect in its security was apparent, Memnon, who was present in person and had now been appointed by Darius to the command of lower Asia and the whole fleet,3 had made all the necessary preparations long ago; a large force of foreign mercenaries had been left in the city, with many of the Persians themselves; the triremes were guarding the harbour, so that the sailors too lent much assistance to the operations.
On the first day, as Alexander was approaching the4 wall near the gate leading to Mylasa, there was a sally from the men in the city and volleying at safe distance; Alexander’s troops had no difficulty in driving back the assailants by a counter charge, and shut them up in the city.
A few days later Alexander took the hypaspists, the5 Companion cavalry and the infantry battalions of



1At present Al. was probably thinking only of the coast of Asia Minor; after Issus he continued the same strategy (ii 17). Of. D. 22, 5–23, 3; P. 17, 2; Introd. 44; App. II.2For operations in Caria cf. D. 23, 4–27, 6.3D. 23, 5 f.85