Arrian

περιοίκων τε καὶ ὅσοι τῶν στρατιωτῶν ἀπόμαχοι
ἦσαν ἐς τὴν Ἀλεξάνδρειαν Νικάνορα μέν, ἕνα τῶν
ἑταίρων, τὴν πόλιν αὐτὴν κοσμεῖν ἐκέλευσε, σατράπην
δὲ Τυρίεσπιν κατέστησε τῆς τε χώρας τῆς
Παραπαμισαδῶν καὶ τῆς ἄλλης ἔστε ἐπὶ τὸν
6Κωφῆνα ποταμόν. ἀφικόμενος δὲ ἐς Νίκαιαν
πόλιν καὶ τῇ Ἀθηνᾷ θύσας προὐχώρει ὡς ἐπὶ τὸν
Κωφῆνα, προπέμψας κήρυκα ὡς Ταξίλην τε καὶ
τοὺς ἐπὶ τάδε τοῦ Ἰνδοῦ ποταμοῦ, κελεύσας
ἀπαντᾶν ὅπως ἂν ἑκάστοις προχωρῇ. καὶ Ταξίλης
τε καὶ οἱ ἄλλοι ὕπαρχοι ἀπήντων, δῶρα τὰ μέγιστα
παρ᾿ Ἰνδοῖς νομιζόμενα κομίζοντες, καὶ τοὺς
ἐλέφαντας δώσειν ἔφασκον τοὺς παρὰ σφίσιν
ὄντας, ἀριθμὸν ἐς πέντε καὶ εἴκοσιν.
7Ἔνθα δὴ διελὼν τὴν στρατιὰν Ἡφαιστίωνα μὲν
καὶ Περδίκκαν ἐκπέμπει ἐς τὴν Πευκελαῶτιν
χώραν ὡς ἐπὶ τὸν Ἰνδὸν ποταμόν, ἔχοντας τήν τε
Γοργίου τάξιν καὶ Κλείτου καὶ Μελεάγρου καὶ τῶν
ἑταίρων ἱππέων τοὺς ἡμίσεας καὶ τοὺς μισθοφόρους
ἱππέας ξύμπαντας, προστάξας τά τε κατὰ
τὴν ὁδὸν χωρία ἢ βίᾳ ἐξαιρεῖν ἢ ὁμολογίᾳ παρίστασθαι
καὶ ἐπὶ τὸν Ἰνδὸν ποταμὸν ἀφικομένους
παρασκευάζειν ὅσα ἐς τὴν διάβασιν τοῦ ποταμοῦ
ξύμφορα. ξὺν τούτοις δὲ καὶ Ταξίλης καὶ οἱ ἄλλοι
8ὕπαρχοι στέλλονται. καὶ οὗτοι ὡς ἀφίκοντο πρὸς
τὸν Ἰνδὸν ποταμόν, ἔπρασσον ὅσα ἐξ Ἀλεξάνδρου
ἦν τεταγμένα. Ἄστις δὲ ὁ τῆς Πευκελαώτιδος
ὕπαρχος νεωτερίσας αὐτός τε ἀπόλλυται καὶ τὴν
πόλιν προσαπώλεσεν, ἐς ἥντινα ξυμπεφεύγει.



414Anabasis Of Alexander IV

more people from the neighbourhood together with327 b.c. all the soldiers unfit for fighting and ordered Nicanor, one of the Companions, to govern the city itself, while he appointed Tyriespis satrap of the country both of the Parapamisadae and of the land as far as the river Cophen. Then after reaching Nicaea5 and6 sacrificing to Athena, he advanced towards the Cophen,6 having sent a herald in advance to Taxilas and the Indians on this side of the river Indus with orders to meet him, each at their earliest convenience; Taxilas and the other hyparchs7 complied, bringing the gifts the Indians prize most, and promised to give him the elephants they had, twenty-five in number.
Here he divided his army, and sent Hephaestion 7 327–6 b.c. and Perdiccas to the territory of Peucelaotis towards the river Indus, with the battalions of Gorgias, Clitus and Meleager, half of the Companion cavalry and all the mercenary cavalry, with instructions to take by storm or receive in surrender all towns on their march; when they had reached the Indus, they were to get everything ready for the crossing of the river.8 Taxilas and the other hyparchs were sent with them. They arrived at the river Indus and carried out8 Alexander’s instructions. But Astis, the hyparch of the district of Peucelaotis, attempted revolt, and perished himself, besides involving in ruin the city to


5For Alexandria and Nicaea see iii 28, 4 n.6The river Kabul. See App. VIII 19 f. on chronology and geography of all operations in the rest of this book.7App. XV 2. Taxilas had submitted to Al. while in Sogdiana (D. 86, 4, cf. QC. viii 12, 5), probably in hope of aid against Porus, his old enemy (v 18, 7); he ruled at Taxila near Rawalpindi, Porus between Hydaspes (Jhelum) and Acesines (Chenab). § 8 shows that Taxilas was supporting a rebel against the ruler of the Astaceni (capital, Charsadda), whose own ‘revolt’ against Al. was probably provoked by fear of Taxilas.8QC. viii 10, 2. A. does not mention the mercenary foot, most Balkan troops and the mounted archers in either army.415