Arrian
4. Αὐτὸς δὲ τὴν πόλιν, ἣν ἐπενόει, τειχίσας ἐν
ἡμέραις εἴκοσι καὶ ξυνοικίσας ἐς αὐτὴν τῶν τε
Ἑλλήνων μισθοφόρων καὶ ὅστις τῶν προσοικούντων
βαρβάρων ἐθελοντὴς μετέσχε τῆς ξυνοικήσεως
καί τινας καὶ τῶν ἐκ τοῦ στρατοπέδου Μακεδόνων,
ὅσοι ἀπόμαχοι ἤδη ἦσαν, θύσας τοῖς θεοῖς ὡς
νόμος αὐτῷ καὶ ἀγῶνα ἱππικόν τε καὶ γυμνικὸν
ποιήσας, ὡς οὐκ ἀπαλλασσομένους ἑώρα τοὺς
2Σκύθας ἀπὸ τῆς ὄχθης τοῦ ποταμοῦ, ἀλλ᾿ ἐκτοξεύοντες
ἐς τὸν ποταμὸν ἑωρῶντο οὐ πλατὺν ταύτῃ
ὄντα, καί τινα καὶ πρὸς ὕβριν τοῦ Ἀλεξάνδρου
βαρβαρικῶς ἐθρασύναντο, ὡς οὐκ ἂν τολμήσαντα
Ἀλέξανδρον ἅψασθαι Σκυθῶν ἢ μαθόντα ἂν ὅτι
περ τὸ διάφορον Σκύθαις τε καὶ τοῖς Ἀσιανοῖς
βαρβάροις,—ὑπὸ τούτων παροξυνόμενος ἐπενόει
διαβαίνειν ἐπ᾿ αὐτοὺς καὶ τὰς διφθέρας παρεσκεύαζεν
3ἐπὶ τῷ πόρῳ. θυομένῳ δὲ ἐπὶ τῇ διαβάσει
τὰ ἱερὰ οὐκ ἐγίγνετο· ὁ δὲ βαρέως μὲν
ἔφερεν οὐ γιγνομένων, ὅμως δὲ ἐκαρτέρει καὶ
ἔμενεν. ὡς δὲ οὐκ ἀνίεσαν οἱ Σκύθαι, αὖθις ἐπὶ τῇ
διαβάσει ἐθύετο, καὶ αὖθις1 κίνδυνον αὐτῷ σημαίνεσθαι
Ἀρίστανδρος ὁ μάντις ἔφραζεν· ὁ δὲ
κρεῖσσον ἔφη ἐς ἔσχατον κινδύνου ἐλθεῖν ἢ κατεστραμμένον
ξύμπασαν ὀλίγου δεῖν τὴν Ἀσίαν
γέλωτα εἶναι Σκύθαις, καθάπερ Δαρεῖος ὁ Ξέρξου
πατὴρ πάλαι ἐγένετο. Ἀρίστανδρος δὲ οὐκ ἔφη
παρὰ τὰ ἐκ τοῦ θείου σημαινόμενα ἄλλα ἀποδείξεσθαι,
ὅτι ἄλλα ἐθέλει ἀκοῦσαι Ἀλέξανδρος.
4Ὁ δέ, ὡς αἵ τε διφθέραι αὐτῷ παρεσκευασμέναι
ἦσαν ἐπὶ τῷ πόρῳ καὶ ὁ στρατὸς ἐξωπλισμένος

1αὖθις Castiglioni: αὖ ἐς codd.346Anabasis Of Alexander IV
4. Alexander himself now spent twenty days in 329 b.c. building the wall of the city he proposed to found, and settling there some Greek mercenaries, any of the neighbouring barbarians who shared in the settlement as volunteers, and also some Macedonians from the army who were no longer fit for active service.1 He then sacrificed to the gods in accordance with his custom and held a cavalry and athletic contest. As he saw that the Scythians were not leaving the river bank but were observed shooting2 from it arrows into the river, which was not very broad here, and were also insulting Alexander with barbaric boasts that he would not dare to touch Scythians or he would learn the difference between Scythians and the barbarians of Asia, his irritation made him plan to cross and attack them, and he began to get ready the hides for the crossing. But when he sacrificed with3 a view to crossing, the omens were not favourable. Though much annoyed by this, still he restrained himself and stayed where he was. But as the Scythians did not give up, he sacrificed again with a view to crossing, and Aristander the prophet again said that danger to him was portended. Alexander replied that it was better to go to any extremity of danger than, after subduing almost the whole of Asia, to be a laughing-stock to Scythians, as Darius the father of Xerxes had been long ago. Yet Aristander refused to interpret the sacrifices in any way contrary to the signs from heaven because Alexander desired to hear something different.
As soon as the hides had been got ready for his4 crossing, and the army was stationed on the bank

1App. VIII 16. Types of settlers: iii 1, 5n.347