Arrian

ξύμπαντας, καὶ αὐτοὶ ἀπαθεῖς ἀπεχώρησαν
3ἐς τὴν ἄκραν. ὡς δὲ καὶ οἱ ὑπ᾿ Ἀλεξάνδρου
ἐσταλμένοι ἐς Μαράκανδα ἤδη προσάγοντες Σπιταμένει
ἐξηγγέλλοντο, τὴν μὲν πολιορκίαν ἐκλείπει
τῆς ἄκρας, αὐτὸς δὲ ὡς ἐς τὰ βασίλεια1 τῆς
Σογδιανῆς ἀνεχώρει. Φαρνούχης δὲ καὶ οἱ ξὺν
αὐτῷ στρατηγοὶ σπεύδοντες ἐξελάσαι αὐτὸν παντάπασιν
ἐπί τε τὰ ὅρια τῆς Σογδιανῆς ξυνείποντο
ὑποχωροῦντι καὶ εἰς τοὺς Νομάδας τοὺς Σκύθας
4οὐδενὶ λογισμῷ ξυνεσβάλλουσιν. ἔνθα δὴ προσλαβὼν
ὁ Σπιταμένης τῶν Σκυθῶν ἱππέων ἐς ἑξακοσίους
προσεπήρθη ὑπὸ τῆς ξυμμαχίας τῆς Σκυθικῆς
δέξασθαι ἐπιόντας τοὺς Μακεδόνας· παραταξάμενος
δὲ ἐν χωρίῳ ὁμαλῷ πρὸς τῇ ἐρήμῳ τῆς
Σκυθικῆς ὑπομεῖναι μὲν τοὺς πολεμίους ἢ αὐτὸς ἐς
αὐτοὺς ἐμβαλεῖν οὐκ ἤθελε, περιϊππεύων δὲ ἐτόξευεν
5ἐς τὴν φάλαγγα τῶν πεζῶν. καὶ ἐπελαυνόντων
μὲν αὐτοῖς τῶν ἀμφὶ Φαρνούχην ἔφευγεν
εὐπετῶς, οἷα δὴ ὠκυτέρων τε αὐτοῖς καὶ ἐν τῷ
τότε ἀκμαιοτέρων ὄντων τῶν ἵππων, τοῖς δὲ ἀμφὶ
Ἀνδρόμαχον ὑπό τε τῆς ξυνεχοῦς πορείας καὶ ἅμα
χιλοῦ ἀπορίᾳ κεκάκωτο ἡ ἵππος· μένουσι δὲ ἢ
ὑποχωροῦσιν ἐπέκειντο εὐρώστως οἱ Σκύθαι.
6ἔνθα δὴ πολλῶν μὲν τιτρωσκομένων ἐκ τῶν
τοξευμάτων, ἔστι δὲ ὧν καὶ πιπτόντων, ἐς πλαίσιον
ἰσόπλευρον τάξαντες τοὺς στρατιώτας ἀνεχώρουν
ὡς ἐπὶ τὸν ποταμὸν τὸν Πολυτίμητον, ὅτι νάπος
ταύτῃ ἦν, ὡς μήτε τοῖς βαρβάροις εὐπετὲς ἔτι
εἶναι ἐκτοξεύειν ἐς αὐτούς, σφίσι τε οἱ πεζοὶ
ὠφελιμώτεροι ὦσι.
1βασίλεια codd: βόρεια Polak, Roos etc, but see App. VIII 16.352Anabasis Of Alexander IV

and retired unharmed themselves to the citadel. As3 329 b.c. soon as Spitamenes heard that the force sent by Alexander to Maracanda was already drawing near, he abandoned the siege of the citadel and retreated himself towards the royal residence of Sogdiana.3 Pharnuches and the officers with him, hurrying on to drive him out altogether, pursued as he withdrew to the frontiers of Sogdiana, and without calculating the risk came into conflict with the nomad Scythians as well. On this Spitamenes, adding some six hundred4 Scythian horse to his force, was encouraged by the Scythian reinforcement to await the Macedonian attack; he drew up his men on a level space near the Scythian desert, but his plan was not merely to await the enemy, or to charge them himself; wheeling round and round, he shot volleys of arrows into the infantry phalanx. When Pharnuches’ troops5 charged them, he had no difficulty in riding off, as his horses were swifter and at the moment fresher, while the horses of Andromachus’ troops had suffered from the forced march and want of fodder. But when they stood their ground or withdrew, the Scythians swooped vigorously upon them. By now many were6 being wounded by the arrows, and some actually falling, and the officers formed their men into a square and withdrew towards the river Polytimetus [Zeravshan], as there was a wooded glen near by, so that the Scythians could no longer easily shoot at them, and their infantry might be of more use to them.
3See App. VIII 16.353