Arrian

ξυνεληλυθότες) καταφεύγουσιν ἐς τὴν ἄκραν. καὶ
τούτους περιστρατοπεδεύσας Ἀλέξανδρος ἡμέραν
μίαν ἐφρούρησεν· οἱ δὲ ἐνδείᾳ ὕδατος ἐνεχείρισαν
σφᾶς Ἀλεξάνδρῳ.
5Τὴν δὲ ἑβδόμην πόλιν ἐξ ἐφόδου ἔλαβε, Πτολεμαῖος
μὲν λέγει, ὅτι αὐτοὺς σφᾶς ἐνδόντας, Ἀριστόβουλος
δέ, ὅτι βίᾳ καὶ ταύτην ἐξεῖλεν καὶ ὅτι
πάντας τοὺς καταληφθέντας ἐν αὐτῇ ἀπέκτεινε.
Πτολεμαῖος δὲ κατανεῖμαι λέγει αὐτὸν τοὺς ἀνθρώπους
τῇ στρατιᾷ καὶ δεδεμένους κελεῦσαι φυλάσσεσθαι
ἔστ᾿ ἂν ἐκ τῆς χώρας ἀπαλλάττηται αὐτός,
ὡς μηδένα ἀπολείπεσθαι τῶν τὴν ἀπόστασιν πραξάντων.
6Ἐν τούτῳ δὲ τῶν τε ἐκ τῆς Ἀσίας Σκυθῶν
στρατιὰ ἀφικνεῖται πρὸς τὰς ὄχθας τοῦ ποταμοῦ
τοῦ Τανάϊδος, ἀκούσαντες οἱ πολλοὶ αὐτῶν, ὅτι
ἔστιν οἳ καὶ τῶν ἐπέκεινα τοῦ ποταμοῦ βαρβάρων
ἀπ᾿ Ἀλεξάνδρου ἀφεστᾶσιν, ὡς, εἰ δή τι λόγου ὂν
ἄξιον νεωτερίζοιτο, καὶ αὐτοὶ ἐπιθησόμενοι τοῖς
Μακεδόσι. καὶ οἱ ἀμφὶ Σπιταμένην δὲ ἀπηγγέλθησαν
ὅτι τοὺς ἐν Μαρακάνδοις καταλειφθέντας
7ἐν τῇ ἄκρᾳ πολιορκοῦσιν. ἔνθα δὴ Ἀλέξανδρος
ἐπὶ μὲν τοὺς ἀμφὶ Σπιταμένην Ἀνδρόμαχόν τε
ἀποστέλλει καὶ Μενέδημον καὶ Κάρανον, ἱππέας
μὲν ἔχοντας τῶν ἑταίρων ἐς ἑξήκοντα καὶ τῶν
μισθοφόρων ὀκτακοσίους, ὧν Κάρανος ἡγεῖτο,
πεζοὺς δὲ μισθοφόρους ἐς χιλίους πεντακοσίους·
ἐπιτάσσει δὲ αὐτοῖς Φαρνούχην τὸν ἑρμηνέα, τὸ μὲν
γένος Λύκιον τὸν Φαρνούχην, ἐμπείρως δὲ τῆς τε
φωνῆς τῶν ταύτῃ βαρβάρων ἔχοντα καὶ τὰ ἄλλα
ὁμιλῆσαι αὐτοῖς δεξιὸν φαινόμενον.
344Anabasis Of Alexander IV

came to some fifteen thousand fighting men) took 329 b.c refuge in the citadel: Alexander blockaded and kept guard on them for a day, and because of want of water they surrendered to him.
The seventh city he took at first assault. Ptolemy5 says that they surrendered, Aristobulus that Alexander captured this city too by force, and killed all he found within; Ptolemy also says that he distributed the men among his army and ordered them to be kept bound and under guard till he left their country, so that none of those responsible for the revolt should be left behind.
Meanwhile an army of the Asian Scythians arrived6 on the banks of the river Tanais; most of them had heard that some of the barbarians on that side of the river had revolted from Alexander, and they intended, should any important rising occur, to join in attacking the Macedonians.1 News was also brought that Spitamenes and his troops were besieging those who had been left behind at Maracanda in the citadel. On this Alexander sent against the troops of Spitamenes,7 Andromachus, Menedemus, and Caranus, with cavalry comprising some sixty Companions and eight hundred of the mercenaries under Caranus, and with about fifteen hundred mercenary infantry; and he placed these forces under command of Pharnuches the interpreter, a Lycian by birth who was expert in the language of the barbarians of these parts and seemed in general to be skilful in dealings with them.2
1QC. vii 7, 1 thinks they were menaced by the new city. ‘Asia’: there is a muddle here. On any view Al. was in Asia, but if the ‘Tanais’ was the frontier between Europe and Asia (App. XII 4), Scythians across the river were in Europe!2QC. 6, 24 names only Menedemus and gives him 3,000 foot and 800 horse.345