Arrian

ξύνεγγυς τῆς πέτρας τῆς Ἀόρνου ᾠκεῖτο, Κρατερὸν
μὲν ξὺν μέρει τῆς στρατιᾶς καταλείπει αὐτοῦ,
σῖτόν τε ἐς τὴν πόλιν ὡς πλεῖστον ξυνάγειν <κελεύσας>1
καὶ ὅσα ἄλλα ἐς χρόνιον τριβήν, ὡς
ἐντεῦθεν ὁρμωμένους τοὺς Μακεδόνας χρονίῳ
πολιορχίᾳ ἐκτρυχῶσαι τοὺς κατέχοντας τὴν πέτραν,
8εἰ μὴ ἐξ ἐφόδου ληφθείη. αὐτὸς δὲ τοὺς τοξότας τε
ἀναλαβὼν καὶ τοὺς Ἀγριᾶνας καὶ τὴν Κοίνου
τάξιν καὶ ἀπὸ τῆς ἄλλης φάλαγγος ἐπιλέξας τοὺς
κουφοτάτους τε καὶ ἅμα εὐοπλοτάτους καὶ τῶν
ἑταίρων ἱππέων ἐς διακοσίους καὶ ἱπποτοξότας ἐς
ἑκατὸν προσῆγε τῇ πέτρᾳ. καὶ ταύτῃ μὲν τῇ
ἡμέρᾳ κατεστρατοπεδεύσατο, ἵνα ἐπιτήδειον αὐτῷ
ἐφαίνετο, τῇ δὲ ὑστεραίᾳ ὀλίγον προελθὼν ὡς πρὸς
τὴν πέτραν αὖθις ἐστρατοπεδεύσατο.
29. Καὶ ἐν τούτῳ ἧκον παρ᾿ αὐτὸν τῶν προσχώρων
τινές, σφᾶς τε αὐτοὺς ἐνδιδόντες καὶ
ἡγήσεσθαι φάσκοντες ἐς τῆς πέτρας τὸ ἐπιμαχώτατον,
ὅθεν οὐ χαλεπὸν αὐτῷ ἔσεσθαι ἑλεῖν τὸ
χωρίον. καὶ ξὺν τούτοις πέμπει Πτολεμαῖον τὸν
Λάγου τὸν σωματοφύλακα τούς τε Ἀγριᾶνας
ἄγοντα καὶ τοὺς ψιλοὺς τοὺς ἄλλους καὶ τῶν
ὑπασπιστῶν ἐπιλέκτους, προστάξας, ἐπειδὰν καταλάβῃ
τὸ χωρίον, κατέχειν μὲν αὐτὸ ἰσχυρᾷ φυλακῇ,
2οἷ δὲ σημαίνειν ὅτι ἔχεται. καὶ Πτολεμαῖος
ἐλθὼν ὁδὸν τραχεῖάν τε καὶ δύσπορον λανθάνει τοὺς
βαρβάρους κατασχὼν τὸν τόπον· καὶ τοῦτον
χάρακι ἐν κύκλῳ καὶ τάφρῳ ὀχυρώσας πυρσὸν



1Some such word must have been omitted (Polak).438Anabasis Of Alexander IV

the city of Embolima, which lay near the rock of326 b.c. Aornos, he left Craterus there with part of the army with instructions to get as much grain as possible into the city and everything else a long delay would make necessary, so that the Macedonians might use the city as a base, and wear out the holders of the rock by a long blockade, if it were not captured by first assault. He himself took the archers, the Agrianians and8 Coenus’ battalion and, selecting the most nimble but at the same time the best armed men from the rest of the phalanx, about two hundred of the Companion cavalry and a hundred mounted archers, approached the rock. That day he encamped in a place he thought convenient; on the next he advanced a little nearer the rock and camped again.
29. At this point some of the neighbouring people came to Alexander and surrendered, promising to lead him to the part of the rock which could best be assaulted, from which he could capture the position without difficulty.1 With these men he sent Ptolemy son of Lagus, the bodyguard, in command of the Agrianians, the light troops including men chosen from the hypaspists,2 ordering him as soon as he captured the position to occupy it with a strong garrison, and signal to him that it was in his hands. Ptolemy pursued a rough and difficult track and2 seized the place, unobserved by the barbarians; he strengthened it with a stockade all round and a trench, and raised a fire-signal from the height where


1See also D. 85 f.; QC. viii 11. Pt. is evidently A’s source
(even if the allusions to Heracles are inserted from Ar.). See iii 29, 7 n. Note that Pt. records an implied criticism of himself in § 4. Chares (Jacoby no. 125 F. 16) has an anecdote that may relate to this siege and date it c. April 326 b.c., cf. Stein pp. 152 f.2Introd. 62.439