Arrian

ἥκοντα καὶ τὸ στρατόπεδον ἐν κύκλῳ σφῶν πάντῃ,
πέμψαντες πρέσβεις ἐδέοντο ἐφ᾿ οἷσπερ τὸ πρότερον
ξυμβῆναι. καὶ Ἀλέξανδρος τό τε χωρίον ἰσχυρὸν
ἰδὼν καὶ αὐτὸς ὡς οὐκ ἐπὶ χρόνιον πολιορκίαν
παρεσκευασμένος ἐπὶ τοῖς αὐτοῖς μὲν οὐδὲ ὣς
4ξυνέβη πρὸς αὐτούς· ὁμήρους δὲ δοῦναι σφῶν τοὺς
δυνατωτάτους ἐκέλευσεν καὶ τοὺς ἵππους, οὓς
πρόσθεν ὡμολόγησαν, καὶ ἑκατὸν τάλαντα ἀντὶ
τῶν πεντήκοντα, καὶ πείθεσθαι τῷ σατράπῃ τῷ
<ὑπ᾿> Ἀλεξάνδρου ταχθέντι καὶ φόρους ἀποφέρειν
ὅσα ἔτη Μακεδόσι, καὶ ὑπὲρ τῆς χώρας διακριθῆναι,
ἣν τῶν προσχώρων οὖσαν βίᾳ κατέχειν ἐν
αἰτίᾳ ἦσαν.
5Ὡς δὲ πάντα οἱ ἐπεχώρησαν, ἀνέζευξεν ἐς
Πέργην, κἀκεῖθεν ἐς Φρυγίαν ὥρμητο· ἦν δὲ αὐτῷ
ἡ πορεία παρὰ Τελμισσὸν πόλιν. οἱ δὲ ἄνθρωποι
οὗτοι τὸ μὲν γένος Πισίδαι εἰσὶ βάρβαροι, χωρίον
δὲ οἰκοῦσιν ὑπερύψηλον καὶ πάντῃ ἀπότομον, καὶ ἡ
6ὁδὸς παρὰ τὴν πόλιν χαλεπή. καθήκει γὰρ ἐκ τῆς
πόλεως ὅρος ἔστε ἐπὶ τὴν ὁδόν, καὶ τοῦτο μὲν
αὐτοῦ ἐν τῇ ὁδῷ ἀποπαύεται, ἀντίπορον δὲ αὐτῷ
ἄλλο ὄρος ἐστὶν οὐ μεῖον ἀπότομον. καὶ ταῦτα τὰ
ὄρη ὥσπερ πύλας ποιεῖ ἐπὶ τῇ ὁδῷ, καὶ ἔστιν
ὀλίγῃ φυλακῇ κατέχοντας τὰ ὄρη ταῦτα ἄπορον
ποιεῖν τὴν πάροδον. καὶ τότε οἱ Τελμισσεῖς
πανδημεὶ ἐκβεβοηθηκότες ἀμφότερα τὰ ὄρη κατεῖχον.
7ταῦτα δὴ ἰδὼν Ἀλέξανδρος στρατοπεδεύεσθαι
αὐτοῦ, ὅπως εἶχον, ἐκέλευε τοὺς Μακεδόνας,
γνοὺς, ὅτι οὐ μενοῦσι πανδημεὶ οἱ Τελμισσεῖς
αὐλιζομένους σφᾶς ἰδόντες, ἀλλ᾿ ἀποχωρήσουσιν ἐς
τὴν πόλιν πλησίον οὖσαν οἱ πολλοὶ αὐτῶν, ὅσον
φυλακὴν καταλιπόντες ἐπὶ τοῖς ὄρεσι. καὶ ξυνέβη
110Anabasis of Alexander I

they sent envoys to beg for an agreement on their331–3 b.c. old terms. Alexander saw that the position was strong, and that he was not prepared for a long siege, yet even so he refused a pact with them on the same conditions. He demanded their most influential4 men as hostages, the horses they had previously promised and a hundred Talents in place of fifty; they were to be subject to the satrap appointed by him, and pay yearly tribute to Macedon and an adjudication was to be held about the territory they were accused of having annexed by violence from their neighbours.
When all this had been conceded, he moved to5 Perge and thence began his march to Phrygia, which led past the city of Telmissus.1 The Telmissians are Pisidian barbarians in origin, and inhabit a very high position, precipitous all round; the road past the city is difficult. A mountain stretches down6 from the city to the road, and there ends; but opposite is another, equally abrupt. These mountains virtually make gates on the road, and a small guard can prevent all approach by holding them. On this occasion the Telmissians came out in full force and occupied both mountains. Seeing this,7 Alexander ordered the Macedonians to camp where they were, knowing that the Telmissians, on seeing them in bivouacks, would not wait there in full force, but would for the most part drift away to the city close by, leaving only a guard on the mountains.

1Properly Termessus (coins and inscriptions).111