Arrian

Μακεδόνες ξυγχωροῦσιν. ὁ δὲ ἀπελθὼν αὐτῇ τῇ
ἡμέρᾳ τὸν Πολέμωνα ἐπανήγαγε. καὶ ταύτῃ πολὺ
ἔτι μᾶλλον ἢ πρόσθεν ἔξω αἰτίας ἐφάνη Ἀμύντας.
ἀλλὰ ὀλίγον γὰρ ὕστερον κώμην τινὰ πολιορκῶν
τοξευθεὶς ἐκ τῆς πληγῆς ἐτελεύτησεν, ὥστε οὐδὲν
πλέον αὐτῷ γίγνεται τὴν κρίσιν ἀποφυγόντι ὅτι μὴ
ἀγαθῷ νομιζομένῳ ἀποθανεῖν.
4Ἀλέξανδρος δέ, καταστήσας ἐπὶ τοὺς ἑταίρους
ἱππάρχας δύο, Ἡφαιστίωνά τε τὸν Ἀμύντορος καὶ
Κλεῖτον τὸν Δρωπίδου, καὶ δίχα διελὼν τὴν τάξιν
τῶν ἑταίρων, ὅτι οὐδὲ φίλτατον ἂν ἠβούλετο ἕνα
τοσούτων ἱππέων, ἄλλως τε καὶ τῶν κρατίστων τοῦ
παντὸς ἱππικοῦ κατά τε ἀξίωσιν καὶ τὴν ἄλλην
ἀρετήν, ἐξηγεῖσθαι, ἀφικνεῖται ἐς τοὺς πάλαι μὲν
Ἀριάσπας καλουμένους, ὕστερον δὲ Εὐεργέτας
ἐπονομασθέντας, ὅτι Κύρῳ τῷ Καμβύσου ξυνεπελάβοντο
5τῆς ἐς Σκύθας ἐλάσεως. καὶ τούτους
Ἀλέξανδρος ὧν τε ἐς Κῦρον ὑπῆρξαν οἱ πρόγονοι
αὐτῶν τιμήσας καὶ αὐτοὺς καταμαθὼν ἄνδρας οὐ
κατὰ τοὺς ἄλλους τοὺς ταύτῃ βαρβάρους πολιτεύοντας,
ἀλλὰ τοῦ δικαίου ἴσα καὶ τοῖς κρατίστοις
τῶν Ἑλλήνων μεταποιουμένους, ἐλευθέρους τε
ἀφῆκεν καὶ χώραν τῆς ὁμόρου ὅσην αὐτοὶ σφίσιν
ᾔτησαν, οὐ πολλὴν δὲ οὐδ᾿ αὐτοὶ ᾔτησαν, προσέθηκεν.
ἐνταῦθα θύσας τῷ Ἀπόλλωνι Δημήτριον
μὲν ἕνα τῶν σωματοφυλάκων ὑποπτεύσας μετασχεῖν
Φιλώτᾳ τῆς ἐπιβουλῆς ξυνέλαβε· σωματοφύλακα
δὲ ἀντὶ Δημητρίου ἀπέδειξε Πτολεμαῖον
τὸν Λάγου.
28. Ταῦτα δὲ διαπραξάμενος προῄει ὡς ἐπὶ


318Anabasis of Alexander III

very day and brought him back; and thus his own 330 b.c. innocence appeared much clearer than before. Soon after, however, when besieging a village, he received an arrow wound of which he died; so that all he gained from his acquittal was that he died with his good name unsmirched.
Alexander now put two hipparchs in charge of the4 Companions, Hephaestion son of Amyntor and Clitus son of Dropides, and after dividing the Companions’ brigade into two parts, since he would not have wished a single man, though his closest friend,1 to command so large a body of cavalry, especially as it was the best of all his mounted force in reputation and valour, he arrived among the people formerly called Ariaspians, but later also nicknamed Benefactors, because they assisted Cyrus son of Cambyses in his Scythian expedition. Alexander honoured this5 people for the services their ancestors had done to Cyrus and from his own observation that they were not governed like the other barbarians of these parts, but also claimed to follow justice as much as the best of the Greeks; he therefore granted them freedom and added to their territory as much as they asked for themselves of the neighbouring country, though they only asked for a modest portion.2 There he sacrificed to Apollo, arrested Demetrius, one of the bodyguards, suspecting that he had a hand in Philotas’ conspiracy,3 and appointed as bodyguard Ptolemy son of Lagus in his place.
28. After carrying out all these measures, Alexander



1i.e. not even Hephaestion.2D. 81; QC. vii 3, 1 f. make Al. appoint a governor with different names, five days out of the Zarangaean capital (QC.). Cf. App. Viii 11 f.3QC. vi 11, 35 ff. makes him die with Philotas.319