Appendices

speech (11, 2 ff.) must have been invented by a writer who had no contact with persons then at Al’s court or else misunderstood what they told him. Part of it reads like an attack on any deification of a mere human (11, 2–6), but it may also suggest that deification is only inappropriate in a man’s own lifetime (11, 7). Neither of these contentions is likely to have been original to A. himself. He lived in a time when for centuries past people in the Greek world had been accustomed to deify the living ruler, king or emperor. Admittedly at Rome itself official apotheosis of the Caesars was deferred till after death, and it might be suggested that A., writing when already a highly placed senator (but cf. Introd. 1 and Appendix in vol. II), composed the speech under the influence of such Roman ideas. But though the words are surely his, I doubt if he would himself have consciously invented the substance of the speech or have imputed to Callisthenes a purely Roman conception, which had no currency in the contemporary Greek world where he had been brought up. It is far more likely that the invention belongs to the late fourth or early third century when ruler cults still attracted objections (C. Habicht, Gottmenschentum und griechische Städte, 213 ff.); in Macedonia, on whose customs the speech lays weight, it was never introduced, and in other Hellenistic kingdoms Al’s immediate successors were not officially recognized as gods in their own lifetime. The fact that A. gives so much space to the contentions ascribed to Callisthenes may suggest that when he read them he was favourably impressed; certainly he explicitly commends Callisthenes for his disapproval of Al’s claim to proscynesis and adoption of Persian dress and ceremonies (10, 1). In vii 29 he 
540Appendices

was to take a different view. It looks as if he was readily influenced by what he had last perused.
11. By contrast he condemns Callisthenes for his alleged boastfulness (10, 2) and, unlike P. (54, 2), for his insolence to Al. at the banquet scene (12, 6), which in his view made it natural for Al. to suspect him of treason (12, 7). His comments on the conduct appropriate to a king’s servant (12, 6) may recall Tacitus’ preference for a middle path between ‘abruptam contumaciam et deforme obsequium’ (Annals iv 20) and be taken as giving some support to the hypothesis that he wrote when he had known from his experience the practical conditions of life at a court; this would not, however, imply that the Anabasis was composed after his legateship in Cappadocia. The attitude revealed betrays no affinity with the admiration his old teacher, Epictetus, had expressed for the outspoken Helvidius Priscus (Epict. i 2 passim, esp. 19 ff.). True, Epictetus is advocating the principle that a man must be true to his own personality, and the personality of Helvidius was very different from that of Callisthenes, who was accused in antiquity of ‘deifying’ Al. in his history, though making him into a son of Zeus (App. V) hardly amounted to that, and of whom Timaeus said that he deserved his fate for corrupting Al. with his flattery (Jacoby no. 124 T. 20 f., cf. F 31). Neither A. nor P., who has other anecdotes about Callisthenes’ rift with Al. which illustrate his lack of tact (52 ff.), explains or even notices the seemingly flagrant contradiction between the character of his history and his conduct at court. One might think that if they had read the history for themselves that problem must have impinged on them too forcibly to be ignored,
541