Arrian

τε ἦν ὑψηλοτέρῳ τείχει ἤπερ αἱ ἄλλαι, οἷα
δὴ ὑπὸ Κύρου οἰκισθεῖσα, καὶ τοῦ πλείστου καὶ
μαχιμωτάτου τῶν ταύτῃ βαρβάρων ἐς ταύτην
συμπεφευγότος οὐχ ὡσαύτως ῥᾳδία ἐξ ἐφόδου
ἑλεῖν τοῖς Μακεδόσιν ἐγίγνετο. ἀλλὰ μηχανὰς γὰρ
προσάγων τῷ τείχει Ἀλέξανδρος ταύτῃ μὲν κατασείειν
ἐπενόει τὸ τεῖχος καὶ κατὰ τὸ ἀεὶ παραρρηγνύμενον
2αὐτοῦ τὰς προσβολὰς ποιεῖσθαι. αὐτὸς
δὲ ὡς κατεῖδε τοὺς ἔκρους τοῦ ποταμοῦ, ὃς διὰ τῆς
πόλεως χειμάρρους ὢν διέρχεται, ξηροὺς ἐν τῷ
τότε ὕδατος καὶ οὐ ξυνεχεῖς τοῖς τείχεσιν, ἀλλ᾿
οἵους παρασχεῖν πάροδον τοῖς στρατιώταις διαδῦναι
ἐς τὴν πόλιν, ἀναλαβὼν τούς τε σωματοφύλακας
καὶ τοὺς ὑπασπιστὰς καὶ τοὺς τοξότας καὶ τοὺς
Ἀγριᾶνας τετραμμένων τῶν βαρβάρων πρὸς τὰς
μηχανὰς καὶ τοὺς ταύτῃ προσμαχομένους λανθάνει
κατὰ τοὺς ἔκρους ξὺν ὀλίγοις τὸ πρῶτον παρελθὼν
3ἐς τὴν πόλιν· ἀναρρήξας δὲ ἔνδοθεν τῶν πυλῶν, αἳ
κατὰ τοῦτο τὸ χωρίον ἦσαν, δέχεται καὶ τοὺς
ἄλλους στρατιώτας εὐπετῶς. ἔνθα δὴ οἱ βάρβαροι
ἐχομένην ἤδη τὴν πόλιν αἰσθόμενοι ἐπὶ τοὺς ἀμφὶ
Ἀλέξανδρον ὅμως ἐτράπησαν· καὶ γίνεται προσβολὴ
αὐτῶν καρτερά, καὶ βάλλεται λίθῳ αὐτὸς
Ἀλέξανδρος βιαίως τήν τε κεφαλήν καὶ τὸν αὐχένα
καὶ Κρατερὸς τοξεύματι καὶ πολλοὶ ἄλλοι τῶν
ἡγεμόνων· ἀλλὰ καὶ ὣς ἐξέωσαν ἐκ τῆς ἀγορᾶς
4τοὺς βαρβάρους. καὶ ἐν τούτῳ οἱ κατὰ τὸ τεῖχος
προσβεβληκότες ἔρημον ἤδη τὸ τεῖχος τῶν προμαχομένων
αἱροῦσιν. ἐν μὲν δὴ τῇ πρώτῃ καταλήψει
τῆς πόλεως ἀπέθανον τῶν πολεμίων μάλιστα ἐς
ὀκτακισχιλίους· οἱ δὲ λοιποί (ἦσαν γὰρ οἱ πάντες
ἐς μυρίους καὶ πεντακισχιλίους μαχίμους οἱ
342Anabasis Of Alexander IV

This was fortified with a higher wall than the rest, 329 b.c. since Cyrus had founded it; and as the greatest number and the best fighters of the barbarians round about had taken refuge in it, it was not so easy for the Macedonians to capture it straight off. However, Alexander brought up engines to the wall and proposed to batter it down in this way and to make assaults wherever breaches occurred. But when he2 personally observed that the outlets of the river, a winter torrent which runs through the city, were dry at the time, and did not reach up to the wall, but were low enough to permit a passage by which soldiers could pass into the city, he took the bodyguards, hypaspists, archers and Agrianes, and while the tribesmen were engaged with the siege-engines and the troops attacking there, he slipped unobserved along the channels, penetrated the city at first with only a few men, and broke open the gates from within3 which were at that point and easily admitted the rest of the troops. Then the barbarians, seeing that their city was already in the enemy’s hands, none the less turned upon Alexander and his force. They made a vigorous onslaught; Alexander himself was struck violently with a stone on his head and neck, and Craterus was wounded by an arrow, as were many other officers. None the less they cleared the market-place of the tribesmen. Meanwhile those4 who had assaulted the wall captured it, now that it was denuded of defenders. In the first occupation of the city about eight thousand of the enemy perished; the rest (the whole number gathered together there
343