Appendices
10. Tarn found indirect confirmation of his hypothesis in the fact that at Opis Al. is said to have referred to Philip as his father (vii 9, 2). But as I hope to show when discussing speeches in A. in vol. II (cf. also F. R. Wüst, Historia 1953/54, 177 ff), this speech is A’s invention. Admittedly, A. is here implicitly contradicting his own conception of Al’s claim (vii 29, 3), no doubt without being conscious of
inconsistency; and this makes it likely that he is using material from one of his main sources. It was again one of these sources that recorded how on one occasion Al. sacrificed to Heracles as his ancestor (vi 3, 1); in another speech, which Tarn himself regarded as fictitious, and rightly, even though not all his arguments are acceptable (ii 286 ff.), Al. himself is made to describe Heracles in this way (v 26, 5). But Heracles was his ancestor, only if he still
acknowledged Philip as his father. Thus Pt. or Ar. or both not only failed to report that Al. claimed to be son of Zeus-Ammon (in any sense, even Tarn’s), except indirectly in an account of the gibes of the mutineers, but implicitly denied, at least in vi 3, 1, that he ever disowned Philip as his father.
11. Pt. at least may have had a reason for suppressing Al’s claim to be son of Zeus. Pt. himself was officially descended through his mother, Arsinoe, from king Amyntas I and was thus a Heraclid and cousin of Al.; as Theocritus put it (xvii 27), both numbered Heracles as their furthest ancestor (Satyrus, Jacoby no. 631). There was also a story that he was really a bastard son of Philip (QC. ix 8, 22, etc.); this cannot be true, nor even have seemed plausible, if he was born (Ps-Lucian, Macrobioi 12) in 367/6 b.c. when Philip was only 16 and in captivity at
478Appendices

Thebes, but perhaps he was born later, and himself propagated the tale, to give him an even closer connection with the Argead line than rival dynasts in the struggle for power within Al’s empire could assert. (See Volkmann, RE xxiii 1603 f.) Pt’s affinity with Al. would have been dissolved in either case, if Al. were regarded as son of Zeus-Ammon and not of Philip: yet to admit that Al. had made the claim and to impugn its veracity would have marred the ideal picture that Pt. clearly wished to draw of his former friend and king, a picture that inevitably had political overtones, since Pt. was in possession of Al’s body and benefited from the prestige derived from the cult at his tomb. The safer course was thus to omit any direct reference to an inconvenient historical fact. No doubt the claim that Al. was son of a god helped to prepare the way for his deification, which took place in Egypt under the rule of Pt. himself, but perhaps only at a time after Pt. wrote his history (Fraser, Ptolemaic Alexandria 215 f. with Introd. §11 above). It is less easy to see why Ar. should have concealed the truth, if such it was. One possibility is that he had read Pt. and on this, as on many other matters, deferred to his authority. But this is not a necessary explanation. The Macedonian
high nobility in general can hardly have relished the suggestion that Al. was of divine birth and not, therefore, a member of the old reigning dynasty, to which many must have been related by marriage or descent. Domiciled in Macedon, Ar. may have been influenced by the feelings of many of Al’s old Companions, whose admiration for their leader was perhaps commonly mixed with distaste for some of his more extravagant pretensions, his
assumption of Oriental state and his claims to be son of
479