Arrian

μάλιστα τιμηθῆναι πρὸς τῆς Ἀθηναίων πόλεως·
τὸν δὲ ἀποκρίνασθαι Ἁρμόδιον καὶ Ἀριστογείτονα,
ὅτι τὸν ἕτερον τοῖν τυράννοιν ἔκτειναν καὶ τυραννίδα
4ὅτι κατέλυσαν. ἐρέσθαι δὲ αὖθις τὸν Φιλώταν
εἰ τῷ τύραννον κτείναντι ὑπάρχοι παρ᾿ οὕστινας
ἐθέλει τῶν Ἑλλήνων φυγόντα σώζεσθαι· καὶ
ἀποκρίνασθαι αὖθις Καλλισθένην, εἰ καὶ μὴ παρ᾿
ἄλλους, παρά γε Ἀθηναίους ὅτι φυγόντι ὑπάρχοι
σώζεσθαι. τούτους γὰρ καὶ πρὸς Εὐρυσθέα πολεμῆσαι
ὑπέρ τῶν παίδων τῶν Ἡρακλέους, τυραννοῦντα
ἐν τῷ τότε τῆς Ἑλλάδος.
5Ὑπὲρ δὲ τῆς προσκυνήσεως ὅπως ἠναντιώθη
Ἀλεξάνδρῳ, καὶ τοιόσδε κατέχει λόγος. ξυγκεῖσθαι
μὲν γὰρ τῷ Ἀλεξάνδρῳ πρὸς τοὺς σοφιστάς
τε καὶ τοὺς ἀμφ᾿ αὐτὸν Περσῶν καὶ Μήδων τοὺς
δοκιμωτάτους μνήμην τοῦ λόγου τοῦδε ἐν πότῳ
6ἐμβαλεῖν· ἄρξαι δὲ τοῦ λόγου Ἀνάξαρχον, ὡς πολὺ
δικαιότερον ἂν θεὸν νομιζόμενον Ἀλέξανδρον
Διονύσου τε καὶ Ἡρακλέους, μὴ ὅτι τῶν ἔργων
ἕνεκα ὅσα καὶ ἡλίκα καταπέπρακται Ἀλεξάνδρῳ,
ἀλλὰ καὶ ὅτι Διόνυσος μὲν Θηβαῖος ἦν, οὐδέν τι
προσήκων Μακεδόσι, καὶ Ἡρακλῆς Ἀργεῖος,
οὐδὲ οὗτος προσήκων ὅτι μὴ κατὰ γένος τὸ Ἀλεξάνδρου·
Ἡρακλείδην γὰρ εἶναι Ἀλέξανδρον·
7Μακεδόνας δὲ ἂν τὸν σφῶν βασιλέα δικαιότερον
θείαις τιμαῖς κοσμοῦντας. καὶ γὰρ οὐδὲ ἐκεῖνο
εἶναι ἀμφίλογον ὅτι ἀπελθόντα γε ἐξ ἀνθρώπων ὡς
θεὸν τιμήσουσι· πόσῳ δὴ δικαιότερον ζῶντα


372Anabasis Of Alexander IV

held in highest honour by the Athenians; and he328 b.c. replied, Harmodius and Aristogiton, because they slew one of the two tyrants, and destroyed the tyranny,1 and that when Philotas asked him again if4 a tyrannicide could find a safe refuge among any of the Greeks he wished, Callisthenes again answered that he would find a safe refuge in Athens at least; the Athenians had even fought on behalf of the children of Heracles against Eurystheus, who was tyrant then over Greece.
As to Callisthenes’ opposition to Alexander5 regarding obeisance, the following story is also prevalent. It had been agreed between Alexander and the Sophists and the most illustrious of the Persians and Medes at his court that mention of this topic should be introduced at a wine-party.2 Anaxarchus6 began the subject, saying that it would be far more just to reckon Alexander a god than Dionysus and Heracles, not so much because of the magnitude and nature of Alexander’s achievements, but also because Dionysus was a Theban, and had no connection with Macedon, and Heracles an Argive, also unconnected with Macedon, except for Alexander’s family, for he was descended from Heracles; but that7 Macedonians in their turn would be more justified in paying the respect of divine honours to their own king; in any case there was no doubt that when Alexander had departed from men they would honour him as a god; how much more just, then, that they should give him his due in life rather than

1The two joint tyrants were Hippias and his brother
Hipparchus. By killing Hipparchus only, Harmodius and
Aristogiton did not destroy the tyranny, but in fact caused
Hippias to become a severe despot.2This story, though surely false, may reflect early controversies on the propriety of deifying Al. QC. viii 5, 8 substitutes the poets Agis and Cleo for Anaxarchus. Besides App. XIV see App. IV.373