Arrian

τῶν κατοικούντων προσπεποιημένοι. ἐνταῦθα
καὶ Ἐριγύϊος ἧκε σὺν τοῖς σκευοφόροις καὶ ταῖς
7ἁμάξαις. ὀλίγον δὲ ὕστερον Ἀρτάβαζος ἀφίκετο
παρ᾿ Ἀλέξανδρον καὶ τῶν παίδων αὐτοῦ Κωφὴν
καὶ Ἀριοβαρζάνης καὶ Ἀρσάμης καὶ ξὺν τούτοις
παρὰ τῶν ξένων τῶν ξὺν Δαρείῳ πρέσβεις καὶ
Αὐτοφραδάτης ὁ Ταπούρων σατράπης. Αὐτοφραδάτῃ
μὲν δὴ τὴν σατραπείαν ἀπέδωκεν,
Ἀρτάβαζον δὲ καὶ τοὺς παῖδας ἅμα οἷ ἐν τιμῇ ἦγε,
τά τε ἄλλα ἐν τοῖς πρώτοις Περσῶν ὄντας καὶ τῆς
8ἐς Δαρεῖον πίστεως ἕνεκα. τοῖς πρέσβεσι δὲ τῶν
Ἑλλήνων δεομένοις σπείσασθαί σφισιν ὑπὲρ τοῦ
παντὸς ξενικοῦ ἀπεκρίνατο ὁμολογίαν μὲν οὐκ ἄν
ποιήσασθαι πρὸς αὐτοὺς οὐδεμίαν· ἀδικεῖν γὰρ
μεγάλα τοὺς στρατευομένους ἐναντία τῇ Ἑλλάδι
παρὰ τοῖς βαρβάροις παρὰ τὰ δόγματα τῶν Ἑλλήνων·
ἐκέλευσε δὲ ἥκειν ξύμπαντας καὶ παραδιδόναι
σφᾶς αὐτοὺς ἐπιτρέποντας Ἀλεξάνδρῳ
χρῆσθαι ὅ τι βούλοιτο, ἢ σώζεσθαι ὅπῃ δύναιντο.
9οἱ δὲ ἐπιτρέπειν ἔφασαν σφᾶς τε αὐτοὺς καὶ τοὺς
ἄλλους Ἀλεξάνδρῳ· ξυμπέμπειν τε ἐκέλευον τὸν
ἡγησόμενον αὐτοῖς, ὡς ἀσφαλῶς διακομισθεῖεν
παρ᾿ αὐτόν· εἶναι δὲ ἐλέγοντο ἐς χιλίους καὶ
πεντακοσίους. καὶ Ἀλέξανδρος πέμπει Ἀνδρόνικον
τὸν Ἀγέρρου καὶ Ἀρτάβαζον παρ᾿ αὐτούς.
24. Αὐτὸς δὲ προῆγεν ὡς ἐπὶ Μάρδους, ἀναλαβὼν
τούς τε ὑπασπιστὰς καὶ τοὺς τοξότας καὶ τοὺς
Ἀγριᾶνας καὶ τὴν Κοίνου καὶ Ἀμύντου τάξιν καὶ
τῶν ἑταίρων ἱππέων τοὺς ἡμίσεας καὶ τοὺς ἱππακοντιστάς·


306Anabasis of Alexander III

inhabitants, they had taken over all the territory they 330 b.c. had traversed. Erigyius too arrived there with the baggage trains and the waggons. Soon after,7 Artabazus came to join Alexander with Cophen, Ariobarzanes and Arsames among his sons and Autophradates, satrap of the Tapurians, and envoys from the mercenaries who had been with Darius. Alexander gave the satrapy back to Autophradates, while he kept Artabazus and his sons by him in an honourable position, as they were among the most eminent Persians and especially because of their loyalty to Darius.5 To the envoys of the Greeks, however, who8 begged him to grant them terms for the whole mercenary force, he replied that he would make no compact with them whatever; men who fought with the barbarians against Greece against the decrees of the Greeks were guilty of grave wrongs.6 He ordered them to come in a body and surrender, leaving it to him to do what he would with them; if not, they must take what steps they could for their own safety. They replied that they placed themselves and the rest9 in Alexander’s hands, and urged him to send an officer to lead them under safe conduct to his camp. They were said to be about one thousand five hundred.7 Alexander sent Andronicus, son of Agerrus, and Artabazus to them.
24. He himself proceeded against the Mardians,1 taking the hypaspists, archers, Agrianians, the battalions of Coenus and Amyntas, half the Companion



5QC. 4, 24 and 5, 1 ff. puts Autophradates’ surrender before
Artabazus’. Al. rewards or punishes men for their conduct
to Darius as it suits him; the motivation in A. is naive.6See Introd. 38 and 40.7Cf. 19, 5 n. QC. 5, 6–10 (cf. D. 76, 2) now also gives 1500; 500 had evidently been lost since 331.1Or Amardi, west of Hyrcanian coastal plain (Strabo xi 8. 8; 13. 3). Cf. D. 76, 3 f.; QC. 5, 11 ff.307