Arrian

τὸ Ἀγηνόριον καλούμενον ἐπέστρεψαν ταύτῃ ἐπὶ
τοὺς Μακεδόνας. καὶ Ἀλέξανδρος ξὺν τοῖς ὑπασπισταῖς
ἐπὶ τούτους χωρήσας τοὺς μὲν αὐτοῦ
μαχομένους διέφθειρεν αὐτῶν, τοῖς δὲ φεύγουσιν
3ἐφείπετο. καὶ φόνος ἦν πολύς, τῶν τε ἀπὸ τοῦ
λιμένος ἐχόντων ἤδη τὴν πόλιν καὶ τῆς Κοίνου
τάξεως παρεληλυθυίας ἐς αὐτήν. ὀργῇ γὰρ ἐχώρουν
ἐπὶ πᾶν οἱ Μακεδόνες, τῆς τε πολιορκίας τῇ τριβῇ
ἀχθόμενοι καὶ ὅτι λαβόντες τινὰς αὐτῶν οἱ Τύριοι
πλέοντας ἐκ Σιδῶνος ἐπὶ τὸ τεῖχος ἀναβιβάσαντες,
ὅπως ἄποπτον εἴη ἀπὸ τοῦ στρατοπέδου, σφάξαντες
4ἔρριψαν εἰς τὴν θάλασσαν. ἀπέθανον δὲ
τῶν μὲν Τυρίων ἐς ὀκτακισχιλίους, τῶν Μακεδόνων
δὲ ἐν τῇ τότε προσβολῇ Ἄδμητός τε ὁ
πρῶτος ἑλὼν τὸ τεῖχος, ἀνὴρ ἀγαθὸς γενόμενος,
καὶ ξὺν αὐτῷ εἴκοσι τῶν ὑπασπιστῶν· ἐν δὲ τῇ
πάσῃ πολιορκίᾳ μάλιστα ἐς τετρακοσίους.
5Τοῖς δὲ ἐς τὸ ἱερὸν τοῦ Ἡρακλέους καταφυγοῦσιν
(ἦσαν δὲ αὐτῶν τε τῶν Τυρίων οἱ μάλιστα
ἐν τέλει καὶ ὁ βασιλεὺς Ἀζέμιλκος καὶ Καρχηδονίων
τινὲς θεωροὶ ἐς τιμὴν τοῦ Ἡρακλέους κατὰ
δή τι[να] νόμιμον παλαιὸν εἰς τὴν μητρόπολιν
ἀφικόμενοι) τούτοις ξύμπασιν ἄδειαν δίδωσιν
Ἀλέξανδρος· τοὺς δὲ ἄλλους ἠνδραπόδισε, καὶ
ἐπράθησαν Τυρίων τε καὶ τῶν ξένων ὅσοι ἐγκατελήφθησαν
6μάλιστα ἐς τρισμυρίους. Ἀλέξανδρος δὲ




208Anabasis of Alexander II

it was in enemy possession: but they massed 332 b.c.
together at what is called the Shrine of Agenor, and there turned to resist the Macedonians. Alexander with his hypaspists attacked them, killed some of them fighting there, and pursued the fugitives. The3 slaughter was great, now that those coming from the harbour were already masters of the city and Coenus’ battalion had passed inside. The rage of the Macedonians was indiscriminate, as they were embittered by the protracted nature of the siege and because the Tyrians had captured some of their men sailing from Sidon, made them mount the wall, so that they might be seen from the camp, cut them down and cast them into the sea. Some eight4 thousand Tyrians fell;1 in the actual attack the Macedonians lost Admetus, the first to mount on the wall, after he proved himself a brave man, with twenty of the hypaspists; in the entire siege the losses were about four hundred.
As for those who fled to the temple of Heracles,5 including among the Tyrians themselves the men of most authority and King Azemilcus,2 as well as some Carthaginian envoys who had come to their mother-city to pay honour to Heracles, according to an ancient custom, Alexander granted them all complete pardon;3 he enslaved the rest; some 30,0004 were sold, what with Tyrians and foreigners

16,000, QC. 4, 16, who makes Al. crucify 2,000 more (cf. D. 46, 3; all male survivors, not less than 2,000, J. xviii 3, 18).2Called Straton by D. 46, 6–47, 6 (cf. J. xviii 3, 9 ff.), with story of his being replaced by ‘Ballonymus’ (‘Abdalonymus’ in QC. iv 1, 15 ff., locating the incident at Sidon, cf. J. xi 10, 8).3In QC. 4, 18 he only spares the envoys.4A conventional figure. D. 46, 4 has only the women and children enslaved (the men are massacred), but alleges (cf. 41, 2) that most had been shipped off to Carthage, whereas QC. 3, 20 with 4, 18 suggests a decision to send them off which was never (and presumably could not have been) carried out. (Early hopes of help from Carthage had been disappointed, D. 40, 3; QC. 3, 19; J. xi 10, 12.) QC. 4, 15 f. alleges that the Sidonians saved 15,000 Tyrians from the victor’s cruelty. Repopulation of Tyre by Al., J. xviii 3, 19, cf. D. xviii 37.209