Arrian

ἐπετύγχανεν, ἐπὶ τοῦ ἅρματος διεσώζετο, ὡς δὲ
φάραγξί τε καὶ ἄλλαις δυσχωρίαις ἐνέκυρσε, τὸ μὲν
ἅρμα ἀπολείπει αὐτοῦ καὶ τὴν ἀσπίδα καὶ τὸν
κάνδυν ἐκδύς· ὁ δὲ καὶ τὸ τόξον ἀπολείπει ἐπὶ τοῦ
ἅρματος· αὐτὸς δὲ ἵππου ἐπιβὰς ἔφευγε· καὶ ἡ
νὺξ οὐ διὰ μακροῦ ἐπιγενομένη ἀφείλετο αὐτὸν τὸ
6πρὸς Ἀλεξάνδρου ἁλῶναι. Ἀλέξανδρος γὰρ ἔστε
μὲν φάος ἦν ἀνὰ κράτος ἐδίωκεν, ὡς δὲ συνεσκόταζέ
τε ἤδη καὶ τὰ πρὸ ποδῶν ἀφανῆ ἦν, εἰς τὸ
ἔμπαλιν ἀπετρέπετο ὡς ἐπὶ τὸ στρατόπεδον· τὸ
μέντοι ἅρμα τοῦ Δαρείου ἔλαβε καὶ τὴν ἀσπίδα ἐπ᾿
7αὐτῷ καὶ τὸν κάνδυν καὶ τὸ τόξον. καὶ γὰρ καὶ ἡ
δίωξις βραδυτέρα αὐτῷ ἐγεγόνει, ὅτι ἐν τῇ πρώτῃ
παραρρήξει τῆς φάλαγγος ἐπιστρέψας καὶ αὐτὸς οὐ
πρόσθεν ἐς τὸ διώκειν ἐτράπετο πρὶν τούς τε
μισθοφόρους τοὺς ξένους καὶ τὸ τῶν Περσῶν
ἱππικὸν ἀπὸ τοῦ ποταμοῦ ἀπωσθέντας κατεῖδε.
8Τῶν δὲ Περσῶν ἀπέθανον Ἀρσάμης μὲν καὶ
Ῥεομίθρης καὶ Ἀτιζύης τῶν ἐπὶ Γρανίκῳ ἡγησαμένων
τοῦ ἱππικοῦ· ἀποθνήσκει δὲ καὶ Σαυάκης ὁ
Αἰγύπτου σατράπης καὶ Βουβάκης τῶν ἐντίμων
Περσῶν· τὸ δὲ ἄλλο πλῆθος εἰς δέκα μάλιστα
μυριάδας καὶ ἐν τούτοις ἱππεῖς ὑπὲρ τοὺς μυρίους,
ὥστε λέγει Πτολεμαῖος ὁ Λάγου ξυνεπισπόμενος
τότε Ἀλεξάνδρῳ τοὺς μετὰ σφῶν διώκοντας
Δαρεῖον, ὡς ἐπὶ φάραγγί τινι ἐν τῇ διώξει ἐγένοντο,
9ἐπὶ τῶν νεκρῶν διαβῆναι τὴν φάραγγα. τό
τε στρατόπεδον τὸ Δαρείου εὐθὺς ἐξ ἐφόδου ἑάλω


162Anabasis of Alexander II

found level ground in his flight, he was safe in his 333 b.c. chariot; but when he came to gullies and other difficult patches, he left his chariot there, threw away his shield and mantle, left even his bow in the chariot, and fled on horseback; only night, speedily falling, saved him from becoming Alexander’s captive, since6 Alexander pursued with all his might as long as daylight held, but when it was growing dark and he could not see his way, turned back towards the camp,4 though he took Darius’ chariot, and with it his shield, mantle and bow. The fact is that his pursuit had7 become slower because he had wheeled back when the phalanx first broke formation and had not himself turned to pursue till he had seen the mercenaries and the Persian cavalry driven back from the river.5
The Persians killed included Arsames, Rheomithres8 and Atizyes who had been among the cavalry commanders on the Granicus, and also Savaces the satrap of Egypt and Bubaces among the Persian nobles; as for the rank and file, some 100,000 fell, including over 10,000 cavalry, so that Ptolemy son of Lagos, who was then with Alexander, says that the pursuers of Darius meeting a deep gully in the pursuit crossed it over bodies of the dead.6 Darius’ camp9 was stormed at once, and captured with his mother,



4Contra D. 37, 2, but cf. 35, 1, QC. 12, 1. With night
fall about 6 p.m., the battle and pursuit might have lasted
4–5 hours. Most of the fugitives, all on the left and centre, must have fled towards the Toprak Kalessi Pass, about 200 stades from the battle (App. III 3).5So QC. II, 16.6Different names in D. 34, 5; QC. 11, 10; same Persian totals in D. 36, 6; QC. 11, 27; P. 20, 5; J. XI 9, 10 (except that he includes 40,000 prisoners)—all incredible; on unreliability of casualty figures see my Italian Manpower, App. 28. Macedonian losses: about 450 killed or missing in D. and QC, 280 in J., 1,000 foot and 200 horse in the fragment of an unknown historian (Jacoby no. 148, 44); A. 10, 7 does not purport to give the total.163