Arrian
3ἑκάστῃ [τῇ] ἡμέρᾳ. γίγνονται δὲ καὶ ἅλες
αὐτόματοι ἐν τῷ χωρίῳ τούτῳ ὀρυκτοί· καὶ
τούτων ἔστιν οὓς ἐς Αἴγυπτον φέρουσι τῶν ἱερέων
τινὲς τοῦ Ἄμμωνος. ἐπειδὰν γὰρ ἐπ᾿ Αἰγύπτου
οτέλλωνται, ἐς κοιτίδας πλεκτὰς ἐκ φοίνικος
ἐσβαλόντες δῶρον τῷ βασιλεῖ ἀποφέρουσιν ἢ εἴ τῳ
4ἄλλῳ. ἔστι δὲ μακρός τε ὁ χόνδρος (ἤδη <δέ>
τινες αὐτῶν καὶ ὑπὲρ τρεῖς δακτύλους) καὶ
καθαρὸς ὥσπερ κρύσταλλος· καὶ τούτῳ ἐπὶ ταῖς
θυσίαις χρῶνται, ὡς καθαρωτέρῳ τῶν ἀπὸ θαλάσσης
ἁλῶν, Αἰγύπτιοί τε καὶ ὅσοι ἄλλοι τοῦ θείου
5οὐκ ἀμελῶς ἔχουσιν. ἐνταῦθα Ἀλέξανδρος τόν τε
χῶρον ἐθαύμασε καὶ τῷ θεῷ ἐχρήσατο· καὶ
ἀκούσας ὅσα αὐτῷ πρὸς θυμοῦ ἦν, ὡς ἔλεγεν,
ἀνέζευξεν ἐπ᾿ Αἰγύπτου, ὡς μὲν Ἀριστόβουλος
λέγει, τὴν αὐτὴν ὀπίσω ὁδόν, ὡς δὲ Πτολεμαῖος ὁ
Λάγου, ἄλλην εὐθεῖαν ὡς ἐπὶ Μέμφιν.
5. Εἰς Μέμφιν δὲ αὐτῷ πρεσβεῖαί τε πολλαὶ ἐκ
τῆς Ἑλλάδος ἧκον, καὶ οὐκ ἔστιν ὅντινα ἀτυχήσαντα
ὧν ἐδεῖτο ἀπέπεμψε, καὶ στρατιὰ παραγίγνεται
παρὰ μὲν Ἀντιπάτρου μισθοφόροι Ἕλληνες
ἐς τετρακοσίους, ὧν ἡγεῖτο Μενοίτας1 ὁ Ἡγησάνδρου,
ἐκ Θρᾴκης δὲ ἱππεῖς ἐς πεντακοσίους, ὧν
2ἦρχεν Ἀσκληπιόδωρος ὁ Εὐνίκου. ἐνταῦθα θύει
τῷ Διῒ τῷ βασιλεῖ καὶ πομπεύει ξὺν τῇ οτρατιᾷ ἐν
τοῖς ὅπλοις καὶ ἀγῶνα ποιεῖ γυμνικὸν καὶ μουσικόν.
καὶ τὰ κατὰ τὴν Αἴγυπτον ἐνταῦθα ἐκόμησε· δύο
μὲν νομάρχας Αἰγύπτου κατέστησεν Αἰγυπτίους,
Δολόασπιν καὶ Πέτισιν, καὶ τούτοις διένειμε τὴν

1Μενοίτας; some read Μενίδας (cf. iii 12, 3; 13, 3 etc).232Anabasis of Alexander III

regularly every day. Then there are natural salts in3 331 b.c. this district, to be obtained by digging; some are taken by priests of Ammon to Egypt. Whenever they are going off to Egypt, they pack the salt into baskets woven of palm leaves, to be conveyed as a present to the king or to someone else. The grains4 of this salt are large, some of them have been known to be more than three fingers’ breadth, and clear as crystal. Egyptians and others who are particular about religious observance use this salt in their sacrifices, as being purer than the sea-salts. Now5 Alexander surveyed the site with wonder, and made his enquiry of the god; he received the answer his heart desired, as he said, and turned back for Egypt, by the same route according to Aristobulus, but according to Ptolemy son of Lagos, by a different way, direct to Memphis.
5. At Memphis many embassies reached him from Greece, and he sent away no one disappointed in his request.1 He was also joined by a force sent by Antipater, Greek mercenaries four hundred strong, under the command of Menoetas2 son of Hegesander, and about five hundred Thracian horse, under command of Asclepiodorus son of Eunicus. Then Alexander2 sacrificed to Zeus the King and held a procession with his force under arms and celebrated athletic and musical games. He then made his arrangements for Egypt; he appointed two Egyptians, Doloaspis and Petisis as nomarchs, dividing the whole country


1The embassies may include that mentioned in ii 25, 4 n., but QC. iv 8, 12 f. specifically names Athens, Rhodes, Chios and Mitylene, and Al. perhaps deferred decisions recorded in 2, 7 till now, so QC. He also makes Al. go up the Nile to Memphis and beyond, iv 8, 2 and 7 ff.2Or Menidas, see critical note.233