Arrian

καὶ ἡ μήτηρ καὶ ἡ γυνή, αὐτὴ δὲ καὶ ἀδελφὴ
Δαρείου, καὶ υἱὸς Δαρείου νήπιος· καὶ θυγατέρες
δύο ἑάλωσαν καὶ ἄλλαι ἀμφ᾿ αὐτὰς Περσῶν τῶν
ὁμοτίμων γυναῖκες οὐ πολλαί. οἱ γὰρ ἄλλοι
Πέρσαι τὰς γυναῖκας σφῶν ξὺν τῇ ἄλλῃ κατασκευῇ
10ἐς Δαμασκὸν ἔτυχον ἐσταλκότες· ἐπεὶ καὶ Δαρεῖος
τῶν τε χρημάτων τὰ πολλὰ καὶ ὅσα ἄλλα μεγάλῳ
βασιλεῖ ἐς πολυτελῆ δίαιταν καὶ στρατευομένῳ
ὅμως συνέπεται πεπόμφει ἐς Δαμασκόν, ὥστε ἐν
τῷ στρατεύματι οὐ πλείονα ἢ τρισχίλια τάλαντα
ἑάλω. ἀλλὰ καὶ τὰ ἐν Δαμασκῷ χρήματα ὀλίγον
ὕστερον ἑάλω ὑπὸ Παρμενίωνος ἐπ᾿ αὐτὸ τοῦτο
σταλέντος. τοῦτο τὸ τέλος τῇ μάχῃ ἐκείνῃ ἐγένετο
ἐπὶ ἄρχοντος Ἀθηναίοις Νικοκράτους μηνὸς Μαιμακτηριῶνος.
12. Τῇ δὲ ὑστεραίᾳ, καίπερ τετρωμένος τὸν
μηρὸν ξίφει Ἀλέξανδρος, ὁ δὲ τοὺς τραυματίας
ἐπῆλθε, καὶ τοὺς νεκροὺς ξυναγαγὼν ἔθαψε
μεγαλοπρεπῶς ξὺν τῇ δυνάμει πάσῃ ἐκτεταγμένῃ
ὡς λαμπρότατα ἐς πόλεμον· καὶ λόγῳ τε ἐπεκόσμησεν
ὅσοις τι διαπρεπὲς ἔργον ἐν τῇ μάχῃ ἢ
αὐτὸς ξυνέγνω εἰργασμένον ἢ ἀκοῇ συμφωνούμενον
ἔμαθεν, καὶ χρημάτων ἐπιδόσει ὡς ἑκάστους
2ξὺν τῇ ἀξίᾳ ἐτίμησεν. καὶ Κιλικίας μὲν ἀποδεικνύει
σατράπην Βάλακρον τὸν Νικάνορος, ἕνα
τῶν σωματοφυλάκων τῶν βασιλικῶν, ἀντὶ δὲ
τούτου ἐς τοὺς σωματοφύλακας κατέλεξε Μένητα
τὸν Διονυσίου· ἀντὶ δὲ Πτολεμαίου τοῦ Σελεύκου



164Anabasis of Alexander II

wife, who was also his sister, and his infant son; two 333 b.c. daughters were taken too, with a few noble Persian ladies in their suite.7 The other Persians had in fact despatched their women-folk and baggage to Damascus; Darius too had sent there the greater10 part of his money and everything else a great king takes with him even on campaign for his extravagant way of living; so8 they found no more than three thousand Talents in the camp. However, the money at Damascus too was captured soon after by Parmenio, who was specially detailed for the purpose.9 So ended this battle, fought in the archonship at Athens of Nicocrates and in the month Maimacterion.10
12. Next day, despite a sword wound in his thigh, Alexander went round to see the wounded; he gathered together the dead and gave them a splendid military funeral, the whole army marshalled in their finest battle array. His speech contained citations of all whom he knew, from his own eyes or from the agreed report of others, to have distinguished themselves in the battle; he honoured each of them by a donation suitable to their worth. He appointed2 as satrap of Cilicia Balacrus son of Nicanor,1 one of the royal bodyguards; and selected Menes son of Dionysius to take his place among the bodyguards; and in place of Ptolemaeus son of Seleucus, who had



7D. 35 f.; QC. 11, 20 ff.; P. 20, 6–21 with elaborations.8A. characteristically mentions this only when it becomes relevant to Al’s doings, cf. P. 20, 6; contrast D. 32, 3; QC. 8, 12.9QC. 13, with much detail, giving 2600 Talents in coins and 500 lbs of silver. Parmenio was sent over 200 miles ahead of the main army.10The Attic month corresponding to Nov./Dec. 333 b.c., but Beloch, III 2, 304 ff. gives reasons for thinking that A. has sometimes falsely converted Macedonian months in his sources into Attic, and that Issus was fought in October; the Persian fleet was still at sea (13, 5) a little later. QC. 8, 8 makes winter imminent.1D. xviii 22, 1.165