Arrian

τῇ Ἀσίᾳ ἔτι ἀπὸ Σεμιράμεως καὶ γυναῖκας ἄρχειν
ἀνδρῶν. Πιξώδαρος δὲ τὴν μὲν ἐκβάλλει τῆς
8ἀρχῆς, αὐτὸς δὲ κατεῖχε τὰ πράγματα. τελευτήσαντος
δὲ Πιξωδάρου Ὀροντοβάτης τὴν Καρῶν
ἀρχὴν ἐκ βασιλέως πεμφθεὶς εἶχε, γαμβρὸς ὢν
Πιξωδάρου. Ἄδα δὲ Ἄλινδα μόνον κατεῖχε,
χωρίον τῆς Καρίας ἐν τοῖς ὀχυρώτατον, καὶ
ἐσβαλόντι Ἀλεξάνδρῳ ἐς Καρίαν ἀπήντα, τὰ τε
Ἄλινδα ἐνδιδοῦσα καὶ παῖδά οἱ τιθεμένη Ἀλέξανδρον.
καὶ Ἀλέξανδρος τὰ τε Ἄλινδα αὐτῇ
ἐπέτρεψε καὶ τὸ ὄνομα τοῦ παιδὸς οὐκ ἀπηξίωσε,
καί ἐπειδὴ Ἁλικαρνασσόν τε ἐξεῖλε καὶ τῆς ἄλλης
Καρίας ἐπεκράτησεν, αὐτῇ ἄρχειν ἁπάσης ἔδωκε.
24. Τῶν Μακεδόνων δὲ ἔστιν οἳ συνεστρατευμένοι
Ἀλεξάνδρῳ ἦσαν νεωστὶ πρὸ τῆς στρατιᾶς
γεγαμηκότες· καὶ τούτων ἔγνω οὐκ ἀμελητέα
εἶναί οἱ Ἀλέξανδρος, ἀλλ᾿ ἐκπέμπει γὰρ αὐτοὺς ἐκ
Καρίας διαχειμάσοντας ἐν Μακεδονίᾳ ἅμα ταῖς
γυναιξίν, ἐπιτάξας αὐτοῖς Πτολεμαῖόν τε τὸν
Σελεύκου, ἕνα τῶν σωματοφυλάκων τῶν βασιλικῶν,
καὶ τῶν στρατηγῶν Κοῖνόν τε τὸν Πολεμοκράτους
καὶ Μελέαγρον τὸν Νεοπτολέμου, ὅτι καὶ
2αὐτοὶ τῶν νεογάμων ἦσαν, προστάξας, ἐπειδὰν
αὐτοί τε ἐπανίωσι καὶ τοὺς μετὰ σφῶν ἐκπεμφθέντας
ἐπαναγάγωσι, καταλέξαι ἱππέας τε καὶ πεζοὺς
ἐκ τῆς χώρας ὅσους πλείστους. καὶ τῷ ἔργῳ
τῷδε, εἴπερ τινὶ ἄλλῳ, εὐδοκίμησε παρὰ Μακεδόσιν
Ἀλέξανδρος. ἔπεμψε δὲ καὶ Κλέανδρον τὸν
Πολεμοκράτους ἐπὶ ξυλλογῇ στρατιωτῶν εἰς
Πελοπόννησον.
3Παρμενίωνα δὲ πέμπει ἐπὶ Σάρδεων, δοὺς αὐτῷ
τῶν τε ἑταίρων ἱππαρχίαν καὶ τοὺς Θετταλοὺς
98Anabasis of Alexander I

been accepted in Asia that women should actually334 b.c. rule men. Pixodarus, however, turned her out of the government and held power himself. On his death8 Orontobates, his brother-in-law, was sent down by the king and assumed the government. Ada meanwhile held only Alinda, the strongest fortress in Caria; and when Alexander entered Caria she went to meet him, surrendering Alinda and adopting Alexander as her son. Alexander gave Alinda to her charge, and did not reject the title of son, and when he had taken Halicarnassus and become master of the rest of Caria, made her ruler of the whole country.
24. Some of the Macedonians serving under Alexander had recently married before taking the field; Alexander thought he ought to consider these men, and sent them off from Caria to spend the winter with their wives in Macedonia, putting them under Ptolemaeus son of Seleucus, one of the royal Bodyguards, and attaching to him two of his generals, Coenus son of Polemocrates and Meleager son of Neoptolemus, as they themselves were among the newly wed. He directed them, when they returned2 and brought back their party, to enrol as many horse and foot from the country as they could. Alexander gained as much popularity by this act among the Macedonians as by any other. He also sent Cleander son of Polemocrates to the Peloponnese to collect troops.1
Parmenio was sent to Sardis, with a hipparchy of3 the Companions, the Thessalian cavalry, the other

1QC. iii 1, 1 (not in D.).99