Arrian

παῖζε ῥᾳδιουργότερον ἐγγεγράφθαι ἔφασαν τῷ
Ἀσσυρίῳ ὀνόματι.
5Ἐκ δὲ τῆς Ἀγχιάλου ἐς Σόλους ἀφίκετο· καὶ
φρουρὰν ἐσήγαγεν ἐς Σόλους καὶ ἐπέβαλεν αὐτοῖς
τάλαντα διακόσια ἀργυρίου ζημίαν, ὅτι πρὸς τοὺς
6Πέρσας μᾶλλόν τι τὸν νοῦν εἶχον. ἔνθεν δὲ
ἀναλαβὼν τῶν μὲν πεζῶν τῶν Μακεδόνων τρεῖς
τάξεις, τοὺς τοξότας δὲ πάντας καὶ τοὺς Ἀγριᾶνας
ἐξελαύνει ἐπὶ τοὺς τὰ ὄρη κατέχοντας Κίλικας.
καὶ ἐν ἑπτὰ ταῖς πάσαις ἡμέραις τοὺς μὲν βίᾳ
ἐξελών, τοὺς δὲ ὁμολογίᾳ παραστησάμενος ἐπανῆκεν
7ἐς τοὺς Σόλους. καὶ ἐνταῦθα μανθάνει
Πτολεμαῖον καὶ Ἄσανδρον ὅτι ἐκράτησαν Ὀροντοβάτου
τοῦ Πέρσου, ὃς τήν τε ἄκραν τῆς Ἁλικαρνασσοῦ
ἐφύλασσε καὶ Μύνδον καὶ Καῦνον καὶ
Θήραν καὶ Καλλίπολιν κατεῖχε· προσῆκτο δὲ καὶ
Κῶ καὶ Τριόπιον. τοῦτον ἡττῆσθαι ἔγραφον μάχῃ
μεγάλῃ· καὶ ἀποθανεῖν μὲν τῶν ἀμφ᾿ αὐτὸν
πεζοὺς ἐς ἑπτακοσίους καὶ ἱππέας ἐς πεντήκοντα,
8ἁλῶναι δὲ οὐκ ἐλάττους τῶν χιλίων. Ἀλέξανδρος δὲ
ἐν Σόλοις θύσας τε τῷ Ἀσκληπιῷ καὶ πομπεύσας
αὐτός τε καὶ ἡ στρατιὰ πᾶσα καὶ λαμπάδα ἐπιτελέσας
καὶ ἀγῶνα διαθεὶς γυμνικὸν καὶ μουσικὸν
Σολεῦσι μὲν δημοκρατεῖσθαι ἔδωκεν· αὐτὸς δὲ
ἀναζεύξας ἐς Ταρσὸν τοὺς μὲν ἱππέας ἀπέστειλεν
Φιλώτᾳ δοὺς ἄγειν διὰ τοῦ Ἀλη[ν]ίου πεδίου ἐπὶ
9τὸν ποταμὸν τὸν Πύραμον, αὐτὸς δὲ σὺν τοῖς
πεζοῖς καὶ τῇ ἴλῃ τῇ βασιλικῇ ἐς Μάγαρσον ἧκεν
καὶ τῇ Ἀθηνᾷ τῇ Μαγαρσίδι ἔθυσεν. ἔνθεν δὲ ἐς
Μαλλὸν ἀφίκετο καὶ Ἀμφιλόχῳ ὅσα ἥρωι ἐνήγισε·
καὶ στασιάζοντας καταλαβὼν τὴν στάσιν αὐτοῖς
138Anabasis of Alexander II

hand-clap. (It was said that the words ‘be merry’ 333 b.c. had a less delicate original in the Assyrian.)2
From Anchialus he reached Soli; he put a garrison5 in the place, and fined them two hundred silver Talents, because they were inclined to favour Persia.3 From there he took three battalions of the Macedonian6 infantry, all the archers, and the Agrianians, and marched against the Cilicians holding the heights. In no more than seven days he drove some of them out, induced others to enter into agreements, and returned to Soli.4 There he learnt that Ptolemaeus7 and Asander had conquered Orontobates the Persian, who had been defending the citadel of Halicarnassus, was in control of Myndus, Caunus, Thera and Callipolis, and had won over Cos and Triopium. The letter stated that they had beaten him in a great battle with a loss of about 700 foot and 50 cavalry, and taken at least 1,000 prisoners.5 At Soli Alexander8 sacrificed to Asclepius and held a procession of his whole army, with a torch relay race and athletic and musical competitions.6 He granted a democracy to Soli. He then proceeded to Tarsus and sent off the cavalry, commissioning Philotas to conduct them to the river Pyramus through the Aleian plain, while he himself went with the infantry9 and the royal squadron to Magarsus and sacrificed to Athena of Magarsus. He next arrived at Mallus and made offerings for the dead to Amphilochus as a hero; he found the Mallians torn by factions and put a stop





2Ar. F. 9 (Strabo xiv 5, 9; Athenaeus 530 A–B; A. is fullest), derived probably from Callisthenes (F. 34).3QC. 7, 2. Soli is treated as Greek, cf. 12, 2; Introd. n. 61.4Not in QC.5QC. 7, 4. Cf. App. II 2.6QC. 7, 3 and 5 takes Al. straight to Mallus.139