Arrian
ΒΙΒΛΙΟΝ ΤΕΤΑΡΤΟΝ
1. Οὐ πολλαῖς δὲ ἡμέραις ὕστερον ἀφικνοῦνται
παρ᾿ Ἀλέξανδρον πρέσβεις παρά τε Σκυθῶν τῶν
Ἀβίων καλουμένων (οὓς καὶ Ὅμηρος δικαιοτάτους
ἀνθρώπους εἰπὼν ἐν τῇ ποιήσει ἐπῄνεσεν·
οἰκοῦσι δὲ ἐν τῇ Ἀσίᾳ οὗτοι αὐτόνομοι, οὐχ
ἥκιστα διὰ πενίαν τε καὶ δικαιότητα) καὶ παρὰ
τῶν ἐκ τῆς Εὐρώπης Σκυθῶν, οἳ δὴ τὸ μέγιστον
2ἔθνος [Σκυθικὸν] ἐν τῇ Εὐρώπῃ ἐποικοῦσιν. καὶ
τούτοις ξυμπέμπει Ἀλέξανδρος τῶν ἑταίρων, πρόφασιν
μὲν κατὰ πρεσβείαν φιλίαν ξυνθησομένους, ὁ
δὲ νοῦς τῆς πομπῆς ἐς κατασκοπήν τι μᾶλλον
ἔφερε φύσεώς τε τῆς χώρας τῆς Σκυθικῆς καὶ
πλήθους αὐτῶν καὶ νομαίων καὶ ὁπλίσεως, ἥντινα
ἔχοντες στέλλονται ἐς τὰς μάχας.
3Αὐτὸς δὲ πρὸς τῷ Τανάϊδι ποταμῷ ἐπενόει πόλιν
οἰκίσαι, καὶ ταύτην ἑαυτοῦ ἐπώνυμον. ὅ τε
γὰρ χῶρος ἐπιτήδειος αὐτῷ ἐφαίνετο αὐξῆσαι ἐπὶ
μέγα τὴν πόλιν καὶ ἐν καλῷ οἰκισθήσεσθαι τῆς ἐπὶ
Σκύθας, εἴποτε ξυμβαίνοι, ἐλάσεως καὶ τῆς προφυλακῆς
τῆς χώρας πρὸς τὰς καταδρομὰς τῶν
4πέραν τοῦ ποταμοῦ ἐποικούντων βαρβάρων. ἐδόκει
δ᾿ ἂν καὶ μεγάλη γενέσθαι ἡ πόλις πλήθει τε
τῶν ἐς αὐτὴν ξυνοικιζομένων καὶ τοῦ ὀνόματος τῇ
λαμπρότητι. καὶ ἐν τούτῳ οἱ πρόσχωροι τῷ
ποταμῷ βάρβαροι τούς τε τὰ φρούρια ἐν ταῖς πόλεσι
σφῶν ἔχοντας στρατιώτας τῶν Μακεδόνων ξυλλαβόντες
ἀπέκτειναν καὶ τὰς πόλεις ἐς ἀσφάλειάν
336Anabasis Of Alexander IV


Book IV
1. Not many days later, envoys came to Alexander 329 b.c. from the Abian Scythians, as they are called, whom Homer praised in his epic by calling them ‘most just of men’; they live in Asia, and are independent, chiefly through their poverty and their sense of justice. Envoys came too from the European Scythians, the largest nation dwelling in Europe. Alexander sent some of the Companions with them,2 pretending it was an embassy to conclude a friendly agreement; but the idea of the mission was rather to spy out the nature of the Scythians’ land, their numbers, their customs and the arms they use on their warlike expeditions.1
He was himself planning to found a city on the3 Tanais, and to give it his own name. For in his view the site was suitable for the city to rise to greatness, and it would be well placed for any eventual invasion of Scythia and as a defence bastion of the country against the raids of the barbarians dwelling on the other side of the river. He thought that the city4 would actually rise to greatness because of the number of settlers and the splendour of its name.2 At this point the barbarians near the river seized and killed the Macedonian troops garrisoning their cities, and then began to strengthen the defences of the


1QC. vii 6, 11 f. Scyths: App. XII. Cf. i 3, 1 n.; iii 8, 3 n.; iv 3, 6 n.2QC. 6, 13. Motivation: iii 1, 5 n. Cf. App. VIII for all topographical matters in this book.337