Appendices

contemplate a major battle, and this eased the problem of procuring food and water. He was thus able to make more rapid progress. Herodotus iv 201 reckons a day’s journey as 200 stades, about 37 km, but he was not thinking of even a small army with its impedimenta. Kromayer (para. 1) shows that in the late nineteenth century a division of about 12,000 men could march on average 25–30 km a day; 33 was thought extraordinary. As Al. was often moving in difficult country or in harsh weather, and had to pause to gather supplies when he reached fertile districts, we should not expect an average rate of progress over the immense distances he covered in 330–329 above 30 km, though for many days together he must have marched at 35. See also §21.
8. He reached Rhagae, 8 km S.E. of Teheran (its modern counterpart), on the 11th day from Hamadan (iii 20, 1), and the speed of his march forced him to pause there for 5 days. By the most direct route the distance is about 310 km (von Stahl), an average of about 28 km. Both von Stahl and Radet suppose that he took a more circuitous route, since Arrian l.c. says that at his rate of progress the Caspian Gates were only one day’s march away, and the distance is about 70 km. But Arrian was surely judging by the rate of his pursuit of Darius on the last day, which was quite exceptional (infra). A pause at Rhagae was required no doubt for supplies. At any rate if he reached Hamadan in early June, he probably did not reach Rhagae till c. 20 June nor set out again till c. 25 June. The earlier we can date these movements, the better it will suit subsequent chronology.
494Appendices
9. He then got through the Caspian Gates, 82 km to the end of the defiles of Sialek and Sai’dar south of the Elburz mountains, at breakneck speed on the second day, and paused in the fertile plain of Choarene to obtain provisions, as he knew that the country ahead was desolate (iii 20, 4); von Stahl takes him to Aradan, 124 km from Teheran on the modern road, Radet not quite so far. Both assume that it was on this same day that he heard of Darius’ arrest and resumed his advance that night, before the return of a foraging party (iii 21, 1 f.). But the text of A. does not require that assumption: A. was quite capable of omitting to record one or more days’ rest in Choarene, and the speed of his pursuit of Darius in the next four days is more credible, if we accept that there had been such a rest. Von Stahl and Radet offer rival and conjectural reconstructions of that pursuit, which is said to have culminated in a final march of up to 400 stades or 70 km in the last night and part of the last day, perhaps 18 hours (21, 9), the only distance A. records. Until this last stage Al. had had foot as well as horse with him, and the distances he had covered were no doubt shorter. Radet ends the pursuit at Kharian not far from Shahrud, makes him cover 400 km in all from Rhagae and 270 from Choarene and cites the opinions of French military experts that this rate of marching is just, but only just, within the bounds of credibility (it was all in broiling heat). Von Stahl put the end of the pursuit near Damghan, only 344 km from Teheran on the modern road. Now after the pursuit Al. waited for the rest of his army to come up (23, 1), and QC. (vi 2, 15) puts the pause at the city later called Hecatompylos; nothing suggests that Al. turned back to meet the rest of his troops. Excavations
495