Arrian

ἡ Κρατεροῦ τοῦ Ἀλεξάνδρου τάξις εἶχε, καὶ αὐτὸς
Κρατερὸς ἐξῆρχε τοῦ εὐωνύμου τῶν πεζῶν· καὶ
ἱππεῖς ἐχόμενοι αὐτοῦ οἱ ξύμμαχοι, ὧν ἡγεῖτο
Ἐριγύϊος ὁ Λαρίχου· τούτων δὲ ἐχόμενοι ὡς ἐπὶ
τὸ εὐώνυμον κέρας οἱ Θεσσαλοὶ ἱππεῖς, ὧν ἦρχε
Φίλιππος ὁ Μενελάου. ξύμπαν δὲ τὸ εὐώνυμον
ἦγε Παρμενίων ὁ Φιλώτα, καὶ ἀμφ᾿ αὐτὸν οἱ τῶν
Φαρσαλίων ἱππεῖς οἱ κράτιστοί τε καὶ πλεῖστοι τῆς
Θεσσαλικῆς ἵππου ἀνεστρέφοντο.
12. Ἡ μὲν ἐπὶ μετώπου τάξις Ἀλεξάνδρῳ ὧδε
κεκόσμητο· ἐπέταξε δὲ καὶ δευτέραν τάξιν ὡς
εἶναι τὴν φάλαγγα ἀμφίστομον. καὶ παρηγγέλλετο
τοῖς ἡγεμόσι τῶν ἐπιτεταγμένων, εἰ κυκλουμένους
τοὺς σφῶν πρὸς τοῦ Περσικοῦ στρατεύματος
κατίδοιεν, ἐπιστρέψαντας ἐς τὸ ἔμπαλιν δέχεσθαι
2τοὺς βαρβάρους· ἐς ἐπικαμπὴν δέ, εἴ που ἀνάγκη
καταλαμβάνοι ἢ ἀναπτύξαι ἢ ξυγκλεῖσαι τὴν
φάλαγγα, κατὰ μὲν τὸ δεξιὸν κέρας ἐχόμενοι τῆς
βασιλικῆς ἴλης τῶν Ἀγριάνων ἐτάχθησαν οἱ
ἡμίσεες, ὧν ἡγεῖτο Ἄτταλος, καὶ μετὰ τούτων οἱ
Μακεδόνες οἱ τοξόται, ὧν Βρίσων ἦρχεν, ἐχόμενοι
δὲ τῶν τοξοτῶν οἱ ἀρχαῖοι καλούμενοι ξένοι καὶ
3ἄρχων τούτων Κλέανδρος. προετάχθησαν δὲ τῶν
τε Ἀγριάνων καὶ τῶν τοξοτῶν οἵ τε πρόδρομοι
ἱππεῖς καὶ οἱ Παίονες, ὧν Ἀρέτης καὶ Ἀρίστων
ἡγοῦντο. ξυμπάντων δὲ προτεταγμένοι ἦσαν οἱ
μισθοφόροι ἱππεῖς, ὧν Μενίδας ἦρχε. τῆς δὲ
βασιλικῆς ἴλης καὶ τῶν ἄλλων ἑταίρων προτεταγμένοι
ἦσαν τῶν τε Ἀγριάνων καὶ τῶν τοξοτῶν οἱ



260Anabasis of Alexander III

held by the battalion of Craterus son of Alexander, 331 b.c. who also commanded the (entire) left of the infantry. Next to them came the allied cavalry,10 under Erigyius son of Larichus; next them, on the left wing, were the Thessalian cavalry under Philippus son of Menelaus. The commander of the entire left was Parmenio son of Philotas, and round him rode the Pharsalian cavalry, the finest and most numerous of the Thessalian horsemen.
12. This was the order in which Alexander had marshalled his front, but he also posted a second line, so that his phalanx faced both ways.1 The commanders of this reserve had instructions to face about and receive the barbarian attack, if they saw their own forces being surrounded by the Persian army. However, in case a need arose to extend or contract2 the line, on the right wing but at an angle to it,2 half the Agrianians under Attalus were posted next to the royal squadron, along with the Macedonian archers under Brison, and next to the archers the so-called old mercenaries under Cleander; in front of the3 Agrianians and archers cavalry were stationed, consisting of the prodromoi and the Paeonians under the command of Aretas and Ariston, and in front of all these the mercenary cavalry3 under Menidas. The royal squadron and the other Companions had half the Agrianians and archers4 stationed in their front




10Part only, cf. 12, 4.1Clearly hoplites, i.e. Greek allies (not otherwise mentioned) and mercenaries other than Oleander’s force, which comprised either (i) those who had crossed to Asia with Al. or (ii) those previously sent there by Philip, as against (iii) later reinforcements.2The translation is certain, but cf. App. IX 2.3Some only, cf. § 5.4Macedonians?261