Arrian
7προσῆγον. ὡς δὲ οὐδὲ ταύτῃ ἤνυεν, ἐς τὸ
πρὸς νότον αὖ ἄνεμον καὶ πρὸς Αἴγυπτον ἀνέχον
τεῖχος μετῄει πάντῃ ἀποπειρώμενος τοῦ ἔργου.
καὶ ἐνταῦθα πρῶτον κατεσείσθη τε τὸ τεῖχος ἐπὶ
μέγα καί τι καὶ κατηρίφθη αὐτοῦ παραρραγέν.
τότε μὲν δὴ ὅσον ἐπιβαλὼν γεφύρας ᾗ ἐρήριπτο τοῦ
τείχους ἀπεπειράθη ἐς ὀλίγον τῆς προσβολῆς· καὶ
οἱ Τύριοι οὐ χαλεπῶς ἀπεκρούσαντο τοὺς Μακεδόνας.
23. Τρίτῃ δὲ ἀπὸ ταύτης ἡμέρᾳ νηνεμίαν τε
φυλάξας καὶ παρακαλέσας τοὺς ἡγεμόνας τῶν
τάξεων ἐς τὸ ἔργον ἐπῆγε τῇ πόλει ἐπὶ τῶν νεῶν
τὰς μηχανάς. καὶ πρῶτα μὲν κατέσεισε τοῦ
τείχους ἐπὶ μέγα, ὡς δὲ ἀποχρῶν εἰς πλάτος ἐφάνη
τὸ παρερρηγμένον, τὰς μὲν μηχανοφόρους ναῦς
2ἐπανάγειν ἐκέλευσεν· ὁ δὲ δύο ἄλλας ἐπῆγεν, αἳ
τὰς γεφύρας αὐτῷ ἔφερον, ἃς δὴ ἐπιβάλλειν ἐπενόει
τῷ κατερρηγμένῳ τοῦ τείχους. καὶ τὴν μὲν μίαν
τῶν νεῶν οἱ ὑπασπισταὶ ἔλαβον, ᾗ ἐπετέτακτο
Ἄδμητος, τὴν ἑτέραν δὲ ἡ Κοίνου τάξις οἱ ἀσθέτεροι1
καλούμενοι, καὶ αὐτὸς ξὺν τοῖς ὑπασπισταῖς
3ἐπιβήσεσθαι τοῦ τείχους ᾗ παρείκοι ἔμελλεν. τὰς
τριήρεις δὲ τὰς μὲν ἐπιπλεῖν κατὰ τοὺς λιμένας
ἀμφοτέρους ἐκέλευσεν, εἴ πως πρὸς σφᾶς τετραμμένων
τῶν Τυρίων βιάσαιντο τὸν ἔσπλουν· ὅσαι δὲ
αὐτῶν βέλη ἀπὸ μηχανῶν βαλλόμενα εἶχον ἢ ὅσαι
τοξότας ἐπὶ τῶν καταστρωμάτων ἔφερον, ταύτας
δὲ ἐκέλευσεν ἐν κύκλῳ περιπλεούσας τὸ τεῖχος
ἐποκέλλειν τε ὅπῃ παρείκοι καὶ ἀνακωχεύειν ἐντὸς
βέλους, ἔστε τὸ ἐποκεῖλαι ἄπορον γίγνοιτο, ὡς

1Editors generally amend to πεζέταιροι, but cf. Introd. n. 99.204Anabasis of Alexander II

of their ships carrying engines, they again did not7 332 b.c. succeed, so Alexander turned to the south and the wall facing Egypt, and tested the work at every point. It was here that the wall was first badly shaken and in part broken down by a rent. At that time Alexander made a slight and tentative attack, going so far as to throw gangways over the broken part of the wall: the Tyrians, however, easily repulsed the Macedonians.
23. Two days afterwards,1 having waited till he got a calm, and urged his battalion commanders to action, Alexander brought up the engines on board the ships against the city. First he battered down the wall for a good space. But when the breach seemed wide enough, he ordered the engine-carrying ships to back water; and sent in two2 others, carrying his gangways, which he intended to let fall where the wall was breached. The hypaspists took over one of the ships, Admetus being its captain; the other was manned by Coenus’ battalion of the so-called astheteroi.2 Alexander himself intended to mount on the wall with his hypaspists where practicable. Some of his triremes were3 ordered to sail round about each harbour, in case they might force an entrance by sea while the Tyrians were occupied with his own party. Other triremes, which had missiles to fire from engines on board or which carried archers on the decks, were ordered to circle about the wall, run ashore wherever possible, or lie to within range, so long as it was impracticable to run ashore. In this way the Tyrians would be under


1Vague accounts of final assault, diverging from A., in D. 46; QC. 4, 10 ff. (two days after naval sortie). J. xi 10, 14 makes Tyre fall by treachery.2See Introd. n. 99.205