Arrian
7ἀνηνέχθη, ὡς τῆς τε ἐν τῷ Μηδικῷ πολέμῳ
προδοσίας τῶν Ἑλλήνων διὰ μακροῦ ταύτην δίκην
ἐκτίσαντας Θηβαίους, καὶ τῆς Πλαταιῶν ἔν τε ταῖς
σπονδαῖς καταλήψεως καὶ τοῦ παντελοῦς ἀνδραποδισμοῦ
τῆς πόλεως, καὶ τῆς τῶν παραδόντων
σφᾶς Λακεδαιμονίοις οὐχ Ἑλληνικῆς γενομένης διὰ
Θηβαίους σφαγῆς, καὶ τοῦ χωρίου τῆς ἐρημώσεως,
ἐν ὅτῳ οἱ Ἕλληνες παραταξάμενοι Μήδοις
ἀπώσαντο τῆς Ἑλλάδος τὸν κίνδυνον, καὶ ὅτι
Ἀθηναίους αὐτοὶ τῇ ψήφῳ ἀπώλλυον, ὅτε ὑπὲρ
ἀνδραποδισμοῦ τῆς πόλεως γνώμη προὐτέθη ἐν
8τοῖς Λακεδαιμονίων ξυμμάχοις. ἐπεὶ καὶ πρὸ τῆς
ξυμφορᾶς πολλὰ ἀπὸ τοῦ θείου ἐπισημῆναι ἐλέγετο,
ἃ δὴ ἐν μὲν τῷ παραυτίκα ἠμελήθη, ὕστερον δὲ ἡ
μνήμη αὐτὰ ἐς λογισμὸν τοῦ ἐκ πάλαι ἐπὶ τοῖς
ξυνενεχθεῖσιν προσημανθῆναι ἀνήνεγκεν.
9Τοῖς δὲ μετασχοῦσι τοῦ ἔργου ξυμμάχοις, οἷς δὴ
καὶ ἐπέτρεψεν Ἀλέξανδρος τὰ κατὰ τὰς Θήβας
διαθεῖναι, τὴν μὲν Καδμείαν φρουρᾷ κατέχειν
ἔδοξε, τὴν πόλιν δὲ κατασκάψαι ἐς ἔδαφος καὶ τὴν
χώραν κατανεῖμαι τοῖς ξυμμάχοις, ὅση μὴ ἱερὰ
αὐτῆς· παῖδας δὲ καὶ γυναῖκας καὶ ὅσοι ὑπελείποντο
Θηβαίων, πλὴν τῶν ἱερέων τε καὶ ἱερειῶν καὶ
ὅσοι ξένοι Φιλίππου ἢ Ἀλεξάνδρου ἢ ὅσοι πρόξενοι
10Μακεδόνων ἐγένοντο, ἀνδραποδίσαι. καὶ τὴν Πινδάρου
δὲ τοῦ ποιητοῦ οἰκίαν καὶ τοὺς ἀπογόνους
τοῦ Πινδάρου λέγουσιν ὅτι διεφύλαξεν Ἀλέξανδρος
αἰδοῖ τῇ Πινδάρου. ἐπὶ τούτοις Ὀρχόμενόν τε καὶ
Πλαταιὰς ἀναστῆσαί τε καὶ τειχίσαι οἱ ξύμμαχοι
ἔγνωσαν.
10. Ἐς δὲ τοὺς ἄλλους Ἕλληνας ὡς ἐξηγγέλθη
42Anabasis of Alexander I

at length, for betraying the Greek cause in the7 [480–479, 431, 427 b.c.] Persian wars, for seizing Plataea in time of truce, for completely enslaving the Plataeans, for her responsibility for the un-Greek massacre of men who had surrendered to Sparta, and for the desolation of the Plataean countryside, on which the Greeks, ranged shoulder to shoulder against Persia, had repelled the common danger of Greece, and last, for voting [404 b.c.] for the destruction of Athens when a motion was put before the allies of Sparta that the Athenians should be sold into slavery. People said that the coming8 disaster cast its shadow before, in many divine warnings neglected then, but the memory of them later made people realize that there had long been prognostications, now confirmed by the event.
The allies who took part in the action, to whom9 Alexander actually entrusted the settlement of Thebes,3 decided to garrison the Cadmea, but to raze the city to the ground, and to apportion its land among the allies, in so far as it had not been consecrated, and to enslave the women and children and any Theban survivors, save for priests and priestesses, and any guest-friends of Philip or Alexander, or proxenoi4 of Macedonians. They say5 that10 Alexander saved the poet Pindar’s house and any of his descendants out of reverence for Pindar. Besides this, the allies determined to rebuild and fortify Orchomenus and Plataea.6
10. When the fate of Thebes was notified to the




3D. 14, 4 makes this a formal decree of the synedrion (Introd. 38), but still ascribes the real decision to Al., who wished to terrorize the Greeks, cf. P. 11, 5.4Citizens who performed consular functions for members of particular foreign communities.5Cf. P. 11, 6; ‘vulgate’, unless ‘they’ are Pt. and Ar.6Previously destroyed by Thebes.43