Appendices

illustrations of the way in which that ‘tradition’ varied, partly no doubt because of its mutations in successive writers.
7. Of the two stories about proscynesis that told by Chares, which may repose on knowledge he acquired as a court usher (P. 46), is credible and does not suggest that it was claimed as an honour due to a god. That interpretation is presupposed in the tale of the debate, and it is certainly false. For what follows see Lane Fox ch. 23 with bibliography, especially E. J. Bickermann, Parola del Passato 1963, 241 ff., correcting in some points J. P. V. D. Balsdon, Historia 1950, 363 ff.
8. ‘Obeisance’ is a rather misleading translation of proscynesis, used faute de mieux. It was performed by kissing one’s fingers towards the person honoured, perhaps by blowing a kiss. Greeks and presumably Macedonians rendered the honour only to the image that represented a god; it was a mark of the ‘superstitious man’ that he would perform it only on his knees (Theophrastus, Characters 16, 5). But in Persia it was a mark of respect paid to superiors in rank, and therefore by all to the king (cf. Herodotus i 134). Herodotus suggests that the inferior fell on his knees, and QC. viii 5, 6 suggests that prostration always accompanied proscynesis to the king; it was certainly expected of Greek ambassadors (e.g. Herodotus vii 136). But in Persian eyes they were doubtless very lowly beings; the Persepolis reliefs (cf. Olmstead, History of the Persian Empire Plate XXX) show that Persian dignitaries did no more than make a half-bow in obeisance to the king. In Chares’ story there is no place for prostration at
538Appendices

Alexander’s banquet. Thus the Persian ceremony was, at least when performed by men of rank, no different in principle from the Greek, except that it was rendered to men. Greeks who forgot or did not know that in Persia all superiors received it believed that it betokened that the Persians worshipped the king as a god (cf. Isocrates iv 151); in fact the Persian king was not a god (contra QC. viii 5, 11), though he ruled by the grace of the supreme god, Ahura-Mazda.
9. Since Greeks and Macedonians in Alexander’s court must have seen Persians performing proscynesis to superiors other than the king, they can hardly have shared the illusions of Isocrates. But that did not dispel the prejudices in which they had been reared. Greeks boasted that they ‘did obeisance to no man as a master but only to the gods’ (Xenophon, Anabasis iii 2, 13, cf. iv 1, 35). To Aristotle it was an honour that only barbarians paid to men (Rhetoric 1367a 27). It is plausible to suppose that Al. sought to introduce the practice among all his courtiers, only in order to create a greater measure of equality between Persian and western notables and thus to conciliate the Persians. But that was not a motive with which the Macedonians would have sympathized. Their aversion to a ceremony they thought demeaning probably led Alexander to abandon this attempt at assimilation—with
more prudence than he had made it. Callisthenes
may have had a leading part in the resistance, and paid the price for it.
10. It is indeed evident that neither A. nor his source was aware that proscynesis did not import deification. It follows that the substance of Callisthenes’
539