Arrian

καὶ Κάρανον καὶ Μενέδημον οὐ δέξασθαι τὴν
ἠγεμονίαν, τὸ μέν τι ὡς μὴ δοκεῖν παρὰ τὰ ἐπηγγελμένα
ὑπὸ Ἀλεξάνδρου αὐτούς τι κατὰ σφᾶς
νεωτερίζειν, τὸ δὲ καὶ ἐν αὐτῷ τῷ δεινῷ οὐκ
ἐθελήσαντας, εἰ δή τι πταίσειαν, μὴ ὅσον κατ᾿
ἄνδρα μόνον μετέχειν αὐτοῦ, ἀλλὰ καὶ ὡς τὸ πᾶν
αὐτοὺς κακῶς ἐξηγησαμένους. ἐν τούτῳ δὴ τῷ
θορύβῳ τε καὶ τῇ ἀταξίᾳ ἐπιθεμένους αὐτοῖς τοὺς
βαρβάρους κατακόψαι πάντας, ὥστε ἱππέας μὲν μὴ
πλείονας τῶν τεσσαράκοντα ἀποσωθῆναι, πεζοὺς δὲ
ἐς τριακοσίους.
3Ταῦτα δὲ ὡς ἠγγέλθη Ἀλεξάνδρῳ, ἤλγησέ τε τῷ
πάθει τῶν στρατιωτῶν καὶ ἔγνω σπουδῇ ἐλαύνειν
ὡς ἐπὶ Σπιταμένην τε καὶ τοὺς ἀμφ᾿ αὐτὸν βαρβάρους.
ἀναλαβὼν οὖν τῶν τε ἑταίρων ἱππέων τοὺς
ἡμισέας καὶ τοὺς ὑπασπιστὰς ξύμπαντας καὶ τοὺς
τοξότας καὶ τοὺς Ἀγριᾶνας καὶ τῆς φάλαγγος τοὺς
κουφοτάτους ἤει ὡς ἐπὶ Μαράκανδα, ἵνα ἐπανήκειν
Σπιταμένην ἐπυνθάνετο καὶ αὖθις πολιορκεῖν τοὺς
4ἐν τῇ ἄκρᾳ. καὶ αὐτὸς μὲν ἐν τρισὶν ἡμέραις
διελθὼν χιλίους καὶ πεντακοσίους σταδίους τῇ
τετάρτῃ ὑπὸ τὴν ἕω προσῆγε τῇ πόλει. Σπιταμένης
δὲ καὶ οἱ ἀμφ᾿ αὐτόν, ὡς ἐξηγγέλθη προσάγων
Ἀλέξανδρος, οὐκ ἔμειναν, ἀλλ᾿ ἐκλιπόντες τὴν
5πόλιν φεύγουσιν. ὁ δὲ ἐχόμενος αὐτῶν ἐδίωκεν·
ὡς δὲ ἐπὶ <τὸν> χῶρον ἧκεν, οὗ ἡ μάχη ἐγένετο,
θάψας τοὺς στρατιώτας ὡς ἐκ τῶν παρόντων
εἵπετο ἔστε ἐπὶ τὴν ἔρημον τοῖς φεύγουσιν.
ἐκεῖθεν δὲ ἀναστρέφων ἐπόρθει τὴν χώραν καὶ τοὺς


356Anabasis Of Alexander IV

did not accept the command, partly to avoid329 b.c. the appearance of taking any initiative of their own contrary to the commands of Alexander, and partly because in the very moment of crisis they were not disposed, in case of a disaster, to be involved in it not simply as individuals but as men who had themselves directed the whole enterprise badly. It was in this confusion and disorder that the barbarians charged and cut them all to pieces, so that not more than forty cavalry and about three hundred foot-soldiers escaped.1
When this was reported to Alexander he was3 distressed at the disaster to his men and decided to march at full speed against Spitamenes and the barbarians with him.2 He therefore took half the Companion cavalry, the archers and Agrianians, and the lightest-armed of the phalanx and marched to Maracanda, where he learnt Spitamenes had returned and was again besieging the garrison in the citadel. Alexander covered fifteen hundred stades in three4 days,3 and approached the city on the fourth about dawn. Spitamenes and his troops did not stay on learning that Alexander was drawing near, but left the city and fled. Alexander pursued them closely,5 and when he reached the place of the battle, he buried the soldiers as best he could and followed the fugitives right up to the desert. Thence he turned back,



1QC. vii 7, 30 ff. also has ambuscade but does not much resemble Ar. Losses: 2,000 foot and 300 horse, cf. 3, 7 n.2In QC. 7, 39 Al. hears the news before crossing the Syrdarya and conceals it. For his operations against Spitamenes cf. QC. 9, 20–10, 9; App. VIII 12.3From Ar., cf. Strabo xi 11, 5. He knew that Polytimetus was a Macedonian name and may have given Ochus as the native name, cf. Pearson LH 168 f.357