Arrian

προσάγοντα αἰσθόμενοι Ἀλέξανδρον ἐμπρήσαντες
τὴν πόλιν ἔφευγον πρὸς τὰ ὄρη. οἱ δ᾿ ἀμφ᾿
Ἀλέξανδρον εἴχοντο τῶν φευγόντων ἔστε ἐπὶ τὰ
ὄρη, καὶ φόνος πολὺς γίγνεται τῶν βαρβάρων, πρὶν
ἐς τὰς δυσχωρίας φθάσαι ἀπελθόντας.
3Τὸν δὲ ἡγεμόνα αὐτὸν τῶν ταύτῃ Ἰνδῶν Πτολεμαῖος
ὁ Λάγου πρός τινι ἤδη γηλόφῳ ὄντα κατιδὼν
καὶ τῶν ὑπασπιστῶν ἔστιν οὓς ἀμφ᾿ αὐτὸν ξὺν πολὺ
ἐλάττοσιν αὐτὸς ὢν ὅμως ἐδίωκεν ἔτι ἐκ τοῦ ἵππου·
ὡς δὲ χαλεπὸς ὁ γήλοφος τῷ ἵππῳ ἀναδραμεῖν ἦν,
τοῦτον μὲν αὐτοῦ καταλείπει παραδούς τινι τῶν
ὑπασπιστῶν ἄγειν, αὐτὸς δὲ ὡς εἶχε πεζὸς τῷ
4Ἰνδῷ εἵπετο. ὁ δὲ ὡς πελάζοντα ἤδη κατεῖδε τὸν
Πτολεμαῖον, αὐτός τε μεταβάλλει ἐς τὸ ἔμπαλιν καὶ
οἱ ὑπασπισταὶ ξὺν αὐτῷ. καὶ ὁ μὲν Ἰνδὸς τοῦ
Πτολεμαίου διὰ τοῦ θώρακος παίει ἐκ χειρὸς ἐς τὸ
στῆθος ξυστῷ μακρῷ, καὶ ὁ θώραξ ἔσχε τὴν
πληγήν· Πτολεμαῖος δὲ τὸν μηρὸν διαμπὰξ βαλὼν
5τοῦ Ἰνδοῦ καταβάλλει τε καὶ σκυλεύει αὐτόν. ὡς
δὲ τὸν ἡγεμόνα σφῶν κείμενον οἱ ἀμφ᾿ αὐτὸν εἶδον,
οὗτοι μὲν οὐκέτι ἔμενον, οἱ δὲ ἐκ τῶν ὀρῶν αἰρόμενον
τὸν νεκρὸν τοῦ ὑπάρχου ἰδόντες πρὸς τῶν
πολεμίων ἤλγησάν τε καὶ καταδραμόντες ξυνάπτουσιν
ἐπ᾿ αὐτῷ μάχην καρτερὰν πρὸς τῷ
γηλόφῳ. ἤδη γὰρ καὶ Ἀλέξανδρος ἔχων τοὺς ἀπὸ
τῶν ἵππων καταβεβηκότας πεζοὺς πρὸς τῷ γηλόφῳ
ἦν. καὶ οὗτοι ἐπιγενόμενοι μόγις ἐξέωσαν τοὺς
Ἰνδοὺς ἐς τὰ ὄρη καὶ τοῦ νεκροῦ ἐκράτησαν.
6Ὑπερβαλὼν δὲ τὰ ὄρη Ἀλέξανδρος ἐς πόλιν
κατῆλθεν, ᾗ ὄνομα ἦν Ἀριγαῖον· καὶ ταύτην καταλαμβάνει
ἐμπεπρησμένην ὑπὸ τῶν ἐνοικούντων καὶ
τοὺς ἀνθρώπους πεφευγότας. ἐνταῦθα δὲ ἀφίκοντο
420Anabasis Of Alexander IV

approach, they burned the city and fled to the 327–6 b.c. mountains. Alexander’s troops followed close on the fugitives as far as the mountains, and there was a great slaughter of the barbarians, until they got away first into the rough country.3
The actual leader of the Indians of this district was3 observed by Ptolemy son of Lagus, already close to a foothill; Ptolemy had with him some of the hypaspists, and though far inferior in numbers, he still continued to pursue him on horse, but as the hill was hard for his horse to go up, he left his mount there, handing it to one of the hypaspists to lead, and in person followed the Indian on foot, just as he was. When the Indian saw Ptolemy drawing near, he himself4 turned round at bay, and his hypaspists with him, and with his long spear struck at close quarters through Ptolemy’s corselet to his breast; the corselet checked the blow. But Ptolemy drove right through the Indian’s thigh, and felled and despoiled him. While his followers, on seeing their leader lying there,5 did not continue to stand their ground, others from the hills, seeing the enemy carrying off their hyparch’s body, rushed down in their distress and joined in a fierce battle near the hill. Now Alexander was already near the hill with his infantry dismounted. When they came on the scene they pushed the Indians back to the mountains, though with difficulty, and got possession of the body.
After crossing the hills, Alexander descended at a6 city called Arigaeum and found that it had been set on fire by its inhabitants; and that the people had

3At least the following story must be from Pt.421