Arrian

Σιτάλκης· οἱ γὰρ ἱππεῖς αὐτῷ οὐκ ὠφέλιμοι ἐν τῇ
δυσχωρίᾳ ἦσαν. τοῖς Πισίδαις δὲ καὶ Τελμισσεῖς
προσβεβοηθηκότες ξυνετάξαντο.
5Ἤδη τε οἱ ἀμφ᾿ Ἀλέξανδρον προσβεβληκότες
τῷ ὄρει, ὅπερ κατεῖχον οἱ Πισίδαι, κατ᾿ αὐτὸ τὸ
ἀποτομώτατον τῆς ἀνόδου ἦσαν, καὶ ἐν τούτῳ
ἐπιτίθενται αὐτοῖς οἱ βάρβαροι λόχοις κατὰ κέρας
ἑκάτερον, ᾗ σφίσι μὲν εὐπροσοδώτατον ἦν, τοῖς
πολεμίοις δὲ χαλεπωτάτη ἡ πρόσβασις. καὶ τοὺς
μὲν τοξότας, οἷα δὴ οὔτε ἀκριβῶς ὡπλισμένους καὶ
πρώτους πελάσαντας, ἐτρέψαντο, οἱ δὲ Ἀγριᾶνες
6ἔμειναν. ἐγγὺς γὰρ ἤδη καὶ ἡ φάλαγξ τῶν
Μακεδόνων προσῆγε καὶ πρὸ αὐτῆς Ἀλέξανδρος
ἐφαίνετο. ὡς δὲ ἐν χερσὶν ἡ μάχη ἐγένετο, γυμνοί
τε οἱ βάρβαροι ὄντες ὁπλίταις προσεφέροντο καὶ
πάντῃ κατατιτρωσκόμενοι ἔπιπτον [δὲ], ἐνταῦθα
7δὴ ἐγκλίνουσιν· καὶ ἀπέθανον μὲν αὐτῶν ἐς πεντακοσίους,
. . . κοῦφοι γὰρ ὄντες καὶ ἔμπειροι τῶν
χωρίων οὐ χαλεπῶς ἀπεχώρουν· καὶ οἱ Μακεδόνες
διὰ βαρύτητα τῶν ὅπλων καὶ ἀπειρίαν τῶν ὁδῶν οὐ
8θαρραλέοι ἐς τὸ διώκειν ἦσαν. Ἀλέξανδρος δὲ
ἐχόμενος τῶν φευγόντων τὴν πόλιν αὐτῶν αἱρεῖ
κατὰ κράτος. τῶν δὲ ξὺν αὐτῷ Κλέανδρός τε ὁ
στρατηγὸς τῶν τοξοτῶν ἀποθνήσκει καὶ τῶν ἄλλων
ἀμφὶ τοὺς εἴκοσιν. Ἀλέξανδρος δὲ ἐπὶ τοὺς
ἄλλους Πισίδας ἦγε· καὶ τὰ μέν τινα τῶν φρουρίων
βίᾳ ἐξεῖλε, τὰ δὲ ὁμολογίᾳ προσηγάγετο.
29. Ἐντεῦθεν δὲ ᾔει ἐπὶ Φρυγίας παρὰ τὴν
λίμνην, ᾗ ὄνομα Ἀσκανία, ἐν ᾗ ἅλες πήγνυνται
αὐτόματοι, καὶ τούτοις χρῶνται οἱ ἐπιχώριοι οὐδὲ
θαλάσσης τι ἐπὶ τούτῳ δέονται· καὶ ἀφικνεῖται ἐς
Κελαινὰς πεμπταῖος. ἐν δὲ ταῖς Κελαιναῖς ἄκρα ἦν
114Anabasis of Alexander I

men under Sitalces. The cavalry were of no use to334–3 b.c.
him in this rough country. The Pisidians’ line included Telmissians who had come to their help.
In their assault on the height held by the Pisidians,5 Alexander’s troops had already reached the steepest part of the ascent when barbarians in bands attacked them on either wing, where they could best approach and the Macedonians found the means to advance hardest. They drove back the archers, as they were lightly armed and first to make contact; but the Agrianians held firm. For the Macedonian phalanx6 was already coming up, and Alexander himself was visible at its head. Once hand-to-hand fighting had begun, the barbarians who had no protective armour and were engaged with hoplites were wounded and fell on all sides and at length gave way. Some7 five hundred perished.1 . . . Unencumbered and knowing the country, they got away easily; from weight of armour and ignorance of the paths the Macedonians had little heart for the pursuit. Alexander,8 however, kept on the heels of the fugitives and stormed the city, losing Cleander, the commander of the archers, and some twenty more of his followers. Then he attacked the remaining Pisidians, captured some of their forts and received the surrender of others.
29. Thence he passed into Phrygia by Lake Ascania,333 b.c. where salt crystallizes naturally, and is used by the inhabitants, who thus need no sea salt; in four days he reached Celaenae, where a citadel sheer on every side was held under orders from the satrap of Phrygia

1The number of prisoners was given in the lacuna.115