Arrian

καὶ ὕπνους τοὺς Ἀλεξάνδρου· ταῦτα οὐ φέροντα
ἔτι ἐλευθερῶσαι ἐθελῆσαι ἑαυτόν τε καὶ τοὺς
3ἄλλους Μακεδόνας. τοῦτον μὲν δὴ αὐτόν τε καὶ
τοὺς ξὺν αὐτῷ ξυλληφθέντας καταλευσθῆναι πρὸς
τῶν παρόντων. Καλλισθένην δὲ Ἀριστόβουλος
μὲν λέγει δεδεμένον ἐν πέδαις ξυμπεριάγεσθαι τῇ
στρατιᾷ, ἔπειτα νόσῳ τελευτῆσαι, Πτολεμαῖος δὲ
ὁ Λάγου στρεβλωθέντα καὶ κρεμασθέντα ἀποθανεῖν.
οὕτως οὐδὲ οἱ πάνυ πιστοὶ ἐς τὴν ἀφήγησιν
καὶ ξυγγενόμενοι ἐν τῷ τότε Ἀλεξάνδρῳ ὑπὲρ τῶν
γνωρίμων τε καὶ οὐ λαθόντων σφᾶς ὅπως ἐπράχθη
4ξύμφωνα ἀνέγραψαν. πολλὰ δὲ καὶ ἄλλα ὑπὲρ
τούτων αὐτῶν ἄλλοι ἄλλως ἀφηγήσαντο, ἀλλ᾿ ἐμοὶ
ταῦτα ἀποχρῶντα ἔστω ἀναγεγραμμένα. ταῦτα
μὲν δὴ οὐ πολλῷ ὕστερον πραχθέντα ἐγὼ ἐν τοῖσδε
τοῖς ἀμφὶ Κλεῖτον ξυνενεχθεῖσιν Ἀλεξάνδρου
ἀνέγραψα, τούτοις μᾶλλόν τι οἰκεῖα ὑπολαβὼν ἐς
τὴν ἀφήγησιν.
15. Παρ᾿ Ἀλέξανδρον δὲ ἧκεν καὶ αὖθις Σκυθῶν
τῶν ἐκ τῆς Εὐρώπης πρεσβεία ξὺν τοῖς πρέσβεσιν
οἷς αὐτὸς ἐς Σκύθας ἔστειλεν. ὁ μὲν δὴ τότε
βασιλεὺς τῶν Σκυθῶν ὅτε οὗτοι ὑπὸ Ἀλεξάνδρου
ἐπέμποντο τετελευτηκὼς ἐτύγχανεν, ἀδελφὸς δὲ
2ἐκείνου ἐβασίλευεν. ἦν δὲ ὁ νοῦς τῆς πρεσβείας
ἐθέλειν ποιεῖν πᾶν τὸ ἐξ Ἀλεξάνδρου ἐπαγγελλόμενον
Σκύθας· καὶ δῶρα ἔφερον Ἀλεξάνδρῳ
παρὰ τοῦ βασιλέως τῶν Σκυθῶν ὅσα μέγιστα
νομίζεται ἐν Σκύθαις· καὶ τὴν θυγατέρα ὅτι ἐθέλει
Ἀλεξάνδρῳ δοῦναι γυναῖκα βεβαιότητος οὕνεκα
3τῆς πρὸς Ἀλέξανδρον φιλίας τε καὶ ξυμμαχίας. εἰ
δὲ ἀπαξιοῖ τὴν Σκυθῶν βασίλισσαν γῆμαι Ἀλέξανδρος,
386Anabasis Of Alexander IV

to introduce obeisance, and Alexander’s drinking and327 b.c. sleeping habits; it was all this he would bear no longer and sought to liberate himself and the other Macedonians; he was then stoned to death by the3 assemblage, along with his fellow prisoners. As for Callisthenes, Aristobulus says he was bound with fetters and carried round with the army, but at length died of sickness, Ptolemy son of Lagus that he was racked and put to death by hanging. Thus not even those whose narratives are entirely trustworthy and who actually accompanied Alexander at that time agree in their accounts of events which were public and within their own knowledge. There are many4 other varying accounts of the same events in different histories, but I must be content with what I have recorded. They occurred a little later, but I have recorded them in connection with the affair between Clitus and Alexander, thinking them to be more relevant here to my narrative.
15. Envoys came to Alexander1 a second time fromWinter 329–8 b.c. the European Scythians, together with the envoys himself had sent to Scythia, for the king of the Scythians at the time when they were being sent by Alexander had died; and his brother was reigning. The purpose of the embassy was to express the2 readiness of the Scythians to do whatever Alexander commanded; they brought gifts for Alexander from the king of Scythia which are most highly regarded in Scythia, and said that the king was willing to give Alexander his daughter in marriage, to confirm his friendship and alliance. If, however, Alexander3 should not think fit to marry the Scythian princess,

1Presumably at winter-quarters at Zariaspa (7, 1), whence his departure is recorded in 15, 7; QC. vii 1, 7 ff. gives an account parallel to 1–4 (omitting 5 f.) in midsummer 328.387