Arrian

ἐφαίνετο, εἰ μακρόθεν μετίοιεν ὅσα ἐς γεφύρωσιν
τοῦ πόρου. ξυναγαγὼν οὖν τὰς διφθέρας, ὑφ᾿ αἷς
ἐσκήνουν οἱ στρατιῶται, φορυτοῦ ἐμπλῆσαι ἐκέλευσεν
ὡς ξηροτάτου καὶ καταδῆσαί τε καὶ
ξυρράψαι ἀκριβῶς, τοῦ μὴ ἐσδύεσθαι ἐς αὐτὰς τοῦ
ὕδατος. ἐμπλησθεῖσαι δὲ καὶ ξυρραφεῖσαι ἱκαναὶ
ἐγένοντο διαβιβάσαι τὴν στρατιὰν ἐν πέντε ἡμέραις.
5Πρὶν δὲ διαβαίνειν τὸν ποταμὸν τῶν τε Μακεδόνων
ἐπιλέξας τοὺς πρεσβυτάτους καὶ ἤδη ἀπολέμους
καὶ τῶν Θεσσαλῶν τοὺς ἐθελοντὰς καταμείναντας
ἐπ᾿ οἴκου ἀπέστειλεν. ἐκπέμπει δὲ καὶ
Στασάνορα, ἕνα τῶν ἑταίρων, ἐς Ἀρείους, προστάξας
Ἀρσάκην μὲν τὸν σατράπην τῶν Ἀρείων
ξυλλαβεῖν, ὅτι ἐθελοκακεῖν αὐτῷ Ἀρσάκης ἔδοξεν,
αὐτὸν δὲ σατράπην εἶναι ἀντ᾿ ἐκείνου Ἀρείων.
6Περάσας δὲ τὸν Ὄξον ποταμὸν ἦγε κατὰ
σπουδήν, ἵνα Βῆσσον εἶναι ξὺν τῇ δυνάμει ἐπυνθάνετο.
καὶ ἐν τούτῳ ἀφικνοῦνται παρὰ Σπιταμένους
καὶ Δαταφέρνου πρὸς αὐτὸν ἀγγέλλοντες,
ὅτι Σπιταμένης καὶ Δαταφέρνης, εἰ πεμφθείη
αὐτοῖς καὶ ὀλίγη στρατιὰ καὶ ἡγεμὼν τῇ στρατιᾷ,
ξυλλήψονται Βῆσσον καὶ παραδώσουσιν Ἀλεξάνδρῳ·
ἐπεὶ καὶ νῦν ἀδέσμῳ φυλακῇ φυλάσσεσθαι
7πρὸς αὐτῶν Βῆσσον. ταῦτα ὡς ἤκουσεν Ἀλέξανδρος,
αὐτὸς μὲν ἀναπαύων ἦγε τὴν στρατιὰν
σχολαίτερον ἢ πρόσθεν, Πτολεμαῖον δὲ τὸν Λάγου
ἀποστέλλει τῶν τε ἑταίρων ἱππαρχίας τρεῖς ἄγοντα
καὶ τοὺς ἱππακοντιστὰς ξύμπαντας, πεζῶν δὲ τήν





326Anabasis of Alexander III

would be long delay if they were to fetch from a 329 b.c. distance enough to bridge the stream. So he collected the hides the troops used for tent covers and ordered them to be filled with the driest possible chaff, and then to be tied down and stitched neatly together so as to be watertight. When they were filled and stitched together they were efficient enough to take the army across in five days.3
Before crossing the river Alexander selected from5 the Macedonians the oldest men who were no longer fit for service and the Thessalian volunteers who had remained behind and sent them on their way home.4 He also sent Stasanor, one of the Companions, to Areia, with instructions to arrest Arsaces, satrap of the Areians, because he thought him guilty of treason to himself; Stasanor was to take his place as satrap of Areia.5
After crossing the river Oxus he marched rapidly6 to the place where according to his information Bessus and his force were to be found. At this time men came to him from Spitamenes and Dataphernes with the message that if quite a small force were sent them, and a man to command it, they would seize Bessus and hand him over to Alexander; in fact they already had him under open arrest. On hearing this,7 Alexander for his own part rested his army and led it on more leisurely than before, but sent Ptolemy son of Lagus6 with three hipparchies of the Companion cavalry, all the mounted javelin-men and of

3So QC. vii 5, 17.4QC. 5, 27 makes Al. send home 900 men a little later.5In QC. viii 3, 17 Stasanor replaces ‘Arsames’ only in 328.6Pt. is clearly the source down to 30, 5 at least; he is not named in QC’s different story, and C. B. Welles (Miscellanea Rostagni 1963, 101 ff.) questions if he had the commands reported here and in 18, 9; iv 29, 1; vi 11, 8, or tells credible stories of them; I agree with the refutation of his criticisms of Pt. by J. Seibert, Untersuchungen zur Geschichte Ptolemaios I, 4 ff. Hipparchies: Introd. 58 ff.327