Arrian
8πρὸς τῶν ἄλλων ἀνθρώπων. ταῦτα εἰπόντα παραμυθήσασθαι
μὲν Ἀλέξανδρον ἐν τῷ τότε, κακὸν δὲ
μέγα, ὡς ἐγώ φημι, ἐξεργάσασθαι Ἀλεξάνδρῳ καὶ
μεῖζον ἔτι ἢ ὅτῳ τότε ξυνείχετο, εἴπερ οὖν σοφοῦ
ἀνδρὸς τήνδε ἔγνω τὴν δόξαν, ὡς οὐ τὰ δίκαια ἄρα
χρὴ σπουδῇ ἐπιλεγόμενον πράττειν τὸν βασιλέα,
ἀλλὰ ὅ τι ἂν καὶ ὅπως οὖν ἐκ βασιλέως πραχθῇ,
9τοῦτο δίκαιον νομίζειν. ἐπεὶ καὶ προσκυνεῖσθαι
ἐθέλειν Ἀλέξανδρον λόγος κατέχει, ὑπούσης μὲν
αὐτῷ καὶ τῆς ἀμφὶ τοῦ Ἄμμωνος πατρὸς μᾶλλόν τι
ἢ Φιλίππου δόξης, θαυμάζοντα δὲ ἤδη τὰ Περσῶν
καὶ Μήδων τῆς τε ἐσθῆτος τῇ ἀμείψει καὶ τῆς
ἄλλης θεραπείας τῇ μετακοσμήσει. οὐκ ἐνδεῆσαι
δὲ οὐδὲ πρὸς τοῦτο αὐτῷ τοὺς κολακείᾳ ἐς αὐτὸ
ἐνδιδόντας, ἄλλους τέ τινας καὶ δὴ καὶ τῶν σοφιστῶν
τῶν ἀμφ᾿ αὐτὸν Ἀνάξαρχόν τε καὶ Ἆγιν
Ἀργεῖον, ἐποποιόν.
10. Καλλισθένην δὲ τὸν Ὀλύνθιον Ἀριστοτέλους
τε τῶν λόγων διακηκοότα καὶ τὸν τρόπον ὄντα
ὑπαγροικότερον οὐκ ἐπαινεῖν ταῦτα. τούτου μὲν
δὴ ἕνεκα καὶ αὐτὸς Καλλισθένει ξυμφέρομαι, ἐκεῖνα
δὲ οὐκέτι ἐπιεικῆ δοκῶ τοῦ Καλλισθένους, εἴπερ
ἀληθῆ ξυγγέγραπται, ὅτι ὑφ᾿ αὑτῷ εἶναι ἀπέφαινε
καὶ τῇ αὑτοῦ ξυγγραφῇ Ἀλέξανδρόν τε καὶ τὰ
2Ἀλεξάνδρου ἔργα, οὔκουν αὐτὸς ἀφῖχθαι ἐξ Ἀλεξάνδρου
δόξαν κτησόμενος, ἀλλὰ ἐκεῖνον εὐκλεᾶ ἐς
ἀνθρώπους ποιήσων· καὶ οὖν καὶ τοῦ θείου τὴν
μετουσίαν Ἀλεξάνδρῳ οὐκ ἐξ ὧν Ὀλυμπιὰς ὑπὲρ
τῆς γενέσεως αὐτοῦ ψεύδεται ἀνηρτῆσθαι, ἀλλὰ ἐξ
ὧν ἂν αὐτὸς ὑπὲρ Ἀλεξάνδρου ξυγγράψας ἐξενέγκῃ
3ἐς ἀνθρώπους. εἰσὶ δὲ οἳ καὶ τάδε ἀνέγραψαν, ὡς
ἄρα ἤρετο αὐτόν ποτε Φιλώτας ὅντινα οἴοιτο
370Anabasis Of Alexander IV

kind. These words are said to have consoled Alexander8 328 b.c. for the time, but I say that he did Alexander even greater harm than the affliction he then suffered from, if indeed he gave this opinion as that of a sage, that the duty of the king is not to act justly after earnest consideration, but that anything done by a king in any form is to be accounted just. The fact is that the9 report prevails that Alexander desired people actually to do him obeisance, from the underlying idea that his father was Ammon and not Philip,4 and as he was now expressing his admiration for the ways of the Persians and Medes, both in his change of dress and in addition by the altered arrangements for his attendance, and that even as to obeisance there was no lack of flatterers to give him his wish, among whom the most prominent were Anaxarchus and Agis of Argos, an epic poet, two of the sophists at his court.
10. It is said that Callisthenes of Olynthus, a past pupil of Aristotle, and with something of the boor in his character, did not approve of this, and here I myself agree with Callisthenes; on the other hand I think Callisthenes went beyond reason, if the record is true, in declaring that Alexander and his exploits depended on him and his history; it was not he who2 had come to win fame from Alexander, but it would be his work to make Alexander renowned among men; and again, that Alexander’s share in divinity did not depend on Olympias’ invention about his birth, but on the account he would write and publish in Alexander’s interest. Some too have recorded3 that Philotas once asked him whom he thought to be

4App. V. Cf. vii 29, 3; 30, 2.371