Arrian

ἐφειστήκει τῷ ποταμῷ, αἵ τε μηχαναὶ ἀπὸ
ξυνθήματος ἐξηκόντιζον ἐς τοὺς Σκύθας παριππεύοντας
ἐπὶ τῇ ὄχθῃ καὶ ἔστιν οἳ αὐτῶν ἐτιτρώσκοντο
ἐκ τῶν βελῶν, εἷς δὲ δὴ διὰ τοῦ γέρρου τε
καὶ τοῦ θώρακος διαμπὰξ πληγεὶς πίπτει ἀπὸ τοῦ
ἵππου, οἱ μὲν ἐξεπλάγησαν πρός τε τῶν βελῶν τὴν
διὰ μακροῦ ἄφεσιν καὶ ὅτι ἀνὴρ ἀγαθὸς αὐτοῖς
τετελευτήκει, καί ὀλίγον ἀνεχώρησαν ἀπὸ τῆς
5ὄχθης· Ἀλέξανδρος δὲ τεταραγμένους πρὸς τὰ
βέλη ἰδὼν ὑπὸ σαλπίγγων ἐπέρα τὸν ποταμὸν
αὐτὸς ἡγούμενος· εἵπετο δὲ αὐτῷ καὶ ἡ ἄλλη
στρατιά. πρῶτον μὲν δὴ τοὺς τοξότας καὶ σφενδονήτας
ἀποβιβάσας σφενδονᾶν τε καὶ ἐκτοξεύειν
ἐκέλευσεν ἐς τοὺς Σκύθας, ὡς μὴ πελάζειν αὐτοὺς
τῇ φάλαγγι τῶν πεζῶν ἐκβαινούσῃ, πρὶν τὴν ἵππον
6αὐτῷ διαβῆναι πᾶσαν. ὡς δὲ ἀθρόοι ἐπὶ τῇ ὄχθῃ
ἐγένοντο, ἐφῆκεν ἐπὶ τοὺς Σκύθας τὸ μὲν πρῶτον
μίαν ἱππαρχίαν τῶν ξένων καὶ τῶν σαρισσοφόρων
ἴλας τέσσαρας· καὶ τούτους δεξάμενοι οἱ Σκύθαι
καὶ ἐς κύκλους περιϊππεύοντες ἔβαλλόν τε πολλοὶ
ὀλίγους <καὶ> αὐτοὶ οὐ χαλεπῶς διεφύγγανον.
Ἀλέξανδρος δὲ τούς τε τοξότας καὶ τοὺς Ἀγριᾶνας
καὶ τοὺς ἄλλους ψιλούς, ὧν Βάλακρος ἦρχεν,
ἀναμίξας τοῖς ἱππεῦσιν ἐπῆγεν ἐπὶ τοὺς Σκύθας.
7ὡς δὲ ὁμοῦ ἤδη ἐγίγνοντο, ἐλάσαι ἐκέλευσεν ἐς
αὐτοὺς τῶν τε ἑταίρων τρεῖς ἱππαρχίας καὶ τοὺς
ἱππακοντιστὰς ξύμπαντας· καὶ αὐτὸς δὲ τὴν
λοιπὴν ἵππον ἄγων σπουδῇ ἐνέβαλεν ὀρθίαις ταῖς
ἴλαις. οὔκουν ἔτι οἷοί τε ἦσαν ἐξελίσσειν τὴν ἱππασίαν
348Anabasis Of Alexander IV

fully armed, the catapults on a signal hurled their329 b.c. volleys at the Scythians riding along the bank, and some were wounded by the missiles; one was actually pierced right through his shield and corslet, and fell from his horse. The Scythians were dismayed at the long-range discharge of the missiles and at the loss of a brave man and retreated a little from the bank. Seeing them in disorder because of the missiles,5 Alexander sounded his bugles and began the crossing of the river, himself in the van; the rest of the army followed him. He first disembarked the archers and slingers, and told them to shoot their bullets and arrows at the Scythians, to keep them from approaching the phalanx of the infantry as it disembarked, before his cavalry had fully crossed. When they were6 all in a body on the bank, he launched at the Scythians first a hipparchy of the mercenaries and four squadrons of the lancers.2 The Scythians awaited their onslaught, riding round in circles and shooting at them; they were many against few, and easily evaded their attack. Alexander then mixed up his archers, the Agrianians and the other light troops under Balacrus, with the cavalry, and led them against the Scythians. Once they were quite close, he ordered7 three hipparchies3 of the Companions and all the mounted javelin-men to charge at them; and he himself brought up the rest of the cavalry at full speed and went in with his squadrons in column. So the Scythians were no longer able to wheel round in


2Introd. n. 84.3Introd. 59 f.349