Arrian

τε Φιλώτα τάξιν καὶ τῶν ὑπασπιστῶν χιλιαρχίαν
μίαν καὶ τοὺς Ἀγριᾶνας πάντας καὶ τῶν τοξοτῶν
τοὺς ἡμίσεας, σπουδῇ ἐλαύνειν κελεύσας ὡς
Σπιταμένην τε καὶ Δαταφέρνην. καὶ Πτολεμαῖος
ᾔει ὡς ἐτέτακτο, καὶ διελθὼν ἐν ἡμέραις τέτταρσι
σταθμοὺς δέκα ἀφικνεῖται ἐς τὸ στρατόπεδον, οὗ
τῇ προτεραίᾳ ηὐλισμένοι ἦσαν οἱ ἀμφὶ τὸν Σπιταμένην
βάρβαροι.
30. Ἐνταῦθα ἔμαθε Πτολεμαῖος ὅτι οὐ βεβαία
τῷ Σπιταμένει καὶ Δαταφέρνῃ ἡ γνώμη ἐστὶν
ἀμφὶ τῇ παραδόσει τοῦ Βήσσου. τοὺς μὲν δὴ
πεζοὺς κατέλιπε, προστάξας ἕπεσθαι ἐν τάξει,
αὐτὸς δὲ ξὺν τοῖς ἱππεῦσιν ἐλάσας ἀφίκετο πρὸς
κώμην τινά, ἵνα ὁ Βῆσσος ἦν ξὺν ὀλίγοις στρατιώταις.
2οἱ γὰρ ἀμφὶ τὸν Σπιταμένην μετακεχωρήκεσαν
ἤδη ἐκεῖθεν, καταιδεσθέντες αὐτοὶ παραδοῦναι
τὸν Βῆσσον. Πτολεμαῖος δὲ περιστήσας ἐν
κύκλῳ τῆς κώμης τοὺς ἱππέας (ἦν γάρ τι καὶ
τεῖχος περιβεβλημένον καὶ πύλαι κατ᾿ αὐτὸ)
ἐπεκηρυκεύετο τοῖς ἐν τῇ κώμῃ βαρβάροις ἀπαθεῖς
σφᾶς ἀπαλλάσσεσθαι παραδόντας Βῆσσον. οἱ δὲ
3ἐδέχοντο τοὺς ξὺν Πτολεμαίῳ ἐς τὴν κώμην. καὶ
Πτολεμαῖος ξυλλαβὼν Βῆσσον ὀπίσω ἐπανῄει.
προπέμψας δὲ ἤρετο Ἀλέξανδρον, ὅπως χρὴ ἐς
ὄψιν ἄγειν Ἀλεξάνδρου Βῆσσον. καὶ Ἀλέξανδρος
γυμνὸν ἐν κλοιῷ δήσαντα οὕτως ἄγειν ἐκέλευσε καὶ
καταστήσαντα ἐν δεξιᾷ τῆς ὁδοῦ, ᾗ αὐτός τε καὶ ἡ
στρατιὰ παρελεύσεσθαι ἔμελλε. καὶ Πτολεμαῖος
οὕτως ἐποίησεν.
4Ἀλέξανδρος δὲ ἰδὼν τὸν Βῆσσον ἐπιστήσας τὸ
ἅρμα ἤρετο ἀνθ᾿ ὅτου τὸν βασιλέα τὸν αὑτοῦ καὶ
ἅμα καὶ οἰκεῖον καὶ εὐεργέτην γενόμενον Δαρεῖον τὰ
328Anabasis of Alexander III

the infantry the battalion of Philotas, one chiliarchy 329 b.c. of the hypaspists, all the Agrianes, and half the archers, with orders to proceed by forced marches to Spitamenes and Dataphernes. Ptolemy went as directed, and traversing ten days’ marches in four days arrived at the camp where the barbarians with Spitamenes had bivouacked the previous day.
30. There he learnt that Spitamenes and Dataphernes had not quite made up their mind about the surrender of Bessus. He therefore left the infantry behind, with instructions to follow in formation, and rode on himself with the cavalry, and arrived at a village where Bessus was with a few soldiers. Spitamenes2 and his men had already withdrawn, as they were ashamed to hand Bessus over personally. Ptolemy stationed the cavalry in a cordon round the village—it had some sort of wall thrown round it, and gates in the wall—and made a proclamation to the barbarians in the village that they would depart unscathed if they handed Bessus over. They admitted Ptolemy and his troops into the village, and after3 seizing Bessus he retired. Then he sent a messenger ahead and asked Alexander in what way he should bring Bessus into his presence. Alexander ordered him to bring Bessus bound, naked, and wearing a wooden collar, and set him on the right of the road by which Alexander and his army were to pass. Ptolemy did so.
On seeing Bessus Alexander stopped his car and4 asked him why he had first seized Darius, who had been his king, and in addition his relative and benefactor,
329