Arrian

τῷ Ἡρακλεῖ ἔθυσέ τε καὶ πομπὴν ἔστειλε ξὺν τῇ
δυνάμει ὡπλισμένῃ· καὶ αἱ νῆες ξυνεπόμπευσαν
τῷ Ἡρακλεῖ, καὶ ἀγῶνα γυμνικὸν ἐν τῷ ἱερῷ καὶ
λαμπάδα ἐποίησε· καὶ τὴν μηχανήν, ᾗ τὸ τεῖχος
κατεσείσθη, ἀνέθηκεν ἐς τὸν νεὼν καὶ τὴν ναῦν τὴν
Τυρίαν τὴν ἱερὰν τοῦ Ἡρακλέους, ἥντινα ἐν τῷ
ἐπίπλῳ ἔλαβε, καὶ ταύτην τῷ Ἡρακλεῖ ἀνέθηκεν
καὶ ἐπίγραμμα ἐπ᾿ αὐτῇ, ἢ αὐτὸς ποιήσας ἢ ὅτου
δὴ ἄλλου ποιήσαντος, οὐκ ἄξιον μνήμης τὸ ἐπίγραμμα·
διὰ τοῦτο καὶ ἐγὼ αὐτὸ ἀναγράψαι
ἀπηξίωσα. Τύρος μὲν δὴ οὕτως ἑάλω ἐπὶ ἄρχοντος
Νικήτου Ἀθήνησι μηνὸς Ἑκατομβαιῶνος.
25. Ἔτι δὲ ἐν τῇ πολιορκίᾳ τῆς Τύρου ξυνεχομένου
Ἀλεξάνδρου ἀφίκοντο παρὰ Δαρείου
πρέσβεις ὡς αὐτὸν ἀπαγγέλλοντες μύρια μὲν
τάλαντα ὑπὲρ τῆς μητρός τε καὶ τὴς γυναικὸς καὶ
τῶν παίδων δοῦναι ἐθέλειν Ἀλεξάνδρῳ Δαρεῖον·
τὴν δὲ χώραν πᾶσαν τὴν ἐντὸς Εὐφράτου ποταμοῦ
ἔστε ἐπὶ θάλασσαν τὴν Ἑλληνικὴν Ἀλεξάνδρου
εἶναι· γήμαντα δὲ τὴν Δαρείου παῖδα Ἀλέξανδρον
2φίλον τε εἶναι Δαρείῳ καὶ ξύμμαχον. καὶ τούτων
ἐν τῷ ξυλλόγῳ τῶν ἑταίρων ἀπαγγελθέντων
Παρμενίωνα μὲν λέγουσιν Ἀλεξάνδρῳ εἰπεῖν ὅτι
αὐτὸς ἂν Ἀλέξανδρος ὢν ἐπὶ τούτοις ἠγάπησε
καταλύσας τὸν πόλεμον μηκέτι τὸ πρόσω κινδυνεύειν·
Ἀλέξανδρον δὲ Παρμενίωνι ἀποκρίνασθαι
ὅτι καὶ αὐτὸς ἂν, εἴπερ Παρμενίων ἦν, οὕτως
ἔπραξεν, ἐπεὶ δὲ Ἀλέξανδρός ἐστιν, ἀποκρινεῖσθαι
3Δαρείῳ ἅπερ δὴ καὶ ἀπεκρίνατο. ἔφη γὰρ οὔτε
χρημάτων δεῖσθαι παρὰ Δαρείου οὔτε τῆς χώρας
λαβεῖν ἀντὶ τῆς πάσης τὸ μέρος· εἶναι γὰρ τά τε
χρήματα καὶ τὴν χώραν αὑτοῦ πᾶσαν· γῆμαί τε εἰ
210Anabasis of Alexander II

captured at Tyre. Alexander sacrificed to Heracles56 332 b.c. and held a procession in his honour, with his forces under arms; there was a naval review too in honour of Heracles, and Alexander held athletic games in the temple enclosure and a relay torch-race; the engine which battered down the wall was dedicated to the temple; and the Tyrian sacred ship, consecrated to Heracles, which he captured in the attack, was dedicated to Heracles with an inscription, either of his own composition or of someone else’s, not worth recording; that is why I did not trouble to copy it.6 It was in this way that Tyre was captured in the archonship of Nicetus at Athens in the month Hecatombaeon.7
25. While Alexander was still occupied in the siege of Tyre, envoys came to him from Darius announcing that Darius was ready to give Alexander 10,000 Talents for his mother, wife and children; to cede all the country west of Euphrates to the Greek sea, to give Alexander his daughter in marriage and be his friend and ally. When this was2 reported in the council of the Companions, it is said that Parmenio told Alexander that if he were Alexander he would be glad to stop the war on these terms without further risks, and that Alexander answered Parmenio that he too would have done this if he had been Parmenio, but as he was Alexander, he would make the reply to Darius he actually made: he needed no money from Darius, nor a part3 of the country instead of the whole; for the money and country all belonged to him; if he chose to marry



5D. 46, 6.6Presumably Pt. or Ar. did.7July/Aug. 332 b.c.211