Arrian
3τὸν μὲν δὴ κύκλον τῆς πέτρας λέγουσιν ἐς διακοσίους
σταδίους μάλιστα εἶναι, ὕψος δὲ αὐτῆς,
ἵναπερ χθαμαλώτατον, σταδίων ἕνδεκα, καὶ ἀνάβασιν
χειροποίητον μίαν χαλεπήν· εἶναι δὲ καὶ
ὕδωρ ἐν ἄκρᾳ τῇ πέτρᾳ πολὺ καὶ καθαρόν, πηγὴν
ἀνίσχουσαν, ὡς καὶ ἀπορρεῖν ἀπὸ τῆς πηγῆς ὕδωρ,
καὶ ὕλην καὶ γῆν ἀγαθὴν ἐργάσιμον ὅσην καὶ
χιλίοις ἀνθρώποις ἀποχρῶσαν ἂν εἶναι ἐργάζεσθαι.
4Καὶ ταῦτα ἀκούοντα Ἀλέξανδρον πόθος λαμβάνει
ἐξελεῖν καὶ τοῦτο τὸ ὄρος, οὐχ ἥκιστα ἐπὶ τῷ
ἀμφὶ τὸν Ἡρακλέα μύθῳ πεφημισμένῳ. τὰ μὲν
δὴ Ὦρα καὶ τὰ Μάσσαγα φρούρια ἐποίησεν ἐπὶ τῇ
5χώρᾳ, τὰ Βάζιρα δὲ πόλιν1 ἐξετείχισε. καὶ οἱ
ἀμφὶ Ἡφαιστίωνά τε καὶ Περδίκκαν αὐτῷ ἄλλην
πόλιν ἐκτειχίσαντες, Ὀροβάτις ὄνομα τῇ πόλει
ἦν, καὶ φρουρὰν καταλιπόντες ὡς ἐπὶ τὸν Ἰνδὸν
ποταμὸν ᾔεσαν· ὡς δὲ ἀφίκοντο, ἔπρασσον ἤδη
ὅσα ἐς τὸ ζεῦξαι τὸν Ἰνδὸν ὑπὸ Ἀλεξάνδρου
ἐτέτακτο.
6Ἀλέξανδρος δὲ τῆς μὲν χώρας τῆς ἐπὶ τάδε τοῦ
Ἰνδοῦ ποταμοῦ σατράπην κατέστησε Νικάνορα τῶν
ἑταίρων. αὐτὸς δὲ τὰ μὲν πρῶτα ὡς ἐπὶ τὸν
Ἰνδὸν ποταμὸν ἦγε, καὶ πόλιν τε Πευκελαῶτιν οὐ
πόρρω τοῦ Ἰνδοῦ ᾠκισμένην ὁμολογίᾳ παρεστήσατο
καὶ ἐν αὐτῇ φρουρὰν καταστήσας τῶν
Μακεδόνων καὶ Φίλιππον ἐπὶ τῇ φρουρᾷ ἡγεμόνα,
ὁ δὲ καὶ ἄλλα προσηγάγετο μικρὰ πολίσματα πρὸς
τῷ Ἰνδῷ ποταμῶ ᾠκισμένα. ξυνείποντο δὲ αὐτῷ
Κωφαῖός τε καὶ Ἀσσαγέτης οἱ ὕπαρχοι τῆς
7χώρας. ἀφικόμενος δὲ ἐς Ἐμβόλιμα πόλιν, ἣ

1Roos inserted <τὴν> before πόλιν.436Anabasis Of Alexander IV

brought into the tale as a boast. The circumference3 327–6 b.c. of the rock, it is said, is about two hundred stades, its height at its lowest part eleven stades,2 with only one way up, made by hand and rough. On the top of the rock there is said to be plenty of pure water which comes from a perennial spring, from which water actually pours out, as well as wood and good arable land which would be enough for a thousand men to till.
As soon as Alexander heard this, he was seized with4 a longing to capture this mountain too, not least because of the legend about Heracles.3 He made Ora and Massaga into forts to control the district, and fortified Bazira as a city. Hephaestion, Perdiccas5 and their men fortified another city for him, called Orobatis, and leaving a garrison there went on towards the river Indus; on arrival, they were engaged in following all Alexander’s instructions for bridging the Indus.
Alexander appointed Nicanor, one of the Companions,6 326 b.c. satrap of the region this side of the river Indus. He himself first went towards the river Indus and took over by surrender the city of Peucelaotis, situated not far from it, and set a Macedonian garrison there with Philippus as commandant; he also took over various small towns lying near the river Indus. Cophaeus and Assagetes, the hyparchs of the country, were in attendance on him. Then on reaching7
2Cf. iv 21, 2 n.3App. IV 3.437