Arrian

τὴν πόλιν, ἐφ᾿ ἧς τῷ οἰκισμῷ κατελέλειπτο, τούς τε
βαρύτερον ὡπλισμένους τῆς στρατιᾶς Ἀλεξάνδρῳ
ἦγεν καὶ τὰς μηχανάς, εἴ που πολιορκίας δεήσειεν.
6αὐτὸς δὲ Ἀλέξανδρος τούς τε ἑταίρους ἱππέας
ἄγων καὶ τοὺς ἱππακοντιστὰς καὶ τὴν Κοίνου καὶ
Πολυπέρχοντος τάξιν καὶ τοὺς Ἀγριᾶνας τοὺς
χιλίους1 καὶ τοὺς τοξότας ᾔει ὡς ἐπὶ τοὺς Ἀσσακηνούς·
7ἦγε δὲ διὰ τῆς Γουραίων χώρας. καὶ
τὸν ποταμὸν τὸν ἐπώνυμον τῆς χώρας τὸν Γουραῖον
χαλεπῶς διέβη, διὰ βαθύτητά τε καὶ ὅτι ὀξὺς ὁ
ῥοῦς ἦν αὐτῷ καὶ οἱ λίθοι στρογγύλοι ἐν τῷ
ποταμῷ ὄντες σφαλεροὶ τοῖς ἐπιβαίνουσιν ἐγίγνοντο.
οἱ δὲ βάρβαροι ὡς προσάγοντα ᾔσθοντο
Ἀλέξανδρον, ἀθρόοι μὲν ἐς μάχην καταστῆναι οὐκ
ἐτόλμησαν, διαλυθέντες δὲ ὡς ἕκαστοι κατὰ πόλεις
ταύτας ἐπενόουν ἀπομαχόμενοι διασώζειν.
26. Καὶ Ἀλέξανδρος πρῶτα μὲν ἐπὶ Μάσσαγα
ἦγε, τὴν μεγίστην τῶν ταύτῃ πόλεων. ὡς δὲ
προσῆγεν ἤδη τοῖς τείχεσι, θαρρήσαντες οἱ βάρβαροι
τοῖς μισθοφόροις τοῖς ἐκ τῶν πρόσω Ἰνδῶν,
ἦσαν γὰρ οὗτοι ἐς ἑππακισχιλίους, ὡς στρατοπεδευομένους
εἶδον τοὺς Μακεδόνας, δρόμῳ ἐπ᾿
2αὐτοὺς ᾔεσαν. καὶ Ἀλέξανδρος ἰδὼν πλησίον τῆς
πόλεως ἐσομένην τὴν μάχην προσωτέρω ἐκκαλέσασθαι
αὐτοὺς βουληθεὶς τῶν τειχῶν, ὡς εἰ τροπὴ
γίγνοιτο, ἐγίγνωσκεν γὰρ ἐσομένην, μὴ δι᾿ ὀλίγου
ἐς τὴν πόλιν καταφυγόντες εὐμαρῶς διασώζοιντο,
ὡς ἐκθέοντας εἶδε τοὺς βαρβάρους, μεταβαλλομένους
κελεύει τοὺς Μακεδόνας ὀπίσω ἀποχωρεῖν ὡς

1codd.; Roos. Others write καὶ τοὺς ψιλοὺς (cf. IV 30, 6) or ἐς χιλίους. See historical note.426Anabasis Of Alexander IV

who had finished fortifying the city of whose settlement 327–6 b.c. he had been left in charge, brought Alexander the heavier armed troops of the army with the siege engines, in case a siege proved necessary. Alexander6 marched himself with the Companion cavalry, the mounted javelin-men, the battalions of Coenus and Polyperchon, the thousand Agrianians,2 and the archers, towards the Assacenians through the country of the Guraeans. He crossed the river Guraeus37 (which shares its name with the country) with difficulty, because of its depth and rapid current, and the rounded stones in the river proved slippery to step on. But when the barbarians became aware of his approach, they dared not take their stand in mass for a battle, but dispersed to their own cities with the intention of securing the defence and safety of each.
26. Alexander marched first against Massaga, the greatest city of the region. When he was already close to the walls, the barbarians, relying on mercenary Indians brought from further India, about seven thousand men,1 charged the Macedonians at the double as soon as they saw them pitching camp. Alexander who had seen that the battle would be2 near the city, wished to entice them out further from their walls, so that if a rout took place (and he was sure it would) they should not have their city close at hand for refuge and easily escape, and as soon as he saw the barbarians sallying out, he ordered the



2Hardly more than 500 in 334 b.c. (Introd. 56), but 1,000 in 331/30 b.c. (QC. v 3, 6), they must have been reinforced by ‘Thracians’ (Berve i 137 ff.). Cf. Introd. 65. But the text is suspect (see critical note).3Panjkora or Landai (united Panjkora-Swat river).1QC. viii 10, 23 gives 38,000 foot, probably referring to the whole Assacenian force, cf. 24, 5–7 above; his story of the siege, 10, 26–36, is incompatible with A’s.427