Arrian

ἄλλης ὕλης εὐφλέκτου ἐμπλήσαντες δύο ἱστοὺς ἐπὶ
τῇ πρώρᾳ καταπηγνύουσι καὶ ἐν κύκλῳ περιφράσσουσιν
ἐς ὅσον μακρότατον, ὡς φορυτόν τε ταύτῃ
καὶ δᾷδας ὅσας πλείστας δέξασθαι· πρὸς δὲ πίσσαν
τε καὶ θεῖον καὶ ὅσα ἄλλα ἐς τὸ παρακαλέσαι
2μεγάλην φλόγα ἐπὶ ταύτῃ ἐπεφόρησαν. παρέτειναν
δὲ καὶ κεραίαν διπλῆν ἐπὶ τοῖς ἱστοῖς ἀμφοτέροις,
καὶ ἀπὸ ταύτης ἐξήρτησαν ἐν λέβησιν ὅσα ἐπιχυθέντα
ἢ ἐπιβληθέντα ἐπὶ μέγα τὴν φλόγα ἐξάψειν
ἔμελλεν, ἕρματά τε ἐς τὴν πρύμναν ἐνέθεσαν, τοῦ
ἐξᾶραι ἐς ὕψος τὴν πρῶραν πιεζομένης κατὰ
3πρύμναν τῆς νεώς. ἔπειτα ἄνεμον τηρήσαντες ὡς
ἐπὶ τὸ χῶμα ἐπιφέροντα ἐξάψαντες τριήρεσι τὴν
ναῦν κατ᾿ οὐρὰν εἷλκον. ὡς δὲ ἐπέλαζον ἤδη τῷ τε
χώματι καὶ τοῖς πύργοις, πῦρ ἐμβαλόντες ἐς τὴν
ὕλην καὶ ὡς βιαιότατα ἅμα ταῖς τριήρεσιν ἐπανελκύσαντες
τὴν ναῦν ἐνσείουσιν ἄκρῳ τῷ χώματι·
αὐτοὶ δὲ οἱ ἐν τῇ νηῒ καιομένῃ ἤδη ἐξενήξαντο οὐ
4χαλεπῶς. καὶ ἐν τούτῳ ἥ τε φλὸξ πολλὴ ἐνέπιπτε
τοῖς πύργοις καὶ αἱ κεραῖαι περικλασθεῖσαι ἐξέχεαν
ἐς τὸ πῦρ ὅσα ἐς ἔξαψιν τῆς φλογὸς παρεσκευασμένα
ἦν. οἱ δ᾿ ἀπὸ τῶν τριήρων πλησίον τοῦ
χώματος ἀνακωχεύοντες ἐτόξευον ἐς τοὺς πύργους,
ὡς μὴ ἀσφαλὲς εἶναι πελάσαι ὅσοι σβεστήριόν τι τῇ
5φλογὶ ἐπέφερον. καὶ ἐν τούτῳ κατεχομένων ἤδη
ἐκ τοῦ πυρὸς τῶν πύργων ἐκδραμόντες ἐκ τῆς
πόλεως πολλοὶ καὶ ἐς κελήτια ἐμβάντες ἄλλῃ καὶ
ἄλλῃ ἐποκείλαντες τοῦ χώματος τόν τε χάρακα οὐ
χαλεπῶς διέσπασαν τὸν πρὸ αὐτοῦ προβεβλημένον
καὶ τὰς μηχανὰς ξυμπάσας κατέφλεξαν, ὅσας μὴ τὸ
6ἀπὸ τῆς νεὼς πῦρ ἐπέσχεν. Ἀλέξανδρος δὲ τό τε
χῶμα ἀπὸ τῆς ἠπείρου ἀρξαμένους πλατύτερον
190Anabasis of Alexander II

and other combustible wood, fixed two masts in the 332 b.c.
bows, and built bulwarks round, extended as far as possible, so that it would contain the greatest amount of chips and shavings and torches; to say nothing of pitch, sulphur, and anything else to stir a great blaze, which they added liberally. They2 lashed a double yardarm to each mast, and hung from it in cauldrons anything which could be poured or thrown on to increase the flame, and they
ballasted the stern to lift the bows as high as possible by the weight aft. Then they waited for a wind blowing3 towards the mole and, making fast hawsers, towed the transport astern with triremes. When they got near the mole and the towers, they lit the material, hauled with the triremes as violently as possible and dashed the ship on to the edge of the mole. The crew of the ship, already ablaze, swam off without difficulty. At this point a great flame was4 falling on the towers, and as the yards broke, they poured on to the fire the material that had been made ready to feed the flame. The men in the triremes lay to near the mole, and shot at the towers, so that it was not safe for anyone to get near with materials to quench the fire. At this stage, the towers being5 well alight, the citizens sallied out in large numbers, jumping into small boats, and put in at different parts of the mole, where they easily tore down the palisade set up to protect it and burned all the engines which had not been caught by fire from the ship. Alexander,6 however, ordered his men to make the mole
191