Arrian

κατεστρατοπέδευσεν αὐτοῦ, ὡς ἀναπαῦσαι ὀλίγον
τούς τε ἄνδρας καὶ τοὺς ἵππους· Παρμενίων δὲ τό
τε στρατόπεδον τῶν βαρβάρων εἷλε καὶ τὰ σκευοφόρα
καὶ τοὺς ἐλέφαντας καὶ τὰς καμήλους.
5Ἀλέξανδρος δὲ ἀναπαύσας τοὺς ἀμφ᾿ αὑτὸν
ἱππέας ἔστε ἐπὶ μέσας νύκτας προὐχώρει αὖθις
κατὰ σπουδὴν ἐπ᾿ Ἄρβηλα, ὡς Δαρεῖόν τε αἱρήσων
ἐκεῖ καὶ τὰ χρήματα καὶ τὴν ἄλλην κατασκευὴν
τὴν βασιλικήν. καὶ ἀφίκετο εἰς Ἄρβηλα τῇ
ὑστεραίᾳ διώξας τοὺς πάντας ἐκ τῆς μάχης σταδίους
μάλιστα ἐς ἑξακοσίους. καὶ Δαρεῖον μὲν οὐ
καταλαμβάνει ἐν Ἀρβήλοις, ἀλλὰ ἔφευγεν οὐδέν τι
ἐλινύσας Δαρεῖος· τὰ χρήματα δὲ ἐγκατελήφθη καὶ
ἡ κατασκευὴ πᾶσα, καὶ τὸ ἅρμα τὸ Δαρείου αὖθις
ἐγκατελήφθη καὶ ἡ ἀσπὶς αὖθις καὶ τὰ τόξα ἑάλω.
6Ἀπέθανον δὲ τῶν ἀμφ᾿ Ἀλέξανδρον ἄνδρες μὲν
ἐς ἑκατὸν μάλιστα, ἵπποι δὲ ἔκ τε τῶν τραυμάτων
καὶ τῆς κακοπαθείας τῆς ἐν τῇ διώξει ὑπὲρ τοὺς
χιλίους, καὶ τούτων τῆς ἑταιρικῆς ἵππου σχεδόν τι
οἱ ἡμίσεες. τῶν βαρβάρων δὲ νεκρῶν μὲν ἐλέγοντο
ἐς τριάκοντα μυριάδας, ἑάλωσαν δὲ πολὺ πλείονες
τῶν ἀποθανόντων καὶ οἱ ἐλέφαντες καὶ τῶν
ἁρμάτων ὅσα μὴ κατεκόπη ἐν τῇ μάχῃ.
7Τοῦτο <τὸ> τέλος τῇ μάχῃ ταύτῃ ἐγένετο ἐπὶ
ἄρχοντος Ἀθηναίοις Ἀριστοφάνους μηνὸς Πυανεψιῶνος·
καὶ Ἀριστάνδρῳ ξυνέβη ἡ μαντεία ἐν τῷ
αὐτῷ μηνί, ἐν ὅτῳ ἡ σελήνη ἐκλιπὴς ἐφάνη, τήν τε
μάχην Ἀλεξάνδρῳ καὶ τὴν νίκην γενέσθαι.
16. Δαρεῖος μὲν δὴ εὐθὺς ἐκ τῆς μάχης παρὰ τὰ
ὄρη τὰ Ἀρμενίων ἤλαυνεν ἐπὶ Μηδίας, καὶ ξὺν


272Anabasis of Alexander III

to give his men and horses a little rest, while Parmenio 331 b.c. took the Persian camp with the baggage train, elephants and camels.
Alexander rested his cavalry till towards midnight,5 and hurried on again to Arbela, to seize Darius there with his treasure and the other royal belongings. He arrived at Arbela next day, having covered in all, since the battle, about six hundred stades in the pursuit. However, he did not catch Darius at Arbela, as he continued his flight without pause, though his treasure and all his equipment was captured and his chariot was seized then a second time, and his shield was taken a second time, and his bow and arrows too.2
Up to a hundred of Alexander’s troops were lost,6 with over a thousand horses from wounds and distress in the pursuit, of which about half belonged to the Companions. The barbarian corpses were said to number some three hundred thousand, but far more were made prisoner than killed, and the elephants and all the chariots which had not been cut down in the battle were also captured.3
So ended this battle in the month Pyanepsion of7 the archonship at Athens of Aristophanes.4 Aristander’s prophecy came true, that Alexander’s battle and victory would occur in the same month in which the moon was partially eclipsed.
16. Darius made straight from the battle by the Armenian mountains for Media, accompanied in


2P. 34, 1 has Al. proclaimed king of Asia at Arbela, cf.
Introd. n. 64.3D. 61: 90,000 Persians, 500 Macedonians (plus many wounded, who might well die later); QC. iv 16, 26: 40,000 Persians, under 300 Macedonians.4An error (October/November); really 26 Boedromion = 1 Oct. (Plut., Camillus 19, 3), cf. App. VIII 5.273