Arrian

κατέπαυσε· καὶ τοὺς φόρους, οὓς βασιλεῖ Δαρείῳ
ἀπέφερον, ἀνῆκεν, ὅτι Ἀργείων μὲν Μαλλωταὶ
ἄποικοι ἦσαν, αὐτὸς δὲ ἀπ᾿ Ἄργους τῶν Ἡρακλειδῶν
εἶναι ἠξίου.
6. Ἔτι δὲ ἐν Μαλλῷ ὄντι αὐτῷ ἀγγέλλεται
Δαρεῖον ἐν Σώχοις ξὺν τῇ πάσῃ δυνάμει στρατοπεδεύειν.
ὁ δὲ χῶρος οὗτός ἐστι μὲν τῆς Ἀσσυρίας
γῆς, ἀπέχει δὲ τῶν πυλῶν τῶν Ἀσσυρίων
ἐς δύο μάλιστα σταθμούς. ἔνθα δὴ ξυναγαγὼν
τοὺς ἑταίρους φράζει αὐτοῖς τὰ ἐξηγγελμένα ὑπὲρ
Δαρείου τε καὶ τῆς στρατιᾶς τῆς Δαρείου. οἱ δὲ
2αὐτόθεν ὡς εἶχεν ἄγειν ἐκέλευον. ὁ δὲ τότε μὲν
ἐπαινέσας αὐτοὺς διέλυσε τὸν ξύλλογον, τῇ δὲ
ὑστεραίᾳ προ[σ]ῆγεν ὡς ἐπὶ Δαρεῖόν τε καὶ τοὺς
Πέρσας. δευτεραῖος δὲ ὑπερβαλὼν τὰς πύλας
ἐστρατοπέδευσε πρὸς Μυριάνδρῳ πόλει· καὶ τῆς
νυκτὸς χειμὼν ἐπιγίγνεται σκληρὸς καὶ ὕδωρ τε ἐξ
οὐρανοῦ καὶ πνεῦμα βίαιον· τοῦτο κατέσχεν ἐν τῷ
στρατοπέδῳ Ἀλέξανδρον.
3Δαρεῖος δὲ τέως μὲν ξὺν τῇ στρατιᾷ διέτριβεν,
ἐπιλεξάμενος τῆς Ἀσσυρίας γῆς πεδίον πάντῃ
ἀναπεπταμένον καὶ τῷ τε πλήθει τῆς στρατιᾶς
ἐπιτήδειον καὶ ἐνιππάσασθαι τῇ ἵππῳ ξύμφορον.
καὶ τοῦτο τὸ χωρίον ξυνεβούλευσεν αὐτῷ μὴ ἀπολείπειν
Ἀμύντας ὁ Ἀντιόχου, ὁ παρὰ Ἀλεξάνδρου
αὐτόμολος· εἶναι γὰρ τὴν εὐρυχωρίαν πρὸς τοῦ
πλήθους τε καὶ τῆς σκευῆς τῶν Περσῶν. καὶ
4ἔμενε Δαρεῖος. ὡς δὲ Ἀλεξάνδρῳ πολλὴ μὲν [ἡ]
ἐν Ταρσῷ τριβὴ ἐπὶ τῇ νόσῳ ἐγίνετο, οὐκ ὀλίγη δὲ
ἐν Σόλοις, ἵνα ἔθυέ τε καὶ ἐπόμπευε, καὶ ἐπὶ τοὺς
ὀρεινοὺς Κίλικας διέτριψεν ἐξελάσας, τοῦτο ἔσφηλεν
Δαρεῖον τῆς γνώμης· καὶ αὐτός τε, ὅ τι περ
140Anabasis of Alexander II

to them; he remitted the tribute paid to Darius, 333 b.c. since Mallus was a colony of Argos, and he himself claimed descent from the Argive Heraclidae.7
6. Alexander was still at Mallus when a report came that Darius with his full force was encamped at Sochi, a place in Assyrian territory, about two marching days from the Assyrian Gates. Alexander therefore assembled the Companions and told them the news of Darius and his army, on which they urged him to advance without more ado. He then2 thanked them and dismissed the council and marched next day to attack Darius and the Persians. On the second day he passed the Gates and camped near a city called Myriandrus, and in the night a severe storm came on with rain, and a violent gale, which kept Alexander in his camp.1
Darius meanwhile was marking time with his army.3 He had selected a plain in the Assyrian land open all round, convenient for the great number of his army and suitable for the manoeuvres of his cavalry. Amyntas son of Antiochus, the deserter from Alexander, advised him not to leave this place; there was, he said, elbow-room favourable for the numbers and equipment of the Persians.2 So Darius stayed where he was. But as Alexander spent a long time4 in Tarsus on account of his illness, and a good deal at Soli, where he sacrificed and held the parade, and was delayed by his raid on the Cilician hillmen,3 all this made Darius waver in his decision. He himself was





7Al. treats Mallus as Greek, like its ‘founder’, Amphilochus.1D. 32, 2; QC. 7, 6–10; App. III 3.2P. 20, 1; QC. 8, 1–11 is very different.3See Appendix VIII 3. For Darius’ mobilization, D. 30 f.; QC. iii 2 f.141