Arrian

τὸ τεῖχος, οὐ χαλεπῶς ἤδη ταύτῃ αἱ νῆες προσεῖχον.
8Οἱ δὲ Τύριοι πάντῃ ἄποροι γιγνόμενοι ἔγνωσαν
ἐπίπλουν ποιήσασθαι ταῖς Κυπρίαις ναυσίν, αἳ κατὰ
τὸν λιμένα ἐφώρμουν τὸν ἐς Σιδῶνα τετραμμένον·
ἐκ πολλοῦ δὴ καταπετάσαντες τὸ στόμα τοῦ
λιμένος ἱστίοις, τοῦ μὴ καταφανῆ γενέσθαι τῶν
τριήρων τὴν πλήρωσιν, ἀμφὶ μέσον ἡμέρας, ὁπότε
οἵ τε ναῦται ἐπὶ τὰ ἀναγκαῖα ἐσκεδασμένοι ἦσαν
καὶ Ἀλέξανδρος ἐν τούτῳ μάλιστα ἀπὸ τοῦ ἐπὶ
θάτερα τῆς πόλεως ναυτικοῦ ἐπὶ τὴν σκηνὴν
9ἀπεχώρει, πληρώσαντες πεντήρεις μὲν τρεῖς καὶ
τετρήρεις ἴσας, τριήρεις δὲ ἑπτὰ ὡς ἀκριβεστάτοις
τε τοῖς πληρώμασι καὶ τοῖς ἀπὸ τῶν καταστρωμάτων
μάχεσθαι μέλλουσιν εὐοπλοτάτοις καὶ ἅμα
εὐθαρσεστάτοις ἐς τοὺς ναυτικοὺς ἀγῶνας, τὰ μὲν
πρῶτα ἀτρέμα τῇ εἰρεσίᾳ ἐπὶ μιᾶς νεὼς ἐξέπλεον
ἄνευ κελευστῶν τὰς κώπας παραφέροντες· ὡς δὲ
ἐπέστρεφον ἤδη ἐπὶ τοὺς Κυπρίους καὶ ἐγγὺς τοῦ
καθορᾶσθαι ἦσαν, τότε δὴ ξὺν βοῇ τε πολλῇ καὶ
ἐγκελευσμῷ ἐς ἀλλήλους καὶ ἅμα τῇ εἰρεσίᾳ
ξυντόνῳ ἐπεφέροντο.
22. Ξυνέβη δὲ ἐκείνῃ τῇ ἡμέρᾳ Ἀλέξανδρον
ἀποχωρῆσαι μὲν ἐπὶ τὴν σκηνήν, οὐ διατρίψαντα δὲ
κατὰ τὸ εἰωθὸς δι᾿ ὀλίγου ἐπὶ τὰς ναῦς ἐπανελθεῖν.
2οἱ δὲ Τύριοι προσπεσόντες ἀπροσδοκήτως ταῖς
ναυσὶν ὁρμούσαις καὶ ταῖς μὲν πάντῃ κεναῖς
ἐπιτυχόντες, τῶν δ᾿ ὑπ᾿ αὐτὴν τὴν βοὴν καὶ τὸν
ἐπίπλουν χαλεπῶς ἐκ τῶν παρόντων πληρουμένων,
τήν τε Πνυταγόρου τοῦ βασιλέως πεντήρη εὐθὺς
ὑπὸ τῇ πρώτῃ ἐμβολῇ κατέδυσαν καὶ τὴν Ἀνδροκλέους
τοῦ Ἀμαθουσίου καὶ τὴν Πασικράτους τοῦ
200Anabasis of Alexander II

had cleared the approach to the wall of obstructions, 332 b.c. the ships at last lay alongside quite easily.
The Tyrians, now becoming hard pressed in every8 way, determined to attack the Cyprian vessels blockading the harbour facing Sidon.3 For a long time they kept sails stretched in front of the harbour mouth, so that the manning of the triremes should not be seen, and about midday, when the sailors had scattered on necessary business and Alexander had just left the fleet on the other side of the city for his tent, they manned three quinqueremes, as many9 quadriremes and seven triremes, with their smartest crews and the best-armed marines to fight from the decks, men who were also boldest in sea-fights, and at first quietly paddled4 out in line ahead, without anyone to call the stroke; but once they began to turn towards the Cyprian ships and were nearly in view, they came on with much shouting and calling of the time among themselves, rowing with unified stroke.
22. It so happened that on that day Alexander, after retiring to his tent, did not rest there as usual, but returned to the ships quite soon. The Tyrian2 attack on the anchored ships was unexpected; they found some quite empty, others were being manned with difficulty in the middle of the noise and attack by any who chanced to be there, and at the first charge the quinqueremes of King Pnytagoras, Androcles of Amathus and Pasicrates of Curium


3QC. 4, 5–9 (different account of sortie); nothing in D.4Professor Warmington suggests that the Greek means that they were not even rowing gently but holding their oars motionless, propelled by wind or current, or at most making occasional strokes for momentum. I feel no certainty on the exact sense.201