Arrian

ἐδόκει προσέχειν τὸν νοῦν καὶ Καλλισθένην θεραπεύειν
ἐπὶ τῷδε. ὑπὲρ τούτου λόγος κατέχει, ὅτι
ἐν θήρᾳ προσφερομένου Ἀλεξάνδρῳ συὸς ἔφθη
βαλὼν τὸν σῦν ὁ Ἑρμόλαος· καὶ ὁ μὲν σῦς πίπτει
βληθείς, Ἀλέξανδρος δὲ τοῦ καιροῦ ὑστερήσας
ἐχαλέπηνε τῷ Ἑρμολάῳ καὶ κελεύει αὐτὸν πρὸς
ὀργὴν πληγὰς λαβεῖν ὁρώντων τῶν ἄλλων παίδων,
καὶ τὸν ἵππον αὐτοῦ ἀφείλετο.
3Τοῦτον τὸν Ἑρμόλαον ἀλγήσαντα τῇ ὕβρει φράσαι
πρὸς Σώστρατον τὸν Ἀμύντου, ἡλικιώτην τε
ἑαυτοῦ καὶ ἐραστὴν ὄντα, ὅτι οὐ βιωτόν οἵ ἐστι μὴ
τιμωρησαμένῳ Ἀλέξανδρον τῆς ὕβρεως, καὶ τὸν
Σώστρατον οὐ χαλεπῶς συμπεῖσαι μετασχεῖν τοῦ
4ἔργου, ἅτε ἐρῶντα. ὑπὸ τούτων δὲ ἀναπεισθῆναι
Ἀντίπατρόν τε τὸν Ἀσκληπιοδώρου τοῦ Συρίας
σατραπεύσαντος καὶ Ἐπιμένην τὸν Ἀρσαίου καὶ
Ἀντικλέα τὸν Θεοκρίτου καὶ Φιλώταν τὸν Κάρσιδος
τοῦ Θρᾳκός. ὡς οὖν περιῆκεν ἐς Ἀντίπατρον
ἡ νυκτερινὴ φυλακή, ταύτῃ τῇ νυκτὶ ξυγκείμενον
εἶναι ἀποκτεῖναι Ἀλέξανδρον, κοιμωμένῳ ἐπιπεσόντας.
5Ξυμβῆναι δὲ οἱ μὲν αὐτομάτως λέγουσιν ἔστε
<ἐφ᾿> ἡμέραν πίνειν Ἀλέξανδρον, Ἀριστόβουλος
δὲ ὧδε ἀνέγραψε. Σύραν γυναῖκα ἐφομαρτεῖν
Ἀλεξάνδρῳ κάτοχον ἐκ τοῦ θείου γιγνομένην καὶ
ταύτην τὸ μὲν πρῶτου γέλωτα εἶναι Ἀλεξάνδρῳ τε
καὶ τοῖς ἀμφ᾿ αὐτόν· ὡς δὲ τὰ πάντα ἐν τῇ κατοχῇ
ἀληθεύουσα ἐφαίνετο, οὐκέτι ἀμελεῖσθαι ὑπ᾿ Ἀλεξάνδρου,
ἀλλ᾿ εἶναι γὰρ τῇ Σύρᾳ πρόσοδον πρὸς τὸν
βασιλέα καὶ νύκτωρ καὶ μεθ᾿ ἡμέραν, καὶ καθεύδοντι
6πολλάκις ἤδη ἐπιστῆναι. καὶ δὴ καὶ τότε
ἀπαλλασσομένου ἐκ τοῦ πότου κατεχομένην ἐκ τοῦ
382Anabasis Of Alexander IV

of philosophy and to be a follower of Callisthenes for 327 b.c. this purpose. The story is prevalent about him that in a hunt a wild boar charged Alexander and that Hermolaus struck it before Alexander could; it fell from his stroke, and Alexander, too late for his chance, was angry with Hermolaus and in his passion ordered him to be whipped in the presence of the other pages, and took his horse from him.
According to the story, this Hermolaus felt the3 outrage bitterly and told Sostratus son of Amyntas, a boy of the same age and his lover, that he found life no longer worth living until he had avenged himself on Alexander for the outrage, and easily persuaded Sostratus as his lover to join in the enterprise; they won over Antipater son of Asclepiodorus, who4 had been satrap of Syria, Epimenes son of Arseus, Anticles son of Theocritus, and Philotas son of Carsis the Thracian, and so when the turn of keeping guard by night fell to Antipater, it was agreed to kill Alexander that night by attacking him in his sleep.
But it so happened according to some writers that5 Alexander went on drinking unprompted till daybreak, whereas Aristobulus tells this story. A Syrian woman possessed by the divine spirit followed Alexander constantly; at first she was a laughing-stock both to Alexander and his court; but when it became clear that everything she uttered when possessed came true, Alexander no longer treated her with contempt but gave her access to his person day and night and she now often watched over him as he slept. So on this occasion, when Alexander ceased6 from his potations, she met him, while possessed by
383