Arrian
7καὶ τῇ μὲν πρώτῃ προσβολῇ οὐδὲν
ὑποτοπήσασι τοῖς Σκύθαις ἐπιπεσόντες τήν τε
λείαν ξύμπασαν ἀφείλοντο αὐτοὺς καὶ τῶν ἀγόντων
τὴν λείαν οὐκ ὀλίγους ἀπέκτειναν. ἐπανιόντες δὲ
αὐτοὶ ἀτάκτως, ἅτε οὐδενὸς ἐξηγουμένου, ἐνεδρευθέντες
πρὸς Σπιταμένους καὶ τῶν Σκυθῶν τῶν μὲν
ἑταίρων ἀποβάλλουσιν ἑπτά, τῶν δὲ μισθοφόρων
ἱππέων ἑξήκοντα. καὶ Ἀριστόνικος ὁ κιθαρῳδὸς
αὐτοῦ ἀποθνήσκει, οὐ κατὰ κιθαρῳδὸν ἀνὴρ ἀγαθὸς
γενόμενος. Πείθων δὲ τρωθεὶς ζῶν λαμβάνεται
πρὸς τῶν Σκυθῶν.
17. Καὶ ταῦτα ὡς Κρατερῷ ἐξηγγέλθη, σπουδῇ
ἐπὶ τοὺς Μασσαγέτας ἤλαυνεν. οἱ δὲ ὡς ἐπύθοντο
πλησίον ἐπελαύνοντά σφισι Κρατερόν, ἔφευγον ἀνὰ
κράτος ὡς εἰς τὴν ἐρήμην. καὶ Κρατερὸς ἐχόμενος
αὐτῶν αὐτοῖς τε ἐκείνοις περιπίπτει οὐ πόρρω τῆς
ἐρήμου καὶ ἄλλοις ἱππεῦσι Μασσαγετῶν ὑπὲρ τοὺς
2χιλίους. καὶ μάχη γίγνεται τῶν τε Μακεδόνων καὶ
τῶν Σκυθῶν καρτερά· καὶ ἐνίκων οἱ Μακεδόνες.
τῶν δὲ Σκυθῶν ἀπέθανον μὲν ἑκατὸν καὶ πεντήκοντα
ἱππεῖς· οἱ δε ἄλλοι οὐ χαλεπῶς ἐς τὴν
ἐρήμην διεσώθησαν, ὅτι ἄπορον ἦν προσωτέρω τοῖς
Μακεδόσι διώκειν.
3Καὶ ἐν τούτῳ Ἀλέξανδρος Ἀρτάβαζον μὲν τῆς
σατραπείας τῆς Βακτρίων ἀπαλλάττει δεηθέντα διὰ
γῆρας, Ἀμύνταν δὲ τὸν Νικολάου σατράπην ἀντ᾿
αὐτοῦ καθίστησι. Κοῖνον δὲ ἀπολείπει αὐτοῦ τὴν
τε αὑτοῦ τάξιν καὶ τὴν Μελεάγρου ἔχοντα καὶ τῶν
ἑταίρων ἱππέων ἐς τετρακοσίους καὶ τοὺς ἱππακοντιστὰς
πάντας καὶ τῶν Βακτρίων τε καὶ


394Anabasis Of Alexander IV

Massagetae. At the first charge, falling on the7 328 b.c. Scythians when they suspected nothing, they robbed them of their entire plunder, and killed many who were driving it off, but when they were returning, in some disorder since there was no one in command, Spitamenes and the Scythians caught them in an ambush, where they lost seven Companions, and sixty mercenary cavalry. Aristonicus the harpist died there, with more courage than a harpist might have. Pithon was wounded and taken alive by the Scythians.
17. When this was reported to Craterus, he marched at all speed against the Massagetae, and when they learned that he was coming up close to them, they fled headlong towards the desert. Craterus pressed upon and overtook them not far from the desert with over a thousand other Massagetaean horsemen. A fierce battle took place between the2 Macedonians and the Scythians, which the Macedonians won. Of the Scythians a hundred and fifty horsemen perished, but the rest easily got away into the desert, since it was impracticable for the Macedonians to pursue further.
Meanwhile Alexander relieved Artabazus of the3 satrapy of Bactria at his own request on account of old age and appointed Amyntas son of Nicolaus in his place.1 He left Coenus there with his own battalion and Meleager’s, about four hundred of the Companion cavalry, all the mounted javelin-men, and

1QC. viii 1, 19 and 2, 14 has first Clitus, then Amyntas, succeed Artabazus, whom he makes out to be 95 (he could not have been over 57, Berve no. 152); place, Maracanda. Al. sends Hephaestion to winter in Bactria, and after further operations, marches to Nautaca, 2, 13–9, leaving winter quarters there after 2 months, 4, 1, cf. A, 18, 1; 19, 4; 21, 10; 22, 3.395