Arrian

ἐργασίμων ἐξήλασαν, τὴν μὲν ἵππον ἐπὶ τὸ δεξιὸν
κέρας αὐτὸς Ἀλέξανδρος παρήγαγεν, τὴν φάλαγγα
3δὲ ἐν πλαισίῳ Νικάνορα ἄγειν ἐκέλευσε. καὶ οἱ
Γέται οὐδὲ τὴν πρώτην ἐμβολὴν τῶν ἱππέων
ἐδέξαντο· παράδοξος μὲν γὰρ αὐτοῖς ἡ τόλμα
ἐφάνη τοῦ Ἀλεξάνδρου, ὅτι εὐμαρῶς οὕτως τὸν
μέγιστον τῶν ποταμῶν διεβεβήκει ἐν μιᾷ νυκτὶ τὸν
Ἴστρον οὐ γεφυρώσας τὸν πόρον, φοβερὰ δὲ καὶ
τῆς φάλαγγος ἡ ξύγκλεισις, βιαία δὲ ἡ τῶν ἱππέων
4ἐμβολή. καὶ τὰ μὲν πρῶτα ἐς τὴν πόλιν καταφεύγουσιν,
ἣ δὴ ἀπεῖχεν αὐτοῖς ὅσον παρασάγγην
τοῦ Ἴστρου· ὡς δὲ ἐπάγοντα εἶδον σπουδῇ
Ἀλέξανδρον τὴν μὲν φάλαγγα παρὰ τὸν ποταμόν,
ὡς μὴ κυκλωθεῖέν πῃ οἱ πεζοὶ ἐνεδρευσάντων τῶν
Γετῶν, τοὺς ἱππέας δὲ κατὰ μέτωπον, λείπουσιν αὖ
καὶ τὴν πόλιν οἱ Γέται κακῶς τετειχισμένην, ἀναλαβόντες
τῶν παιδαρίων καὶ τῶν γυναικῶν ἐπὶ τοὺς
5ἵππους ὅσα φέρειν οἱ ἵπποι ἠδύναντο· ἦν δὲ αὐτοῖς
ἡ ὁρμὴ ὡς πορρωτάτω ἀπὸ τοῦ ποταμοῦ ἐς τὰ
ἔρημα. Ἀλέξανδρος δὲ τήν τε πόλιν λαμβάνει καὶ
τὴν λείαν πᾶσαν ὅσην οἱ Γέται ὑπελίποντο. καὶ
τὴν μὲν λείαν Μελεάγρῳ καὶ Φιλίππῳ ἐπαναγαγεῖν
δίδωσιν, αὐτὸς δὲ κατασκάψας τὴν πόλιν θύει τε
ἐπὶ τῇ ὄχθῃ τοῦ Ἴστρου Διὶ Σωτῆρι καὶ Ἡρακλεῖ
καὶ αὐτῷ τῷ Ἴστρῳ, ὅτι οὐκ ἄπορος αὐτῷ ἐγένετο,
καὶ ἐπανάγει αὐτῆς ἡμέρας σώους σύμπαντας ἐπὶ
τὸ στρατόπεδον.
6Ἐνταῦθα ἀφίκοντο πρέσβεις ὡς Ἀλέξανδρον
παρά τε τῶν ἄλλων ὅσα αὐτόνομα ἔθνη προσοικεῖ
τῷ Ἴστρῳ καὶ παρὰ Σύρμου τοῦ Τριβαλλῶν
βασιλέως· καὶ παρὰ Κελτῶν δὲ τῶν ἐπὶ τῷ Ἰονίῳ
κόλπῳ ᾠκισμένων ἧκον· μεγάλοι οἱ Κελτοὶ τὰ
16Anabasis of Alexander I

from the tilled land, Alexander in person took off the 335 b.c. the cavalry to the right wing, ordering Nicanor to lead the phalanx in rectangular formation. The3 Getae did not even withstand the first charge of the cavalry; for Alexander’s bold stroke came as a great shock to them, in crossing the Ister, the greatest of rivers, so easily in one night without bridging the stream; the solidity of the phalanx was terrifying, and the onslaught of the cavalry violent. They first took refuge in the city, about a parasang14 away from the Ister; then, seeing that Alexander was rapidly bringing up his phalanx along the river, so that the infantry might not be encircled by an ambush of the Getae, with the cavalry on the front, the Getae in their turn deserted their city, which was feebly fortified, taking up on horseback as many of the women and children as the horses could carry; and then marched as far as possible away from the5 river towards the desert. Alexander captured the city and all the plunder the Getae left behind. This plunder he ordered Meleager and Philip to take to the base; he himself razed the city and sacrificed on the bank of the Ister to Zeus the Preserver and Heracles and Ister himself, for permitting the passage. Then the same day he took all his force safe and sound back to the camp.
At this juncture ambassadors came to Alexander6 from Syrmus, King of the Triballi and from the other self-governing tribes near the Ister; others from the Celts settled on the Ionian gulf [Adriatic].

1The use of this Persian term (part of a day’s march, c. 5–6 km) is strange.17