Arrian

Δαρείῳ, ὁπότε πρὸς Βήσσου τε καὶ τῶν ἀμφὶ
Βῆσσον ξυλληφθεὶς ἤγετο οὐδὲν ἄλλο ὅτι μὴ ὄνομα
ὢν βασιλέως. οὔκουν ἔτι οἵους τε εἶναι κατέχειν
αὐτὸν τοὺς ἑταίρους, ἀλλ᾿ ἀναπηδήσαντα γὰρ οἱ μὲν
λόγχην ἁρπάσαι λέγουσι τῶν σωματοφυλάκων
9τινὸς καὶ ταύτῃ παίσαντα Κλεῖτον ἀποκτεῖναι, οἱ δὲ
σάρισσαν παρὰ τῶν φυλάκων τινὸς [καὶ ταύτῃ].1
Ἀριστόβουλος δὲ ὅθεν μὲν ἡ παροινία ὡρμήθη οὐ
λέγει, Κλείτου δὲ γενέσθαι μόνου τὴν ἁμαρτίαν, ὅν
γε ὠργισμένου Ἀλεξάνδρου καὶ ἀναπηδήσαντος ἐπ᾿
αὐτὸν ὡς διαχρησομένου ἀπαχθῆναι μὲν διὰ
θυρῶν ἔξω ὑπὲρ τὸ τεῖχός τε καὶ τὴν τάφρον τῆς
ἄκρας, ἵνα ἐγίνετο, πρὸς Πτολεμαίου τοῦ Λάγου
τοῦ σωματοφύλακος· οὐ καρτερήσαντα δὲ ἀναστρέψαι
αὖθις καὶ περιπετῆ Ἀλεξάνδρῳ γενέσθαι
Κλεῖτον ἀνακαλοῦντι, καὶ φάναι ὅτι· οὗτός τοι ἐγὼ
ὁ Κλεῖτος, ὦ Ἀλέξανδρε· καὶ ἐν τούτῳ πληγέντα
τῇ σαρίσσῃ ἀποθανεῖν.
9. Καὶ ἐγὼ Κλεῖτον μὲν τῆς ὕβρεως τῆς ἐς τὸν
βασιλέα τὸν αὑτοῦ μεγαλωστὶ μέμφομαι· Ἀλέξανδρον
δὲ τῆς συμφορᾶς οἰκτείρω, ὅτι δυοῖν κακοῖν
ἐν τῷ τότε ἡττημένον ἐπέδειξεν αὑτόν, ὑφ᾿ ὅτων
δὴ καὶ τοῦ ἑτέρου οὐκ ἐπέοικεν ἄνδρα σωφρονοῦντα
2ἐξηττᾶσθαι, ὀργῆς τε καὶ παροινίας. ἀλλὰ τὰ ἐπὶ
τοῖσδε αὖ ἐπαινῶ Ἀλεξάνδρου, ὅτι παραυτίκα ἔγνω
σχέτλιον ἔργον ἐργασάμενος. καὶ λέγουσιν εἰσὶν οἳ
[τὰ Ἀλεξάνδρου] ὅτι ἐρείσας τὴν σάρισσαν πρὸς
τὸν τοῖχον ἐπιπίπτειν ἐγνώκει αὐτῇ, ὡς οὐ καλὸν
3αὐτῷ ζῆν ἀποκτείναντι φίλον αὑτοῦ ἐν οἴνῳ. οἱ
πολλοὶ δὲ ξυγγραφεῖς τοῦτο μὲν οὐ λέγουσιν,

1Deleted by Castiglioni.366Anabasis Of Alexander IV

he cried that he had come to the same pass as Darius,328 b.c.
when he was led prisoner by Bessus and his confederates, and that he had nothing now left but the name of king. No longer could the Companions hold him back; he leapt up and, as some say, snatched a spear from one of the bodyguards and struck Clitus a mortal blow with it; according to others, it was a long pike9 from one of the guards he used. But Aristobulus, while not telling the origin of this drinking bout, holds that the entire fault lay with Clitus, since when Alexander leapt up in passion to kill him, Clitus was hurried away outside through the doors over the wall and ditch of the citadel (where all this happened) by Ptolemy son of Lagus, one of the bodyguards, but could not control himself, and turned back; he met with Alexander just as Alexander was calling out ‘Clitus!’ and cried, ‘Here I am, Clitus, Alexander!’ and there and then was struck with the pike and died.
9. I myself strongly blame Clitus for his insolence towards his king, and pity Alexander for his misfortune, since he then showed himself the slave of two vices, by neither of which is it fitting for a man of sense to be overcome, namely, anger and drunkenness. But for the sequel I commend Alexander, in that he2 immediately recognized the savagery of his action. Some say that Alexander leaned the pike against the wall, intending to fall upon it himself, as it was not honourable for him to live after killing a friend in his cups. But most historians have a different story:3
367