Arrian

Βάκτρα τε καὶ Βῆσσον, Δράγγας τε καὶ Γαδρωσοὺς
ἐν τῇ παρόδῳ παραστησάμενος. παρεστήσατο
δὲ καὶ τοὺς Ἀραχώτας καὶ σατράπην κατέστησεν
ἐπ᾿ αὐτοῖς Μένωνα. ἐπῆλθε δὲ καὶ τῶν Ἰνδῶν
τοὺς προσχώρους Ἀραχώταις. ξύμπαντα δὲ ταῦτα
τὰ ἔθνη διὰ χιόνος τε πολλῆς καὶ ξὺν ἀπορίᾳ τῶν
ἐπιτηδείων καὶ τῶν στρατιωτῶν ταλαιπωρίᾳ
2ἐπῆλθε. μαθὼν δὲ τοὺς Ἀρείους αὖθις ἀφεστάναι,
Σατιβαρζάνου ἐς τὴν χώραν αὐτῶν ἐμβαλόντος σὺν
ἱππεῦσι δισχιλίοις, οὓς παρὰ Βήσσου ἔλαβεν,
ἀποστέλλει παρ᾿ αὐτοὺς Ἀρτάβαζόν τε τὸν
Πέρσην καὶ Ἐριγύϊον καὶ Κάρανον τῶν ἑταίρων.
προσέταξε δὲ καὶ Φραταφέρνην τὸν τῶν Παρθυαίων
σατράπην ξυνεμβαλεῖν αὐτοῖς ἐς τοὺς Ἀρείους.
3καὶ γίγνεται μάχη τοῖς ἀμφὶ Ἐριγύϊον καὶ
Κάρανον πρὸς Σατιβαρζάνην καρτερά, οὐδὲ πρόσθεν
οἱ βάρβαροι ἐνέκλιναν πρὶν Σατιβαρζάνην
ξυμπεσόντα Ἐριγυΐῳ πρὸς Ἐριγυΐου πληγέντα
δόρατι ἐς τὸ πρόσωπον ἀποθανεῖν. τότε δὲ
ἐγκλίναντες οἱ βάρβαροι προτροπάδην ἔφευγον.
4Ἐν τούτῳ δὲ Ἀλέξανδρος πρὸς τὸν Καύκασον τὸ
ὄρος ἦγεν, ἵνα καὶ πόλιν ἔκτισε καὶ ὠνόμασεν
Ἀλεξάνδρειαν· καὶ θύσας ἐνταῦθα τοῖς θεοῖς ὅσοις
νόμος αὐτῷ ὑπερέβαλε τὸ ὄρος τὸν Καύκασον,
σατράπην μὲν τῇ χώρᾳ ἐπιτάξας Προέξην, ἄνδρα
Πέρσην, τῶν δὲ ἑταίρων Νειλόξενον τὸν Σατύρου
ἐπίσκοπον ξὺν στρατιᾷ ἀπολιπών.
320Anabasis of Alexander III

proceeded towards Bactra and against Bessus 330 b.c. and on the way won over the Drangians and Gadrosians,1 and the Arachotians as well, appointing Menon as satrap to govern them.2 He also came upon the Indians nearest the Arachotians. He came on all these tribes through deep snow, with provisions wanting and his men in distress. On learning that2 the Areians had again revolted, since Satibarzanes had invaded their country with two thousand horse, whom he had received from Bessus, he sent Artabazus the Persian and two Companions, Erigyius and Caranus to their country and also ordered Phrataphernes, the satrap of Parthyaea, to help them in their attack on the Areians.3 A fierce battle took place between3 the troops of Erigyius and Caranus and Satibarzanes; indeed, the Persians did not give way till in single combat with Erigyius Satibarzanes was struck in the face with a spear and killed. Then the barbarians turned and fled headlong.4
Meanwhile Alexander led his army to Mount4 330-29 b.c. Caucasus,5 where he founded a city he called Alexandria.6 There he sacrificed to the gods to whom he customarily sacrificed, and then crossed Mount 329 b.c. Caucasus, appointing as satrap of the district Proexes, a Persian, with Niloxenes son of Satyrus, one of the Companions, as overseer in command of troops.7
1App. VIII 9.2QC. vi 3, 5 gives him 4,000 foot and 600 horse. For
arrival of reinforcements ib. 2 and 4.3D. 81, 3; QC. vii 3, 2 (in Ariaspia).4D. 83; QC. 4, 33 ff. (embellished), who makes Erigyius rejoin Al. at Bactra, in 329 b.c.5Hindu-Kush, cf. App. XII. March: App. VIII 10 f.6Cf. iv 22 4; Strabo xv 2, 10; D. 83, 2, (mentioning other (or another) settlements nearby, e.g. perhaps Nicaea (iv 22, 6)); QC. vii 3, 23. The settlers in Alexandria (QC.) or all the cities (D.) were 7,000 natives; D. adds 3,000 camp-followers and some volunteers among mercenaries, QC. unfit soldiers. Cf. App. VIII 14–16 for march.7QC. ignores these appointments. Cf. iv 22, 5.321