Arrian
5Τὸ δὲ ὄρος ὁ Καύκασος ὑψηλὸν μέν ἐστιν ὥσπερ
τι ἄλλο τῆς Ἀσίας, ὡς λέγει Ἀριστόβουλος, ψιλὸν
δὲ τὸ πολὺ αὐτοῦ τό γε ταύτῃ. μακρὸν γὰρ ὄρος
παρατέταται ὁ Καύκασος, ὥστε καὶ τὸν Ταῦρον τὸ
ὄρος, ὃς δὴ τὴν Κιλικίαν τε καὶ Παμφυλίαν ἀπείργει,
ἀπὸ τοῦ Καυκάσου εἶναι λέγουσι καὶ ἄλλα
ὄρη μεγάλα, ἀπὸ τοῦ Καυκάσου διακεκριμένα ἄλλῃ
6καὶ ἄλλῃ ἐπωνυμίᾳ κατὰ ἤθη τὰ ἑκάστων. ἀλλὰ
ἔν γε τούτῳ τῷ Καυκάσῳ οὐδὲν ἄλλο ὅτι μὴ
τέρμινθοι πεφύκασι καὶ σίλφιον, ὡς λέγει Ἀριστόβουλος·
ἀλλὰ καὶ ὣς ἐπῳκεῖτο πολλοῖς ἀνθρώποις
καὶ πρόβατα πολλὰ καὶ κτήνη ἐνέμοντο, ὅτι καὶ
χαίρουσι τῷ σιλφίῳ τὰ πρόβατα, καὶ εἰ ἐκ πολλοῦ
πρόβατον σιλφίου αἴσθοιτο, καὶ θεῖ ἐπ᾿ αὐτὸ καὶ τό
τε ἄνθος ἐπινέμεται καὶ τὴν ῥίζαν ἀνορύττον καὶ
7ταύτην κατεσθίει. ἐπὶ τῷδε ἐν Κυρήνῃ ὡς μακροτάτω
ἀπελαύνουσι τὰς ποίμνας τῶν χωρίων, ἵνα
αὐτοῖς τὸ σίλφιον φύεται. οἱ δὲ καὶ περιφράσσουσι
τὸν χῶρον, τοῦ μηδὲ εἰ πελάσειεν αὐτῷ πρόβατα,
δυνατὰ γενέσθαι εἴσω παρελθεῖν, ὅτι πολλοῦ ἄξιον
Κυρηναίοις τὸ σίλφιον.
8Βῆσσος δὲ ἔχων ἀμφ᾿ αὑτ̇ὸν Περσῶν τε τοὺς
μετασχόντας αὐτῷ τῆς Δαρείου συλλήψεως καὶ
αὐτῶν Βακτρίων ἐς ἑπτακισχιλίους καὶ Δάας τοὺς
ἐπὶ τάδε τοῦ Τανάϊδος ποταμοῦ ἐποικοῦντας
ἔφθειρε τὴν ὑπὸ τῷ ὄρει τῷ Καυκάσῳ, ὡς ἐρημίᾳ
τε τῆς χώρας τῆς ἐν μέσῳ αὑτοῦ τε καὶ Ἀλεξάνδρου
καὶ ἀπορίᾳ τῶν ἐπιτηδείων ἀπείρξων Ἀλέξανδρον
9τοῦ μὴ ἐλαύνειν πρόσω. ἀλλὰ Ἀλέξανδρος
ἤλαυνεν οὐδὲν μεῖον, χαλεπῶς μὲν διά τε χιόνος
πολλῆς καὶ ἐνδείᾳ τῶν ἀναγκαίων, ᾔει δὲ ὅμως.
Βῆσσος δέ, ἐπεὶ ἐξηγγέλλετο αὐτῷ οὐ πόρρω ἤδη
322Anabasis of Alexander III
Mount Caucasus, according to Aristobulus, is as5 329 b.c. high as any mountain in Asia; most of it is bare, at least on this side. In fact it is a long mountain range, so that they say that even Mount Taurus, which forms the boundary of Cilicia and Pamphylia, is really a part of Mount Caucasus as well as other great mountains which have been distinguished from Mount Caucasus by various names traditional among the different peoples.8 In this particular Mount Caucasus, however,6 nothing grows save terebinths and silphium according to Aristobulus. But even so it was inhabited by a large number of people and many flocks and herds grazed there, since the flocks like the silphium, and if they notice it ever so far away they run to it, nibble its flower, and dig up and eat the7 root. For this reason in Cyrene they drive their flocks as far as possible from the places where their silphium grows; some even hurdle off the area, so that even if the flocks approach they cannot get in, since silphium is very valuable to the Cyrenaeans.
Bessus, attended by the Persians who had joined in8 the arrest of Darius, by some seven thousand of the Bactrians themselves, and by the Dahae who live on this side of the river Tanais [Syr-darya], was ravaging the land lying under Mount Caucasus, hoping that this desolation of the country lying between himself and Alexander and want of provisions would stop Alexander from proceeding farther. But Alexander advanced9 none the less, with difficulty indeed, through thick snow and with necessaries lacking, but still he came on. As soon as Bessus was told that Alexander

8A. inserts his own comment, from Eratosthenes (App. XII 3), between two citations from Ar.323