Appendices
2. P. 16 is in close accord with A. on the battle. D. 19–21 is in fundamental disagreement. He omits the debate between Al. and Parmenio and makes Al. adopt the plan A. ascribes to Parmenio; he encamps for the night and crosses at dawn, unopposed. If this is correct, 14, 5–15, 5 is all sheer fiction. Of the cavalry engagement D. has somewhat different details (cf. Welles’ notes), though like A. he too concentrates on Al’s heroic deeds; his source was no less laudatory of Al. In his account the Persian foot are not surrounded or, except for some 2,000 prisoners, massacred; most of them fled, though 10,000 were killed (as were 2,000 of the cavalry—A. 16, 2 gives over 1,000), and the prisoners, horse and foot, numbered 20,000. P. too differs from A. in saying that 2,500 Persian cavalry and 20,000 footmen fell; in the very next sentence (16, 8) he cites Ar., and this may suggest that Ar. is the source of all his figures; in that case it is natural to think that A. followed Pt. at least on this point, cf. i 16, 4 n.
3. D’s descriptions of Al’s other battles are patently unreliable; his account of the Granicus is too vague to be rejected, if it stood by itself, but on general grounds it is natural to prefer A’s, since A. appears to be following one or both of his main sources with no reference to the ‘vulgate’. Many modern scholars, none the less, adopt D’s story (or arbitrarily combine it with A’s, e.g. by accepting A’s account of the destruction of the mercenaries) on the ground that it is unthinkable that Al. could have crossed the stream in the face of enemy opposition and that he must have deferred the attack and surprised the Persians at dawn (cf. Lane Fox ch. 8). General
450Appendices

Fuller, a practised soldier, accepted A. without demur (147 ff.).
4. H. Strasburger (Gnomon 1937, 483 ff.) held that A’s story was so absurd that it could not come from Pt., although he was among those who have held that A. normally followed Pt. alone, especially on the incidents of war. Yet we should then have no right to assume that Pt. was A’s source for any statement, unless he is actually cited or there is some other positive argument for attribution. Surely, had A. adopted an account of Al’s first battle totally at variance with that given by Pt., even if it came from Ar., he would have noted such a major discrepancy (cf. v 14, 3 ff.). We should also be obliged to form the lowest estimate of A’s own judgement, in preferring a story that was less well authenticated and (so it is claimed) utterly incredible. I have no doubt that in fact A’s version derived not only from Ar. (as the citation of Ar. in P’s similar account suggests) but also from Pt.
5. The earliest account of the battle was no doubt that given by Callisthenes, whom A’s sources seem to follow on Issus (App. III). Writing for eyewitnesses, Callisthenes cannot have falsified his account to the extent of making Al. cross the stream at once in the face of opposition, if he really crossed at dawn, unopposed. If Pt. and Ar. departed from the truest and earliest narrative, it must be that they themselves had forgotten what actually occurred or that they told a deliberate lie, which many others still alive would have recognized for what it was. In either case their authority would be vitiated, not only for this event but for every other that they recounted. The truth of A’s account of the battle of
451