Arrian
6ξὺν τῇ στρατιᾷ πάσῃ. καὶ τότε δὲ οἱ πράξαντες
τὴν ἀπόστασιν στράτευμα ἐκ Μακεδονίας Ἀντιπάτρου
ἀφῖχθαι ἔφασκον, αὐτὸν δὲ Ἀλέξανδρον
τεθνάναι ἰσχυρίζοντο, καὶ τοῖς ἀπαγγέλλουσιν ὅτι
οὗτος αὐτὸς προσάγει Ἀλέξανδρος χαλεπῶς εἶχον·
ἄλλον γάρ τινα ἥκειν Ἀλέξανδρον τὸν Ἀερόπου.
7Ὁ δὲ Ἀλέξανδρος ἐξ Ὀγχηστοῦ ἄρας τῇ
ὑστεραίᾳ προσῆγε πρὸς τὴν πόλιν τῶν Θηβαίων
κατὰ τὸ τοῦ Ἰολάου τέμενος· οὗ δὴ καὶ ἐστρατοπέδευσεν,
ἐνδιδοὺς ἔτι τοῖς Θηβαίοις τριβήν, εἰ
μεταγνόντες ἐτὶ τοῖς κακῶς ἐγνωσμένοις πρεσβεύσαιντο
8παρ᾿ αὐτόν. οἱ δὲ τοσούτου ἐδέησαν
ἐνδόσιμόν τι παρασχεῖν ἐς ξύμβασιν, ὥστε ἐκθέοντες
ἐκ τῆς πόλεως οἵ τε ἱππεῖς καὶ τῶν ψιλῶν οὐκ
ὀλίγοι ἔστε ἐπὶ τὸ στρατόπεδον ἠκροβολίζοντο ἐς
τὰς προφυλακάς, καί τινας καὶ ἀπέκτειναν οὐ πολλοὺς
9τῶν Μακεδόνων. καὶ Ἀλέξανδρος ἐκπέμπει
τῶν ψιλῶν καὶ τοξοτῶν, ὥστε αὐτῶν ἀναστεῖλαι
τὴν ἐκδρομήν· καὶ οὗτοι οὐ χαλεπῶς ἀνέστειλαν
ἤδη τῷ στρατοπέδῳ αὐτῷ προσφερομένους. τῇ δὲ
ὑστεραίᾳ ἀναλαβὼν τὴν στρατιὰν πᾶσαν καὶ
περιελθὼν κατὰ τὰς πύλας τὰς φερούσας ἐπ᾿
Ἐλευθεράς τε καὶ τὴν Ἀττικήν, οὐδὲ τότε
προσέμιξε τοῖς τείχεσιν αὐτοῖς, ἀλλ᾿ ἐστρατοπέδευσεν
οὐ πολὺ ἀπέχων τῆς Καδμείας, ὥστε ἐγγὺς
εἶναι ὠφέλειαν τῶν Μακεδόνων τοῖς τὴν Καδμείαν
10ἔχουσιν. οἱ γὰρ Θηβαῖοι τὴν Καδμείαν διπλῷ
χάρακι ἐφρούρουν ἀποτειχίσαντες, ὡς μήτε ἔξωθέν
τινα τοῖς ἐγκατειλημμένοις δύνασθαι ἐπωφελεῖν,
μήτε αὐτοὺς ἐκθέοντας βλάπτειν τι σφᾶς, ὁπότε



32Anabasis of Alexander I

all his force, at Onchestus.4 At that time the authors6 335 b.c. of the revolt were saying that a force of Antipater had come from Macedon, but confidently affirmed that Alexander himself was dead, getting annoyed at anyone who reported Alexander’s own proximity at the head of his men: it was, said they, a different Alexander, the son of Aeropus.5
Alexander left Onchestus and next day reached7 Thebes, near the enclosure of Iolaus, where he encamped, giving the Thebans a period of grace, in case they should repent of their bad decisions and send an embassy to him. They were so far from8 making any concession that might lead to an agreement that their cavalry and many of their light troops sallied out against the camp, discharged volleys at the outposts, and actually killed a few Macedonians. Alexander sent out some of his9 light troops and archers to hold up their sally; they easily checked the Thebans, who by now were approaching the camp. Next day Alexander moved his whole force and came round to the gates leading to Eleutherae and Attica, yet even then he did not actually assault the walls, but pitched camp not far from the Cadmea, so that support would be close at hand for its Macedonian garrison. The10 Thebans were investing the Cadmea with a double stockade, so that no one from without could help those shut up inside, nor could they sally out and


4In 339 with Thermopylae held by Thebes Philip had come south through Heraclea, the Asopus pass and Cytinium (Beloch iii 563). Crossing Thessaly by an unusual easterly route, Al. may well have done the same for the purpose of a surprise; in that case the ‘Gates’ do not refer to Thermopylae but to the pass south of Heraclea.5As in 334–323 b.c., Antipater had evidently been left in charge of Macedon. Alexander the Lyncestian: Introd. 46.33