Arrian

σφίσι Βακτρίων τε καὶ Σογδιανῶν
διήρπασαν, αὐτοὶ δὲ ξὺν Σπιταμένει ἐς τὴν ἔρημον
ἔφευγον. ὡς δὲ ἐξηγγέλλετο αὐτοῖς Ἀλέξανδρος
ἐν ὁρμῇ ὢν ἐπὶ τὴν ἔρημον ἐλαύνειν ἀποτεμόντες
τοῦ Σπιταμένους τὴν κεφαλὴν παρὰ Ἀλέξανδρον
πέμπουσιν, ὡς ἀποτρέψοντες ἀπὸ σφῶν αὐτῶν
τούτῳ τῷ ἔργῳ.
18. Καὶ ἐν τούτῳ Κοῖνός τε ἐς Ναύτακα παρ᾿
Ἀλέξανδρον ἐπανέρχεται καὶ οἱ ἀμφὶ Κρατερόν τε
καὶ Φραταφέρνην τὸν τῶν Παρθυαίων σατράπην
καὶ Στασάνωρ ὁ Ἀρείων, πεπραγμένων σφίσι
2πάντων ὅσα ἐξ Ἀλεξάνδρου ἐτέτακτο. Ἀλέξανδρος
δὲ περὶ Ναύτακα ἀναπαύων τὴν στρατιὰν
ὅ τι περ ἀκμαῖον τοῦ χειμῶνος, Φραταφέρνην μὲν
ἀποστέλλει ἐς Μάρδους καὶ Ταπ<ο>ύρους <Αὐτο>φραδάτην
ἐπανάξοντα τὸν σατράπην, ὅτι πολλάκις
ἤδη μετάπεμπτος ἐξ Ἀλεξάνδρου γιγνόμενος οὐχ
3ὑπήκουε καλοῦντι. Στασάνορα δὲ ἐς Δράγγας
σατράπην ἐκπέμπει, ἐς Μήδους δὲ Ἀτροπάτην ἐπὶ
σατραπείᾳ καὶ τοῦτον τῇ Μήδων, ὅτι Ὀξυδάτης
ἐθελοκακεῖν αὐτῷ ἐφαίνετο. Σταμένην δὲ ἐπὶ
Βαβυλῶνος στέλλει, ὅτι Μαζαῖος ὁ Βαβυλώνιος
ὕπαρχος τετελευτηκέναι αὐτῷ ἐξηγγέλλετο. Σώπολιν
δὲ καὶ Ἐπόκιλλον καὶ Μεν[ν]ίδαν ἐς Μακεδονίαν
ἐκπέμπει, τὴν στρατιὰν τὴν ἐκ Μακεδονίας
αὐτῷ ἀνάξοντας.
4Ἅμα δὲ τῷ ἦρι ὑποφαίνοντι προὐχώρει ὡς ἐπὶ
τὴν ἐν τῇ Σογδιανῇ πέτραν, ἐς ἣν πολλοὺς μὲν τῶν


398Anabasis Of Alexander IV

trains of the Bactrians and Sogdianians who had been Winter 328–7 b.c. with them in line of battle, and fled themselves with Spitamenes to the desert. When they learnt that Alexander was already on the move and marching towards the desert, they cut off Spitamenes’ head and sent it to Alexander, to keep him away from themselves by this action.3
18. Meantime Coenus had returned to Alexander at Nautaca as had Craterus, Phrataphernes the satrap of Parthyaea, and Stasanor satrap of Areia, after carrying out all Alexander’s orders. Alexander,2 while resting his force at Nautaca, since it was the depth of winter, despatched Phrataphernes to the Mardians and Tapurians, to bring back the satrap Autophradates, as he had often before been sent for by Alexander but ignored the summons. He sent3 Stasanor to the Drangians as satrap, and Atropates to the Medes as satrap of Media, since he thought Oxydates was wilfully neglecting his duty to him. He despatched Stamenes to Babylon, since Mazaeus the hyparch of Babylon was reported to him to be dead.1 Sopolis and Epocillus and Menidas were sent to Macedonia, to bring up for him the force from Macedonia.2
With the first appearance of spring Alexander4 327 b.c. marched forward towards the Rock of Sogdiana3
3QC. viii 3, 1 ff. has Spitamenes killed by his wife, with no
record of these operations; the ‘Dahae’ then submit.1Cf. QC. viii 3, 17 (Arsaces for Atropates; nothing on Sopolis, Hermolaus’ father (!) etc). ‘Hyparch’: 12, 8 n. A. seems to be partly duplicating 7, 1; probably Pt. and Ar. put the return of Phrataphernes and Stasanor (cf. iii 29, 5) at different times; 18, 1 is likely to be correct.2Introd. n. 90.399