Arrian

καὶ παραλαμβάνει1 Δασκύλιον Παρμενίων
ἐκλιπόντων τῶν φρουρῶν.
3Αὐτὸς δὲ ἐπὶ Σάρδεων προὐχώρει· καὶ ἀπέχοντος
αὐτοῦ ὅσον ἑβδομήκοντα σταδίους Σάρδεων ἧκον
παρ᾿ αὐτὸν Μιθρήνης τε ὁ φρούραρχος τῆς ἀκροπόλεως
τῆς ἐν Σάρδεσι καὶ Σαρδιανῶν οἱ δυνατώτατοι,
ἐνδιδόντες οἱ μὲν τὴν πόλιν, ὁ δὲ Μιθρήνης
4τὴν ἄκραν καὶ τὰ χρήματα. Ἀλέξανδρος δὲ αὐτὸς
μὲν κατεστρατοπέδευσεν ἐπὶ τῷ Ἕρμῳ ποταμῷ·
ἀπέχει δὲ ὁ Ἕρμος ἀπὸ Σάρδεων σταδίους ὅσον
εἴκοσιν· Ἀμύνταν δὲ τὸν Ἀνδρομένους τὴν ἄκραν
παραληψόμενον ἐκπέμπει ἐς Σάρδεις· καὶ Μιθρήνην
μὲν ἐν τιμῇ ἅμα οἷ ἦγεν, Σαρδιανοὺς δὲ καὶ τοὺς
ἄλλους Λυδοὺς τοῖς νόμοις τε τοῖς πάλαι Λυδῶν
χρῆσθαι ἔδωκεν καὶ ἐλευθέρους εἶναι ἀφῆκεν.
5ἀνῆλθε δὲ καὶ αὐτὸς εἰς τὴν ἄκραν, ἵνα τὸ φρούριον
ἦν τῶν Περσῶν· καὶ ἔδοξεν αὐτῷ ὀχυρὸν τὸ
χωρίον· ὑπερύψηλόν τε γὰρ ἦν καὶ ἀπότομον πάντῃ
καὶ τριπλᾷ τείχει πεφραγμένον· αὐτὸς δὲ ἐπὶ τῇ
ἄκρᾳ ναόν τε οἰκοδομῆσαι Διὸς Ὀλυμπίου ἐπενόει
6καὶ βωμὸν ἱδρύσασθαι. σκοποῦντι δὲ αὐτῷ τῆς
ἄκρας ὅπερ ἐπιτηδειότατον χωρίον ὥρᾳ ἔτους
ἐξαίφνης χειμὼν ἐπιγίνεται καὶ βρονταὶ σκληραὶ
καὶ ὕδωρ ἐξ οὐρανοῦ πίπτει, οὗ τὰ τῶν Λυδῶν
βασίλεια· Ἀλεξάνδρῳ δὲ ἔδοξεν ἐκ θεοῦ σημανθῆναι,
ἵνα χρὴ οἰκοδομεῖσθαι τῷ Διὶ τὸν νεών, καὶ
7οὕτως ἐκέλευσε. κατέλιπε δὲ τῆς μὲν ἄκρας τῆς
Σάρδεων ἐπιμελητὴν Παυσανίαν τῶν ἑταίρων, τῶν
δὲ φόρων τῆς συντάξεώς τε καὶ ἀποφορᾶς Νικίαν,
Ἄσανδρον δὲ τὸν Φιλώτα Λυδίας καὶ τῆς ἄλλης τῆς

1παραλαμβάνει. Roos prints παραληψόμενον, which seems
to be meaningless dittography.70Anabasis of Alexander I

Dascylion, and this he duly did, the guards having 334 b.c. evacuated the place.
He himself marched towards Sardis; and when3 he was still about seventy stades away he was met by Mithrenes, commander of the citadel garrison, and the chief citizens of Sardis; they gave up the city, and Mithrenes the citadel and treasury.3 Alexander4 himself camped on the Hermus river, which runs about twenty stades from Sardis, but sent Amyntas, son of Andromenes, to Sardis to take over the citadel; Mithrenes remained with him, with the honours of his rank, while the Sardians and the other Lydians were granted the use of the old Lydian customs, and allowed to be free.4 Alexander himself ascended to5 the citadel, where the Persian garrison was stationed. He noted the strength of the position, which was very high, sheer on every side, and fortified all round with a triple wall. He was thinking of building a temple on the citadel to Olympian Zeus, and of setting up an altar near it, but as he was surveying the citadel6 for the best place, suddenly (it was summer-time) a storm broke with heavy crashes of thunder and violent rain, just where the palace of the Lydian kings was; Alexander supposed that here was a divine intimation where he must build the temple of Zeus, and gave orders accordingly. He left as7 commandant of the citadel Pausanias, one of the Companions, put Nicias in charge of the assessment and receipt of tribute, and appointed Asander, son


3D. 21, 7; P. 17, 1.4i.e. allowed local self-government; the Persians are unlikely to have denied such rights.71