Arrian

ἡμίσεες, καὶ οἱ Βαλάκρου ἀκοντισταί· οὗτοι κατὰ
4<τὰ> ἅρματα τὰ δρεπανηφόρα ἐτετάχατο. Μενίδᾳ
δὲ καὶ τοῖς ἀμφ᾿ αὐτὸν παρήγγελτο, εἰ περιϊππεύοιεν
οἱ πολέμιοι τὸ κέρας σφῶν, ἐς πλαγίους
ἐμβάλλειν αὐτοὺς ἐπικάμψαντας. τὰ μὲν ἐπὶ τοῦ
δεξιοῦ κέρως οὕτως ἐτέτακτο Ἀλεξάνδρῳ· κατὰ
δὲ τὸ εὐώνυμον ἐς ἐπικαμπὴν οἵ τε Θρᾷκες
ἐτετάχατο, ὧν ἡγεῖτο Σιτάλκης, καὶ ἐπὶ τούτοις οἱ
ξύμμαχοι ἱππεῖς, ὧν ἦρχε Κοίρανος,1 ἐπὶ δὲ οἱ
Ὀδρύσαι ἱππεῖς, ὧν ἡγεῖτο Ἀγάθων ὁ Τυρίμμα.
5ξυμπάντων δὲ ταύτῃ προετάχθη ἡ ξενικὴ ἵππος ἡ
τῶν μισθοφόρων, ὧν Ἀνδρόμαχος ὁ Ἱέρωνος
ἦρχεν. ἐπὶ δὲ τοῖς σκευοφόροις οἱ ἀπὸ Θρᾴκης
πεζοὶ ἐς φυλακὴν ἐτάχθησαν. <ἦν δὲ> ἡ πᾶσα
στρατιὰ Ἀλεξάνδρου ἱππεῖς μὲν ἐς ἑπτακισχιλίους,
πεζοὶ δὲ ἀμφὶ τὰς τέσσαρας μυριάδας.
13. Ὡς δὲ ὁμοῦ ἤδη τὰ στρατόπεδα ἐγίγνετο,
ὤφθη Δαρεῖός τε καὶ οἱ ἀμφ᾿ αὐτόν, οἵ τε μηλοφόροι
Πέρσαι καὶ Ἰνδοὶ καὶ Ἀλβανοὶ καὶ Κᾶρες οἱ
ἀνάσπαστοι καὶ οἱ Μάρδοι τοξόται, κατ᾿ αὐτὸν
Ἀλέξανδρον τεταγμένοι καὶ τὴν ἴλην τὴν βασιλικήν.
ἦγε δὲ ὡς ἐπὶ τὸ δεξιὸν τὸ αὑτοῦ Ἀλέξανδρος
μᾶλλον, καὶ οἱ Πέρσαι ἀντιπαρῆγον,
ὑπερφαλαγγοῦντες πολὺ ἐπὶ τῷ σφῶν εὐωνύμῳ.
2ἤδη τε οἱ τῶν Σκυθῶν ἱππεῖς παριππεύοντες
ἥπτοντο τῶν προτεταγμένων τῆς Ἀλεξάνδρου
τάξεως καὶ Ἀλέξανδρος ἔτι ὅμως ἦγεν ἐπὶ δόρυ,
καὶ ἐγγὺς ἦν τοῦ ἐξαλλάσσειν τὸν ὡδοποιημένον



1Κοίρανος; perhaps rather Κάρανος (cf. iii 28, 2; iv 3, 7;
5, 7; 6, 2, but Berve nos. 412 and 442 distinguishes them).262Anabasis of Alexander III

with the javelin-men of Balacrus;5 they were posted 331 b.c. opposite the chariots carrying scythes. Menidas and4 his men had instructions to wheel at an angle and attack the enemy on the flank, if they rode round their wing. This was the disposition of Alexander’s right; on the left at an angle he posted the Thracians under Sitalces’ command,6 and next them the allied cavalry under Coeranus, and then the Odrysian horse under Agathon, son of Tyrimmas.7 Here, in front of5 the whole force, was stationed the foreign mercenary cavalry under Andromachus, son of Hieron. The Thracian foot8 were posted to guard the baggage animals. Alexander’s entire army numbered some 7,000 cavalry and about 40,000 infantry.9
13. As the armies were now nearing one another, Darius and his immediate followers were in full sight; there were the Persians ‘with the Golden Apples’, Indians, Albanians, the ‘transplanted’ Carians and the Mardian archers, all ranged opposite Alexander himself and the royal squadron. But Alexander moved his men rather in the direction of his right, on which the Persians moved accordingly, their left far outflanking Alexander’s army.1 The Scythian cavalry,2 riding along Alexander’s line, were already in contact with the troops posted in front of it; but Alexander still continued steadily his march towards his right, and was nearly clear of the ground which





5Probably Balkan troops.6Javelin-men, cf. i 28, 4.7The Thracians of i 14, 3. D. 57, 5 puts the Cretan archers on the left, where they could have fulfilled the same function as Brison’s men on the right. Another omission in A. or his sources.8Other than Sitalces’ men.9App. IX 3.1Cf. perhaps D. 57, 6; QC. iv 15, 1. For the battle cf. App. IX.263