Arrian

μόνῳ τῶν ἑταίρων· καὶ τὴν μητέρα τὴν Δαρείου
ἀμφιγνοήσασαν ὅστις ὁ βασιλεὺς εἴη αὐτοῖν,
ἐστάλθαι γὰρ ἄμφω τῷ αὐτῷ κόσμῳ, τὴν δὲ
Ἡφαιστίωνι προσελθεῖν καὶ προσκυνῆσαι, ὅτι
7μείζων ἐφάνη ἐκεῖνος. ὡς δὲ ὁ Ἡφαιστίων τε
ὀπίσω ὑπεχώρησε καί τις τῶν ἀμφ᾿ αὐτήν, τὸν
Ἀλέξανδρον δείξας, ἐκεῖνον ἔφη εἶναι Ἀλέξανδρον,
τὴν μὲν καταιδεσθεῖσαν τῇ διαμαρτίᾳ ὑποχωρεῖν,
Ἀλέξανδρον δὲ οὐ φάναι αὐτὴν ἁμαρτεῖν· καὶ γὰρ
8ἐκεῖνον εἶναι Ἀλέξανδρον. καὶ ταῦτα ἐγὼ οὔθ᾿ ὡς
ἀληθῆ οὔτε ὡς πάντῃ ἄπιστα ἀνέγραψα. ἀλλ᾿ εἴτε
οὕτως ἐπράχθη, ἐπαινῶ Ἀλέξανδρον τῆς τε ἐς τὰς
γυναῖκας κατοικτίσεως καὶ τῆς ἐς τὸν ἑταῖρον
πίστεως καὶ τιμῆς· εἴτε πιθανὸς δοκεῖ τοῖς συγγράψασιν
Ἀλέξανδρος ὡς καὶ ταῦτα ἂν πράξας καὶ
εἰπών, καὶ ἐπὶ τῷδε ἐπαινῶ Ἀλέξανδρον.
13. Δαρεῖος δὲ τὴν μὲν νύκτα ξὺν ὀλίγοις τοῖς
ἀμφ᾿ αὐτὸν ἔφυγε, τῇ δὲ ἡμέρᾳ ἀναλαμβάνων ἀεὶ
τῶν τε Περσῶν τοὺς διασωθέντας ἐκ τῆς μάχης καὶ
τῶν ξένων τῶν μισθοφόρων, ἐς τετρακισχιλίους
ἔχων τοὺς πάντας, ὡς ἐπὶ Θάψακόν τε πόλιν καὶ
τὸν Εὐφράτην ποταμὸν σπουδῇ ἤλαυνεν, ὡς
τάχιστα μέσον αὑτοῦ τε καὶ Ἀλεξάνδρου τὸν
2Εὐφράτην ποιῆσαι. Ἀμύντας δὲ ὁ Ἀντιόχου καὶ
Θυμώνδας ὁ Μέντορος καὶ Ἀριστομήδης ὁ Φεραῖος
καὶ Βιάνωρ ὁ Ἀκαρνάν, ξυμπάντες οὗτοι αὐτόμολοι,
μετὰ τῶν ἀμφ᾿ αὐτοὺς στρατιωτῶν ὡς
ὀκτακισχιλίων εὐθὺς ὡς τεταγμένοι ἦσαν κατὰ τὰ
ὄρη φεύγοντες ἀφίκοντο ἐς Τρίπολιν τῆς Φοινίκης·


168Anabasis of Alexander II

visited the tent with Hephaestion and no other 333 b.c. Companion; and Darius’ mother, not knowing which of the two was the king, as both were dressed alike, approached Hephaestion and did him obeisance, since he appeared the taller. Hephaestion drew7 back, and one of her attendants pointed to Alexander and said he was the king; she drew back in confusion at her mistake, but Alexander remarked that she had made no mistake, for Hephaestion was also an Alexander. I have written this down without asserting8 its truth or total incredibility. If it really happened, I approve of Alexander’s compassion for the women and of the trust, and honour bestowed on his companion. If the historians of Alexander think it plausible that he would have acted and spoken in this way, I approve of Alexander on that ground too.3
13. Darius fled through the night with a handful of his suite, but in the daylight he kept picking up Persians who had got off safe from the battle and also some of the foreign mercenaries; and with a body of about 4,000 in all he rode at full speed for the city of Thapsacus and the river Euphrates, meaning to put the river between Alexander and himself as soon as possible.1 Amyntas son of Antiochus, Thymondas2 son of Mentor, Aristomedes of Pherae and Bianor the Acarnanian, all deserters to Darius, with their troops to the number of 8,000, fled straight to the hills at once in the order in which they had been drawn


3A’s reflections may be compared with those of D., QC. and P. (cited above); P. praises him for not enjoying any of the women, except Barsine, daughter of Artabazus (iii 21, 4 n.).: Ar. attested Al’s liaison with her, and a son, Heracles, claimed the Macedonian throne in 309; Tarn ii 330 ff. rejects the story, but see my article in Rivista di filologia classica 1975, 22 ff. Cf. also iv 19, 6–20, 3.1QC. iv 1, 1–3 (4,000 ‘Greeks’, i.e. mercenaries).169