Arrian

Ἀμφεῖον· ὡς δὲ πανταχόθεν αὐτοῖς οἱ Μακεδόνες
καὶ Ἀλέξανδρος ἄλλοτε ἄλλῃ ἐπιφαινόμενος προσέκειντο,
οἱ μὲν ἱππεῖς τῶν Θηβαίων διεκπεσόντες
διὰ τῆς πόλεως ἐς τὸ πεδίον ἐξέπιπτον, οἱ δὲ πεζοὶ
8ὡς ἑκάστοις προὐχώρει ἐσώζοντο. ἔνθα δὴ ὀργῇ
οὐχ οὕτως τι οἱ Μακεδόνες, ἀλλὰ Φωκεῖς τε καὶ
Πλαταιεῖς καὶ οἱ ἄλλοι δὲ Βοιωτοὶ οὐδὲ ἀμυνομένους
τοὺς Θηβαίους ἔτι οὐδενὶ κόσμῳ ἔκτεινον,
τοὺς μὲν ἐν ταῖς οἰκίαις ἐπεισπίπτοντες, οὓς δὲ ἐς
ἀλκὴν τετραμμένους, τοὺς δὲ καὶ πρὸς ἱεροῖς
ἱκετεύοντας, οὔτε γυναικῶν οὔτε παίδων
φειδόμενοι.
9. Καὶ πάθος τοῦτο Ἑλληνικὸν μεγέθει τε τῆς
ἁλούσης πόλεως καὶ ὀξύτητι τοῦ ἔργου, οὐχ ἥκιστα
δὲ τῷ παραλόγῳ ἔς τε τοὺς παθόντας καὶ τοὺς
δράσαντας, οὐ μεῖόν τι τοὺς ἄλλους Ἕλληνας ἢ καὶ
2αὐτοὺς τοὺς μετασχόντας τοῦ ἔργου ἐξέπληξε. τὰ
μὲν γὰρ περὶ Σικελίαν Ἀθηναίοις ξυνενεχθέντα, εἰ
καὶ πλήθει τῶν ἀπολομένων οὐ μείονα τὴν
ξυμφορὰν τῇ πόλει ἤνεγκεν, ἀλλὰ τῷ τε πόρρω ἀπὸ
τῆς οἰκείας διαφθαρῆναι αὐτοῖς τὸν στρατόν, καὶ
τὸν πολὺν ξυμμαχικὸν μᾶλλον ἢ οἰκεῖον ὄντα, καὶ
τῷ τὴν πόλιν αὐτοῖς περιλειφθῆναι, ὡς καὶ ἐς
ὕστερον ἐπὶ πολὺ τῷ πολέμῳ ἀντισχεῖν Λακεδαιμονίοις
τε καὶ τοῖς ξυμμάχοις καὶ μεγάλῳ βασιλεῖ
πολεμοῦντας, οὔτε αὐτοῖς τοῖς παθοῦσιν ἴσην τὴν
αἴσθησιν τῆς ξυμφορᾶς προσέθηκεν, οὔτε τοῖς
ἄλλοις Ἕλλησιν τὴν ἐπὶ τῷ πάθει ἔκπληξιν ὁμοίαν
3παρέσχε. καὶ τὸ ἐν Αἰγὸς ποταμοῖς αὖθις
Ἀθηναίων πταῖσμα ναυτικόν τε ἦν καὶ ἡ πόλις
οὐδὲν ἄλλο ὅτι μὴ τῶν μακρῶν τειχῶν καθαιρέσει
38Anabasis of Alexander I

Ampheum, but as the Macedonians pressed on them 335 b.c.
from all sides, and Alexander appeared, now here, now there, the Theban cavalry, pushing their way through the city, streamed out upon the plain; with the infantry it was sauve qui peut. And then,8 in hot blood, it was not so much the Macedonians as Phocians and Plataeans and the other Boeotians3 who slaughtered the Thebans without restraint, even when they no longer offered resistance, some in their houses, which they broke into, some showing fight; others actually suppliant at the shrines;—they spared neither woman nor child.
9. This Greek disaster, because of the size of the captured city, the sharpness of the action, and not least the general unexpectedness of the event, both to victors and victims, horrified the other Greeks as much as those who had a hand in it.1 The misfortunes2 [413 b.c.] of the Athenians in Sicily brought no less a disaster upon their city measured by the number of the dead, yet their army was destroyed far from home; it was mainly composed of allies rather than of citizens, and their city was left them, so that they held out long afterwards in the war against Sparta, her allies, and Persia; even this disaster did not make the victims themselves equally conscious of misfortune, and did not strike the other Greeks with like horror at the catastrophe. Again, the Athenian3 defeat at Aegospotami was at sea, and though the [405 b.c.] city was humbled, yet it only suffered from the


3Exonerating the Macedonians, cf. 9, 6, contra D. 13, 1, though D. too admits (13, 5 f.) that the Thespians, Plataeans and Orchomenians worked off old grudges on the Thebans. Note also ii 15, 3 f.1§ 1–5 seem to give A’s own reflections, 6–8 recite the charges apparently made against Thebes by Al’s Greek allies, cf. D. 14, 1–4.39