Arrian

ἱππέας καὶ τῶν ψιλῶν ὅσοι κουφότατοι, ὥστε ὁ
Ἀρσάμης μαθὼν αὐτοῦ τὴν ὁρμὴν σπουδῇ φεύγει
ἐκ τῆς Ταρσοῦ παρὰ βασιλέα Δαρεῖον οὐδὲν
βλάψας τὴν πόλιν.
7Ἀλέξανδρος δέ, ὡς μὲν Ἀριστοβούλῳ λέλεκται,
ὑπὸ καμάτου ἐνόσησεν, οἱ δὲ ἐς τὸν Κύδνον [τὸν]
ποταμὸν λέγουσι ῥίψαντα νήξασθαι, ἐπιθυμήσαντα
τοῦ ὕδατος, ἱδρῶντα καὶ καύματι ἐχόμενον. ὁ δὲ
Κύδνος ῥέει διὰ μέσης τῆς πόλεως· οἷα δὲ ἐκ τοῦ
Ταύρου ὄρους τῶν πηγῶν οἱ ἀνισχουσῶν καὶ διὰ
χώρου καθαροῦ ῥέων, ψυχρός τέ ἐστι καὶ τὸ ὕδωρ
8καθαρός· σπασμῷ τε οὖν ἔχεσθαι Ἀλέξανδρον καὶ
θέρμαις ἰσχυραῖς καὶ ἀγρυπνίᾳ ξυνεχεῖ· καὶ τοὺς
μὲν ἄλλους ἰατροὺς οὐκ οἴεσθαι εἶναι βιώσιμον,
Φίλιππον δὲ Ἀκαρνᾶνα, ἰατρόν, ξυνόντα Ἀλεξάνδρῳ
καὶ τά τε ἀμφὶ ἰατρικὴν ἐς τὰ μάλιστα
πιστευόμενον καὶ τὰ ἄλλα οὐκ ἀδόκιμον ἐν τῷ
στρατῷ ὄντα, καθῆραι ἐθέλειν Ἀλέξανδρον φαρμάκῳ·
9καὶ τὸν κελεύειν καθῆραι. τὸν μὲν δὴ
παρασκευάζειν τὴν κύλικα, ἐν τούτῳ δὲ Ἀλεξάνδρῳ
δοθῆναι ἐπιστολὴν παρὰ Παρμενίωνος φυλάξασθαι
Φίλιππον· ἀκούειν γὰρ διεφθάρθαι ὑπὸ
Δαρείου χρήμασιν ὥστε φαρμάκῳ ἀποκτεῖναι
Ἀλέξανδρον. τὸν δὲ ἀναγνόντα τὴν ἐπιστολὴν καὶ
ἔτι μετὰ χεῖρας ἔχοντα αὐτὸν μὲν λαβεῖν τὴν
κύλικα ἐν ᾗ ἦν τὸ φάρμακον, τὴν ἐπιστολὴν δὲ τῷ
10Φιλίππῳ δοῦναι ἀναγνῶναι. καὶ ὁμοῦ τόν τε
Ἀλέξανδρον πίνειν καὶ τὸν Φίλιππον ἀναγινώσκειν
τὰ παρὰ τοῦ Παρμενίωνος. Φίλιππον δὲ εὐθὺς
ἔνδηλον γενέσθαι, ὅτι καλῶς οἱ ἔχει τὰ τοῦ φαρμάκου·
οὐ γὰρ ἐκπλαγῆναι πρὸς τὴν ἐπιστολήν, ἀλλὰ
τοσόνδε μόνον παρακαλέσαι Ἀλέξανδρον, καὶ ἐς τὰ
134Anabasis of Alexander II

the cavalry and the most mobile of the light troops 333 b.c. at full speed to Tarsus, so that Arsames learning of his onrush fled to King Darius without harming the city.2
Here Alexander fell ill, from fatigue according to7 Aristobulus, but others tell the following story.3 Alexander dived into the river Cydnus and had a swim; he wanted the bathe as he was in a sweat and overcome by heat. The Cydnus runs right through the city, and as its springs are in Mount Taurus and it runs through open country, it is cold and its water is clear. Alexander therefore caught a cramp, and8 suffered from violent fever and continuous sleeplessness. All his physicians gave him up except Philip, an Acarnanian doctor in his suite who was very much trusted in medical matters, and in general enjoyed honour in the army; he proposed a strong purge, and Alexander told him to administer it. He was9 making up the draught when a note was given Alexander from Parmenio, ‘Beware of Philip! I hear that Darius has bribed him to poison you.’ Alexander read the letter, and still holding it, took the cup with the draught and gave the note to Philip to read; at one and the same moment Alexander10 drank the dose and Philip read Parmenio’s note. Philip at once made it clear that all was well with the dose; he was not panic-struck at the letter, but simply re-assured Alexander and told him to follow


2QC. iii 4, 2–15; J. xi 8, 1 f.; cf. Xenophon, Anabasis i 2, 21 on the Cilician Gates.3‘Vulgate’ (§ 7–11); D. 31, 4–6, QC. iii 5 f.; J. xi 8, 3 ff. differ in detail; P. 19 gives Ar’s account without naming him.135