Arrian

Ἀρταβάζου ἀποπεπόμφει εἰς Δαμασκὸν Δαρεῖος
ὅτι ἑάλωκε, καὶ ὅσοι Περσῶν ἀμφ᾿ αὐτὰ ἐγκατελείφθησαν
ξὺν τῇ ἄλλῃ βασιλικῇ κατασκευῇ ὅτι καὶ
οὗτοι ἑάλωσαν, ταῦτα μὲν ὀπίσω κομίσαντα ἐς
2Δαμασκὸν Παρμενίωνα φυλάσσειν ἐκέλευε. τοὺς
δὲ πρέσβεις τῶν Ἑλλήνων οἳ πρὸς Δαρεῖον πρὸ τῆς
μάχης ἀφιγμένοι ἦσαν, ἐπεὶ καὶ τούτους ἑαλωκέναι
ἔμαθεν, παρ᾿ αὑτὸν πέμπειν ἐκέλευεν. ἦσαν δὲ
Εὐθυκλῆς μὲν Σπαρτιάτης, Θεσσαλίσκος δὲ Ἰσμηνίου
καὶ Διονυσόδωρος Ὀλυμπιονίκης Θηβαῖοι,
Ἰφικράτης δὲ ὁ Ἰφικράτους τοῦ στρατηγοῦ
3Ἀθηναῖος. καὶ οὗτοι ὡς ἧκον παρὰ Ἀλέξανδρον,
Θεσσαλίσκον μὲν καὶ Διονυσόδωρον καίπερ Θηβαίους
ὄντας εὐθὺς ἀφῆκεν, τὸ μέν τι κατοικτίσει
τῶν Θηβῶν, τὸ δὲ ὅτι συγγνωστὰ δεδρακέναι
ἐφαίνοντο, ἠνδραποδισμένης ὑπὸ Μακεδόνων τῆς
πατρίδος σφίσιν τε ἥντινα ἠδύναντο ὠφέλειαν
εὑρισκόμενοι καὶ εἰ δή τινα καὶ τῇ πατρίδι ἐκ
4Περσῶν καὶ Δαρείου· ταῦτα μὲν ὑπὲρ ἀμφοῖν
ἐπιεικῆ ἐνθυμηθείς, ἰδίᾳ δὲ Θεσσαλίσκου μὲν αἰδοῖ
τοῦ γένους ἀφιέναι εἶπεν, ὅτι τῶν ἐπιφανῶν
Θηβαίων ἦν, Διονυσόδωρον δὲ ἐπὶ τῇ νίκῃ τῶν
Ὀλυμπίων. Ἰφικράτην δὲ φιλίᾳ τε τῆς Ἀθηναίων
πόλεως καὶ μνήμῃ τῆς δόξης τοῦ πατρὸς ζῶντά τε
ἀμφ᾿ αὑτὸν ἔχων ἐς τὰ μάλιστα ἐτίμησε καὶ νόσῳ
τελευτήσαντος τὰ ὀστᾶ ἐς τὰς Ἀθήνας τοῖς πρὸς
5γένους ἀπέπεμψεν. Εὐθυκλέα δὲ Λακεδαιμόνιόν τε
ὄντα, πόλεως περιφανῶς ἐχθρᾶς ἐν τῷ τότε, καὶ
αὐτὸν οὐδὲν ἰδίᾳ εὑρισκόμενον ἐς ξυγγνώμην ὅ τι
καὶ λόγου ἄξιον, τὰ μὲν πρῶτα ἐν φυλακῇ ἀδέσμῳ
εἶχεν, ὕστερον δέ, ὡς ἐπὶ μέγα εὐτύχει, καὶ τοῦτον
ἀφῆκεν.
178Anabasis of Alexander II

Cophen son of Artabazus to Damascus had been 332 b.c. seized, and that all the Persians left to guard them had also been seized with the rest of the royal equipage, he ordered Parmenio to take the spoils back to Damascus and guard them there. As for2 the Greek envoys who had reached Darius before the battle, when he learned that they too had been captured, he ordered them to be sent to him. They were Euthycles the Spartiate, Thessaliscus son of Ismenias and Dionysodorus, an Olympian victor, from Thebes, and Iphicrates son of Iphicrates the general from Athens.2 When they reached Alexander,3 he at once dismissed Thessaliscus and Dionysodorus, Thebans as they were, partly from compassion for Thebes and partly because he thought that they had acted pardonably, since their country had been enslaved by Macedonians and they were looking for any conceivable help they could get for themselves and for their country too from Darius and Persia; he took a kindly view of the doings of4 both, but privately he said that he was releasing Thessaliscus from regard for his family, since he was one of the Theban nobles, and Dionysodorus because of his victory at Olympia. From friendship for Athens and remembrance of his father’s fame, he kept Iphicrates in attendance and paid him special honour; when he died, he sent back his bones to his relatives at Athens. Euthycles, however, as a Lacedaemonian,5 from a city conspicuously hostile to him at the moment, and as a person unable to produce any reasonable claim to individual pardon, was at first kept under guard, though not in bonds; but later, when successes crowded in on Alexander, he too was released.
2Apart from Iphicrates, QC. iii 13, 15 gives different names.179