Arrian

Συρίας σατράπης καὶ Ἀσκληπιόδωρος ὁ ὕπαρχος,
ἀπὸ θαλάσσης καὶ οὗτοι στρατιὰν ἄγοντες.
3Ἔνθα δὴ ξύλλογον ἐκ τῶν παρόντων ξυναγαγὼν
Ἀλέξανδρος παρήγαγεν ἐς αὐτοὺς Βῆσσον· καὶ
κατηγορήσας τὴν Δαρείου προδοσίαν τήν τε ῥῖνα
Βήσσου ἀποτμηθῆναι καὶ τὰ ὦτα ἄκρα ἐκέλευσεν,
αὐτὸν δὲ ἐς Ἐκβάτανα ἄγεσθαι, ὡς ἐκεῖ ἐν τῷ
Μήδων τε καὶ Περσῶν ξυλλόγῳ ἀποθανούμενον.
4καὶ ἐγὼ οὔτε τὴν ἄγαν ταύτην τιμωρίαν Βήσσου
ἐπαινῶ, ἀλλὰ βαρβαρικὴν εἶναι τίθεμαι τῶν ἀκρωτηρίων
τὴν λώβην καὶ ὑπαχθῆναι Ἀλέξανδρον
ξύμφημι ἐς ζῆλον τοῦ Μηδικοῦ τε καὶ Περσικοῦ
πλούτου καὶ τῆς κατὰ τοὺς βαρβάρους βασιλέας
οὐκ ἴσης ἐς τοὺς ὑπηκόους ξυνδιαιτήσεως, ἐσθῆτά
τε ὅτι Μηδικὴν ἀντὶ τῆς Μακεδονικῆς τε καὶ
πατρίου Ἡρακλείδης ὢν μετέλαβεν, οὐδαμῇ
ἐπαινῶ, καὶ τὴν κίταριν τὴν Περσικὴν τῶν νενικημένων
ἀντὶ ὧν αὐτὸς ὁ νικῶν πάλαι ἐφόρει
5ἀμεῖψαι οὐκ ἐπῃδέσθη, οὐδὲν τούτων ἐπαινῶ, ἀλλ᾿
εἴπερ τι ἄλλο, καὶ τὰ Ἀλεξάνδρου μεγάλα πράγματα
ἐς τεκμηρίωσιν τίθεμαι ὡς οὔτε τὸ σῶμα
ὅτῳ εἴη καρτερόν, οὔτε ὅστις γένει ἐπιφανής, οὔτε


360Anabasis Of Alexander IV

and Asclepiodorus the hyparch from the coast, also9–832 b.c. bringing troops.3
Then Alexander summoned a council of those3 present, brought Bessus before them, and accusing him of treachery towards Darius, commanded that his nose and ear-laps should be cut off, and that he should be taken to Ecbatana, to be put to death there in the assembly of Medes and Persians.4 For my4 part, I do not approve of this excessive punishment of Bessus; I regard the mutilation of the extremities as barbaric, and I agree that Alexander was carried away into imitation of Median and Persian opulence and of the custom of barbarian kings not to countenance equality with subjects in their daily lives. Nor do I at all approve the facts that, though a descendant of Heracles, he substituted the dress of Medes for that traditional with Macedonians and that he exchanged the tiara of the Persians, whom he himself had conquered, for the head-dress he had long worn,5 but5 I take it that nothing is clearer proof than Alexander’s great successes of the truth that neither bodily strength in anyone nor distinction of birth nor



3‘Bessus’ is corrupt. QC. 10, 12 makes Asclepiodorus
bring him 4,500 troops from Syria, while Antipater sends 8,000
Greeks, including 600 horse; these might be the men brought
by the ‘hyparch from the coast’; Schmieder proposed to
substitute Asclepiodorus for ‘Bessus’ and Menes for Asclepiodorus,
but while we must suppose that a scribe wrote ‘Bessus’
for some other name, because his mind was still preoccupied
with the true Bessus of § 1, the additional error of transposition
is less easy to accept. Bosworth, CQ 1975, would
read ‘Menon’ (cf. iii 6, 8 n.); on his view of iii 16, 9 (see n.).
Menes had replaced both Menon and Asclepiodorus in the satrapies of north and south Syria, and they were freed to bring on troops he had raised to Al. But if this were right, both men should have been designated as former satraps and the circumscription of each should have been given. I should prefer to read ‘Menes’, even though this means that he did not stay long in his large province (which on my hypothesis embraced more than Syria), and to take ‘hyparch’ here to indicate Asclepiodorus’ subordination to him; this is its proper sense, even though it is sometimes equivalent to satrap. QC. gives other details of the reinforcements, amounting to 19,400 foot and 2,600 horse.4QC. vii 10,10. For what follows to end of ch. 14 see App. XV.5But cf. vii 29, 4.361