Arrian

αὐτῷ οἵ τε Βάκτριοι ἱππεῖς, ὡς τότε ἐν τῇ μάχῃ
ξυνετάχθησαν, ἔφευγον καὶ Περσῶν οἵ τε συγγενεῖς
οἱ βασιλέως καὶ τῶν μηλοφόρων καλουμένων
2οὐ πολλοί. προσεγένοντο δὲ αὐτῷ κατὰ τὴν φυγὴν
καὶ τῶν μισθοφόρων ξένων ἐς δισχιλίους, οὓς
Πά<τ>ρων τε ὁ Φωκεὺς καὶ Γλαῦκος ὁ Αἰτωλὸς
ἦγον. ταύτῃ δὲ αὐτῷ ἡ φυγὴ ἐπὶ Μηδίας ἐγίγνετο,
ὅτι ἐδόκει τὴν ἐπὶ Σούσων τε καὶ Βαβυλῶνος ἥξειν
Ἀλέξανδρον ἐκ τῆς μάχης, ὅτι οἰκουμένη τε
ἐκείνη πᾶσα ἦν καὶ ὁδὸς τοῖς σκευοφόροις οὐ
χαλεπή, καὶ ἅμα τοῦ πολέμου τὸ ἆθλον ἡ Βαβυλὼν
καὶ τὰ Σοῦσα ἐφαίνετο· ἡ δὲ ἐπὶ Μηδίας μεγάλῳ
στρατεύματι οὐκ εὔπορος.
3Καὶ οὐκ ἐψεύσθη Δαρεῖος. Ἀλέξανδρος γὰρ ἐξ
Ἀρβήλων ὁρμηθεὶς τὴν ἐπὶ Βαβυλῶνος εὐθὺς
προὐχώρει. ἤδη τε οὐ πόρρω Βαβυλῶνος ἦν καὶ
τὴν δύναμιν ξυντεταγμένην ὡς ἐς μάχην ἦγε, καὶ
οἱ Βαβυλώνιοι πανδημεὶ ἀπήντων αὐτῷ ξὺν ἱερεῦσί
τε σφῶν καὶ ἄρχουσι, δῶρά τε ὡς ἕκαστοι φέροντες
καὶ τὴν πόλιν ἐνδιδόντες καὶ τὴν ἄκραν καὶ τὰ
4χρήματα. Ἀλέξανδρος δὲ παρελθὼν εἰς τὴν Βαβυλῶνα
τὰ ἱερά, ἃ Ξέρξης καθεῖλεν, ἀνοικοδομεῖν
προσέταξε Βαβυλωνίοις, τά τε ἄλλα καὶ τοῦ Βήλου
τὸ ἱερόν, ὃν μάλιστα θεῶν τιμῶσι Βαβυλώνιοι.
σατράπην δὲ κατέστησε Βαβυλῶνος Μαζαῖον,
Ἀπολλόδωρον δὲ τὸν Ἀμφιπολίτην στρατηγὸν
τῶν μετὰ Μαζαίου ὑπολειπομένων στρατιωτῶν,
καὶ Ἀσκληπιόδωρον τὸν Φίλωνος τοὺς φόρους
5ἐκλέγειν. κατέπεμψε δὲ καὶ ἐς Ἀρμενίαν Μιθρήνην



274Anabasis of Alexander III

flight by the Bactrian cavalry, as they had been 331 b.c. posted with him in the battle on that occasion; he also had an escort of Persians, the royal kinsmen and a few of the ‘spearmen of the Golden Apples’. He2 was joined during the flight by some two thousand of the foreign mercenaries led by Patron the Phocian and Glaucus the Aetolian. The reason why he fled towards Media was that he thought Alexander after the battle would take the route to Susa and Babylon, since all of it was inhabited and the road itself was easy for the baggage trains, and besides, Babylon and Susa were the obvious prize of the war, whereas the route to Media was not easy for a large force.1
Darius was not mistaken, for on leaving Arbela3 Alexander at once advanced on the road to Babylon. He was already near Babylon, and was leading his force in battle order, when the Babylonians came to meet him in mass, with their priests and rulers, each section of the inhabitants bringing gifts and offering surrender of the city, the citadel and the treasure.2 On entering Babylon Alexander directed4 the Babylonians to rebuild the temples Xerxes destroyed, [482–81 b.c.] and especially the temple of Baal, whom the Babylonians honour more than any other god. He appointed Mazaeus satrap of Babylon and Apollodorus
of Amphipolis general of the troops left behind with Mazaeus, and Asclepiodorus son of Philo to collect the taxes.3 He also sent as satrap to Armenia45
1D. 64, 1; QC. v 1, 3–9.2D. 64, 3 f.; QC. v 1, 11–23 and 45 (also on donatives to
troops).3Mazaeus (11, 4 n.) fled to Babylon (QC. iv 6, 17) and, as satrap, surrendered it (v 1, 17); QC. v 1, 43 f. agrees on his appointment and that of Apollodorus (cf. D. 64, 5), makes Agathon commandant of citadel and gives numbers of garrison forces.4It never came under Al’s control (D. xix 23, 3). Cf. D. 64, 6; QC. v 1, 44.275