Arrian

μὲν πρῶτα ξυνέλαβε καὶ δήσας ἦγεν, ἔπειτα
ἀπέκτεινε. καὶ ὁ Βῆσσος οὐ μόνῳ οἷ ταῦτα δόξαντα
πρᾶξαι ἔφη, ἀλλὰ ξὺν τοῖς τότε ἀμφὶ
Δαρεῖον οὖσιν, ὡς σωτηρίαν σφίσιν εὑρέσθαι παρ᾿
5Ἀλεξάνδρου. Ἀλέξανδρος δὲ ἐπὶ τοῖσδε μαστιγοῦν
ἐκέλευεν αὐτὸν καὶ ἐπιλέγειν τὸν κήρυκα ταὐτὰ
ἐκεῖνα ὅσα αὐτὸς τῷ Βήσσῳ ἐν τῇ πύστει ὠνείδισε.
Βῆσσος μὲν δὴ οὕτως αἰκισθεὶς ἀποπέμπεται ἐς
Βάκτρα ἀποθανούμενος. καὶ ταῦτα Πτολεμαῖος
ὑπὲρ Βήσσου ἀνέγραψεν· Ἀριστόβουλος δὲ τοὺς
ἀμφὶ Σπιταμένην τε καὶ Δαταφέρνην Πτολεμαίῳ
ἀγαγεῖν Βῆσσον καὶ παραδοῦναι Ἀλεξάνδρῳ γυμνὸν
ἐν κλοιῷ δήσαντας.
6Ἀλέξανδρος δὲ ἀναπληρώσας τὸ ἱππικὸν ἐκ τῶν
αὐτόθεν ἵππων (πολλοὶ γὰρ αὐτῷ ἵπποι ἔν τε τῇ
ὑπερβολῇ τοῦ Καυκάσου καὶ ἐν τῇ ἐπὶ τὸν Ὄξον τε
καὶ ἀπὸ τοῦ Ὄξου πορείᾳ ἐξέλιπον) ὡς ἐπὶ
Μαράκανδα ἦγε· τὰ δέ ἐστι βασίλεια τῆς Σογδιανῶν
7χώρας. ἔνθεν δὲ ἐπὶ τὸν Τάναϊν ποταμὸν
προῄει. τῷ δὲ Τανάϊδι τούτῳ, ὃν δὴ καὶ Ἰαξάρτην1
ἄλλῳ ὀνόματι πρὸς τῶν ἐπιχωρίων βαρβάρων
καλεῖσθαι λέγει Ἀριστόβουλος, αἱ πηγαὶ μὲν
ἐκ τοῦ Καυκάσου ὄρους καὶ αὐτῷ εἰσιν· ἐξίησι δὲ
καὶ οὗτος ὁ ποταμὸς εἰς τὴν Ὑρκανίαν θάλασσαν.
8ἄλλος δὲ ἂν εἴη Τάναϊς ὑπὲρ ὅτου λέγει Ἡρόδοτος
ὁ λογοποιὸς ὄγδοον εἶναι τῶν ποταμῶν τῶν




1Ἰαξάρτην, Palmarius: Ὀρξάντην codd. See historical note.330Anabasis of Alexander III

led him about in chains, and then murdered 329 b.c. him. Bessus replied that he had acted not by any private decision of his own but in concert with all then attending on Darius, to obtain immunity from Alexander. At this Alexander ordered him to be whipped 5 and the herald to announce during the whipping the crimes for which he himself had blamed Bessus in his question. After this torture Bessus was sent to Bactra to be put to death.1 This is Ptolemy’s account of Bessus: Aristobulus, however, says that it was the followers of Spitamenes and Dataphernes who took Bessus to Ptolemy and handed him over to Alexander naked and bound, wearing a wooden collar.2
Alexander brought his cavalry to full strength with6 horses from the vicinity, for a good many horses had been lost in the crossing of Mount Caucasus and on the marches both to and from the Oxus, and led his troops towards Maracanda [Samarcand], a royal residence of the Sogdianian land. Thence he advanced7 to the river Tanais [Syr-darya]. The springs of this Tanais too, which Aristobulus says is called by the natives a different name, Jaxartes,3 rise in Mount Caucasus; and this river also flows out into the Hyrcanian Sea. The Tanais [Don], which the8 historian Herodotus describes as the eighth of the Scythian

1Cf. iv 7, 3, giving the sequel, not a variant story from
another source. Different versions: D. 83, 8 (followed by
long lacuna); QC. vii 5, 40 ff.; 10, 10.2The minor discrepancy (Pearson LH 166) suggests that
Ar. had not read Pt. or was correcting him silently.3The Syr-darya, which in fact rises in the Kirgiz, not the ‘Caucasus’ (here Hindu-Kush), and flows into the Aral Sea, not the ‘Hyrcanian’ (Caspian); cf. App. XII for these and other geographical confusions. Greek writers normally give the Iranian name for the Syr-darya as Jaxartes; here the manuscripts read ‘Orxantes’, and in vii 16, 3 (the only other place where A. does not use ‘Tanais’) ‘Oxyartes’; P. 45 has ‘Orexartes’. It is thus doubtful what A. (or Ar.) actually wrote: I have hesitantly adopted emendations in both places in the Anabasis.331