Arrian
7Κάρανος δὲ ὁ ἱππάρχης οὐκ ἀνακοινώσας Ἀνδρομάχῳ
διαβαίνειν ἐπεχείρησε τὸν ποταμὸν ὡς ἐς
ἀσφαλὲς ταύτῃ καταστήσων τὴν ἵππον· καὶ οἱ
πεζοὶ αὐτῷ ἐπηκολούθησαν, οὐκ ἐκ παραγγέλματος,
ἀλλὰ φοβερά τε καὶ οὐδενὶ κόσμῳ ἐγένετο αὐτοῖς ἡ
ἔσβασις ἡ ἐς τὸν ποταμὸν κατὰ κρημνώδεις τὰς
8ὄχθας. καὶ οἱ βάρβαροι αἰσθόμενοι τὴν ἁμαρτίαν
τῶν Μακεδόνων αὐτοῖς ἵπποις ἔνθεν καὶ ἔνθεν
ἐσβάλλουσιν ἐς τὸν πόρον. καὶ οἱ μὲν τῶν ἤδη
διαβεβηκότων καὶ ἀποχωρούντων εἴχοντο, οἱ δὲ
τοὺς διαβαίνοντας ἀντιμέτωποι ταχθέντες ἀνείλουν
9ἐς τὸν ποταμόν, οἱ δὲ ἀπὸ τῶν πλαγίων ἐξετόξευον
ἐς αὐτούς, οἱ δὲ τοῖς ἔτι ἐσβαίνουσιν ἐπέκειντο,
ὥστε ἀπορίᾳ πάντοθεν ξυνεχόμενοι οἱ Μακεδόνες
ἐς νῆσόν τινα τῶν ἐν τῷ ποταμῷ ξυμφεύγουσιν οὐ
μεγάλην. καὶ περιστάντες αὐτοὺς οἱ Σκύθαι τε καὶ
οἱ ξὺν Σπιταμένει ἱππεῖς ἐν κύκλῳ πάντας κατετόξευσαν·
ὀλίγους δὲ ἠνδραποδίσαντο αὐτῶν, καὶ
τούτους πάντας ἀπέκτειναν.
6. Ἀριστόβουλος δὲ ἐνέδρᾳ τὸ πολὺ τῆς στρατιᾶς
διαφθαρῆναι λέγει, τῶν Σκυθῶν ἐν παραδείσῳ
κρυφθέντων, οἳ ἐκ τοῦ ἀφανοῦς ἐπεγένοντο τοῖς
Μακεδόσιν ἐν αὐτῷ τῷ ἔργῳ· ἵνα τὸν μὲν Φαρνούχην
παραχωρεῖν τῆς ἡγεμονίας τοῖς ξυμπεμφθεῖσι
Μακεδόσιν, ὡς οὐκ ἐμπείρως ἔχοντα ἔργων
πολεμικῶν, ἀλλ᾿ ἐπὶ τῷ καθομιλῆσαι τοὺς βαρβάρους
μᾶλλόν τι πρὸς Ἀλεξάνδρου ἢ ἐπὶ τῷ ἐν ταῖς
μάχαις ἐξηγεῖσθαι ἐσταλμένον, τοὺς δὲ Μακεδόνας
2τε εἶναι καὶ ἑταίρους βασιλέως. Ἀνδρόμαχον δὲ
354Anabasis Of Alexander IV
Caranus, the commander of the cavalry, without7 329 b.c. notifying Andromachus attempted to cross the river, hoping to get his cavalry into safety there, and the infantry followed him, without any instructions, in a panic-stricken and disorderly descent into the river from the banks which were precipitous. The barbarians8 on seeing the error of the Macedonians dashed, mounted as they were, from all directions into the stream. Some pressed on after those who had already crossed and were in retreat, others were ranged in front of the men crossing and penned them back into the river, or showered arrows at them from9 the flanks, or attacked those still entering the river. Then the Macedonians, helpless and pressed on every side, took refuge in a body on one of the small islands in the river. The Scythians and Spitamenes’ cavalry stationed themselves round in a circle and shot them all down; a few were made prisoners but they too were all killed.
6. Aristobulus, however, states that the greater part of this force was destroyed by an ambush; the Scythians, having hidden themselves in a park, attacked the Macedonians from their concealment in the very course of the action, at the moment when Pharnuches was retiring from his command in favour of the Macedonians who had been sent with him, on the ground that he had no military experience, but had been sent by Alexander to treat with the barbarians rather than to command in battles, while they were both Macedonians and Companions of the king. However, Andromachus, Caranus and Menedemus2
355