Arrian

ἐς Μαράκανδα ἀφίκετο, Ἡφαιστίωνα μὲν ἐκπέμπει
τὰς ἐν τῇ Σογδιανῇ πόλεις συνοικίζειν, Κοῖνον δὲ
καὶ Ἀρτάβαζον ὡς ἐς Σκύθας, ὅτι ἐς Σκύθας
καταπεφευγέναι Σπιταμένης αὐτῷ ἐξηγγέλλετο,
αὐτὸς δὲ ξὺν τῇ λοιπῇ στρατιᾷ ἐπιὼν τῆς Σογδιανῆς
ὅσα ἔτι πρὸς τῶν ἀφεστηκότων κατείχετο ταῦτα οὐ
χαλεπῶς ἐξῄρει.
4Ἐν τούτοις δὲ Ἀλεξάνδρου ὄντος Σπιταμένης τε
καὶ σὺν αὐτῷ τῶν Σογδιανῶν τινες φυγάδων ἐς
τῶν Σκυθῶν τῶν Μασσαγετῶν καλουμένων τὴν
χώραν ξυμπεφευγότες ξυναγαγόντες τῶν Μασσαγετῶν
ἱππέας ἑξακοσίους ἀφίκοντο πρός τι
5φρούριον τῶν κατὰ τὴν Βακτριανήν. καὶ τῷ τε
φρουράρχῳ οὐδὲν πολέμιον προσδεχομένῳ ἐπιπεσόντες
καὶ τοῖς ξὺν τούτῳ τὴν φυλακὴν ἔχουσιν
τοὺς μὲν στρατιώτας διέφθειραν, τὸν φρούραρχον
δὲ ἑλόντες ἐν φυλακῇ εἶχον. θαρσήσαντες δὲ ἐπὶ
τοῦ φρουρίου τῇ καταλήψει ὀλίγαις ἡμέραις ὕστερον
Ζαριάσποις πελάσαντες τῇ μὲν πόλει προσβαλεῖν
ἀπέγνωσαν, λείαν δὲ πολλὴν περιβαλλόμενοι ἤλαυνον.
6Ἦσαν δὲ ἐν τοῖς Ζαριάσποις νόσῳ ὑπολελειμμένοι
τῶν ἑταίρων ἱππέων οὐ πολλοὶ καὶ ξὺν
τούτοις Πείθων τε ὁ Σωσικλέους, ἐπὶ τῆς βασιλικῆς
θεραπείας τῆς ἐν Ζαριάσποις τεταγμένος, καὶ
Ἀριστόνικος ὁ κιθαρῳδός. καὶ οὗτοι αἰσθόμενοι
τῶν Σκυθῶν τὴν καταδρομήν (ἤδη γὰρ ἐκ τῆς
νόσου ἀναρρωσθέντες ὅπλα τε ἔφερον καὶ τῶν
ἵππων ἐπέβαινον) ξυναγαγόντες τούς τε μισθοφόρους
ἱππέας ἐς ὀγδοήκοντα, οἳ ἐπὶ φυλακῇ τῶν
Ζαριάσπων ὑπολελειμμένοι ἦσαν, καὶ τῶν παίδων
τινὰς τῶν βασιλικῶν ἐκβοηθοῦσιν ἐπὶ τοὺς Μασσαγέτας.
392Anabasis Of Alexander IV

he sent Hephaestion to settle people in cities328 b.c. in Sogdiana, and Coenus and Artabazus in the direction of Scythia, since news came that Spitamenes had taken refuge there, while he himself with the rest of the troops went on to parts of Sogdiana still held by the rebels, and destroyed them without trouble.
While Alexander was thus engaged, Spitamenes4 and some fugitives from Sogdiana in his company had fled for refuge to the land of the Scythians called Massagetae1; there they collected six hundred horsemen of the Massagetae and arrived at one of the forts in the Bactrian region. Attacking the commandant5 of the fort, who was not expecting enemy action, and his garrison, they destroyed the soldiers, took the commandant prisoner and kept him in custody. Emboldened by capturing the fort, they approached Zariaspa a few days later, and though they decided not to assault the city, they surrounded it and carried off much booty.
In the city of Zariaspa there were a few of the6 Companion cavalry, left there as invalids with Pithon son of Sosicles, who had been put in charge of the royal retinue at Zariaspa, and Aristonicus the harpist. On learning of the Scythian raid, as they had now recovered and could bear arms and mount horseback, they assembled about eighty mercenary cavalry, who had been left behind to garrison Zariaspa, and some of the King’s pages, and sallied out against the

1Probably between Oxus and Caspian. QC. viii 1, 3 ff. tells another story, also featuring Craterus (A. 17, 1), whose command is not recorded.393