Appendices

with A. (i) He urges that if the banks of the Pinarus were as steep as C. says, neither the Persian cavalry nor the Macedonian phalanx could have crossed the stream. Evidently C. exaggerated the steepness; so does A. 10, 1 (see note). (It follows that the Pinarus cannot be the Payas, cf. supra.) (j) Polybius taxes C. with other absurdities. His criticisms would have been just as apposite to the manoeuvres A. describes in 8, 11 and 9, 1 and 3; he would surely have pronounced them impracticable on broken ground in face of the enemy. Hence, if we believe that Polybius demonstrates that C. had no understanding of war, we must on the same reasoning
convict A. and presumably Pt. If on the other hand Callisthenes’ errors are confined to mistakes on numbers (shared by A’s sources) and on estimates of distances (which they may not have given), there is no reason to deny that he was the prime source used by Pt. and Ar. themselves both for Issus and presumably for other military operations described in his history. (There is no evidence here or elsewhere
that A. himself consulted C.)
5. A’s topographical vagueness would have been for Polybius (xii 25 g) another and fully deserved ground for censure. Of course we can conjecture that Pt. or Ar. gave topographical details as detailed as C. and more exact, and that A. has omitted them, just as he commonly fails to excerpt anything from the geographical excursuses in Ar., which Strabo used, although they must have assisted a better
understanding of Al’s campaigns. But it does Pt. or Ar. or both no credit that they gave absurd estimates of the size of the Persian army, 600,000 men, and of its front line, 140,000, equalling or outdoing not only
462Appendices

C. but the estimates in D. 31, 2 (500,000 in all) and QC. iii 2 (310,000 in total) and 9 (160,000 in the front line); it is little excuse that this exaggeration of Persian numbers was traditional; even Xenophon, though an eye-witness, had reported one million in the Persian army at Cunaxa (Anab. i 7, 12). The conversion of the Cardaces into hoplites was also a lie. At most we can say that Al’s tactical dispositions,
like the advice of Amyntas (6, 3), imply that he must have been outnumbered and therefore in danger of being outflanked. The exaggerations tended to his greater glory, which Pt. and Ar., no less than C, sought to enhance at the cost of truth.
6. As to D. and QC., once the armies were joined in battle, their accounts, which suggest a common source, are incompatible with A. But QC. (unlike
D. 33, 1) roughly agrees with A. about the Macedonian
array, though not about the Persian, and there are many affinities in his narrative of the previous manoeuvres, on which D. is extremely vague. It would seem that QC. drew ultimately on the same tradition as A. (as well as on one followed by D. that diverged markedly), though he is much less full and clear, even at his best. One point is of special interest. In 7, 8 ff. he makes Al. accept Parmenio’s advice not to advance beyond Issus but fight in a narrow space. In fact (as he too shows) Al. did advance,
with the evident intention of facing Darius in Syria. Thus he did not accept Parmenio’s advice. The result was that Darius took Issus and massacred the Macedonians there. Al’s decision cost them their lives. Two modes of apology, if QC. is right that the advice was tendered, were open. One was to suppress the fact: thus A’s sources. The second
463