Arrian

ἐπεὶ Βάλακρος ἐν Αἰγύπτῳ ὑπελείπετο, Κάλανον
7κατέστησεν ἡγεμόνα. κατανεῖμαι δὲ λέγεται ἐς
πολλοὺς τὴν ἀρχὴν τῆς Αἰγύπτου τήν τε φύσιν τῆς
χώρας θαυμάσας καὶ τὴν ὀχυρότητα, ὅτι οὐκ
ἀσφαλές οἱ ἐφαίνετο ἑνὶ ἐπιτρέψαι ἄρχειν Αἰγύπτου
πάσης. καὶ Ῥωμαῖοί μοι δοκοῦσι παρ᾿ Ἀλεξάνδρου
μαθόντες ἐν φυλακῇ ἔχειν Αἴγυπτον καὶ
μηδένα τῶν ἀπὸ βουλῆς ἐπὶ τῷδε ἐκπέμπειν
ὕπαρχον Αἰγύπτου, ἀλλὰ τῶν εἰς τοὺς ἱππέας
σφίσι ξυντελούντων.
6. Ἀλέξανδρος δὲ ἅμα τῷ ἦρι ὑποφαίνοντι ἐκ
Μέμφιος ᾔει ἐπὶ Φοινίκης· καὶ ἐγεφυρώθη αὐτῷ ὅ
τε κατὰ Μέμφιν πόρος τοῦ Νείλου καὶ αἱ διώρυχες
αὐτοῦ πᾶσαι. ὡς δὲ ἀφίκετο ἐς Τύρον, καταλαμβάνει
ἐνταῦθα ἧκον αὐτῷ ἤδη καὶ τὸ ναυτικόν.
ἐν Τύρῳ δὲ αὖθις θύει τῷ Ἡρακλεῖ καὶ ἀγῶνα
2ποιεῖ γυμνικόν τε καὶ μουσικόν. ἐνταῦθα ἀφικνεῖται
παρ᾿ αὐτὸν ἐξ Ἀθηνῶν ἡ Πάραλος πρέσβεις
ἄγουσα Διόφαντον καὶ Ἀχιλλέα· ξυνεπρέσβευον δὲ
αὐτοῖς καὶ οἱ Πάραλοι ξύμπαντες. καὶ οὗτοι τῶν
τε ἄλλων ἔτυχον ὧν ἕνεκα ἐστάλησαν καὶ τοὺς
αἰχμαλώτους ἀφῆκεν Ἀθηναίοις ὅσοι ἐπὶ Γρανίκῳ


236Anabasis of Alexander III

were placed under Calanus, since Balacrus 331 b.c. was being left behind in Egypt.5 It is said that he7 divided the government of Egypt between many officers, as he was strongly impressed by the character and defensibility of the country and did not think it safe to entrust the command of all Egypt to one man.6 The Romans, I think, learnt from Alexander to keep a watch on Egypt, and never to send anyone from the Senate as governor, but only those whom they class as Knights.7
6. When spring began to show itself, Alexander started from Memphis for Phoenicia; bridges were made for him to cross over the river Nile at Memphis and over all its canals. When he reached Tyre, he found his fleet had already arrived there. At Tyre he sacrificed a second time to Heracles and held athletic and musical games.1 There the Paralus22 from Athens reached him, bringing Diophantus and Achilles as envoys; the entire crew of the Paralus were associated with them in the embassy. They achieved all the objects of their mission; in particular Alexander gave up to the Athenians all the Athenians





5QC. iv 8, 4f. names only Aeschylus of Rhodes and Peucestas
the Macedonian, who were ‘put in charge’ of Egypt with
4,000 soldiers, Apollonius ‘put in charge’ of the adjoining
region of Africa, Cleomenes appointed to collect the taxes of
Egypt and Africa, and Polemon to protect the mouths of the
Nile with 30 triremes. Clearly Al. divided civil administration
from military command, and gave Cleomenes special fiscal
duties as well as other civil powers in ‘Arabia’; for ‘Arabia’
and ‘Libya’ cf. Strabo xvii 1, 30, which does not make clear
their delimitation from Upper Egypt. The military arrangements
are impenctrable. Berve distinguished the ‘army’ of Peucestas and Balacrus from the mercenaries: not convincing. For a consortium of generals cf. the later arrangements in Media (vi 27, 3). I doubt if A. or QC. gives a true picture. Recent history suggested that the danger for Al. lay in native revolt strengthened by Greek mercenaries: a wholly divided command would have been least fitted to prevent this.6Pt. in fact used the natural strength of Egypt to turn himself from satrap into independent king. But I doubt for that reason if the comment is his: more probably ‘vulgate’.7A’s comment; in fact the circumstances and Roman organization were different, cf. Tacitus, Annals ii 59; Histories i 11; Dio Cassius li 17.1QC iv 8, 16; P. 29.2Athens’ sacred galley, used to convey ambassadors.237