Appendices

omitted by P., for the execution, even if it coheres with the story of Al’s later repentance, which the continued assertion of Callisthenes’ guilt by Pt. and Ar. makes improbable.) Once again we find that the ‘vulgate’ is not an unified, ‘Clitarchean’ tradition. Faced with all these irreconcilable divergencies in his sources, A. himself left the question of Callisthenes’ complicity open, while suggesting that even if he were innocent he had brought his own fate on himself (12, 6 f.). At all costs Al. had to be excused.
Appendix XV
India and the persian empire
1. In Ind. 1 A. says that the Assaceni (who lived in Swat and Bunēr, App. VIII 20) and the Astaceni, whose centre was Peucelaotis or Charsadda (ib. 19), were subject to Cyrus (559–29 BC). Herodotus (iv. 44) tells how Darius I (521–486) sent Scylax on a voyage down the Indus to its mouth and thence round by sea to Egypt and how he shortly afterwards subdued the ‘Indians’, i.e. peoples in the Indus valley, and ‘made use of the sea’. Darius’ inscriptions and Herodotus’ lists of Persian army contingents and tributaries (see vii 65; iii 94, 97 ff.) present further evidence, lucidly discussed in Cambridge History of India I ch. XIV, for Persian power in India in the late sixth and fifth centuries. Its original extent is not to be defined with certitude. In the south the desert east of the Indus formed the frontier (Herodotus iii 98), but it is less clear how much of the
544Appendices

plain between the Indus and Hyphasis ever belonged to Persia.
2. A. constantly refers to the local rulers in India on both sides of the Indus as hyparchs or under-governors
(iv 22, 8; 24, 1; 28, 6; v 8, 5; 20, 6; 29, 4) or nomarchs, i.e. district governors (v 8, 3; 18, 2; vi 16, 1). If these Greek terms translate Indian or Persian titles, it might be inferred that their holders had once received authority from Persia and had, at least in theory, been subject to satraps. They also commonly bear the name of the people or city they rule, e.g. Abisares of the Abhisara, Assacenus (iv 27, 4), Astis, i.e. Astacenus (iv 22, 8, Porus of the Paurava, Taxilas of Taxila; his personal name was Omphis or Mophis (QC. viii 12, 4; D. 86, 4). Evidently they are native rajahs. A. also calls Porus a king (vi 2, 1, cf. v 19, 2), a title other writers accord to Taxilas, Abisares, the bad Porus, Sopithes (e.g. D. 86, 4; 90, 4; 91, 1 and 7). Even if this is correct, it does not imply that they, or their predecessors, had not been Persian vassals; compare the kings in Cyprus and Phoenicia. Similarly the ‘self-governing’ cities may be communities which like some Greek cities in Asia enjoyed republican forms of local government under Persian suzerainty. Nor is it surprising that A’s narrative does not explicitly refer to Persian rule beyond the Indus. There is not even any indication in book iv that Darius III had been in control of the peoples Al. conquered in 327–326 before crossing that river. Yet Indians who were ‘neighbours of the Bactrians’ (iii, 8, 3), or lived ‘this side of Indus’ (8, 6), or ‘mountain Indians’ (8, 4) whose satrap was delivered up to Al. by Indians ‘on this side of Indus’ (25, 8), had served in his armies. If Al. had conquered
545