Arrian

οἱ δὲ ἐλέφαντες ἔστησαν κατὰ τὴν [Δαρείου]1
ἴλην τὴν βασιλικὴν καὶ ἅρματα ἐς πεντήκοντα.
7τοῦ δὲ δεξιοῦ οἵ τε Ἀρμενίων καὶ Καππαδοκῶν
ἱππεῖς προετετάχατο καὶ ἅρματα δρεπανηφόρα
πεντήκοντα. οἱ δὲ Ἕλληνες οἱ μισθοφόροι παρὰ
Δαρεῖόν τε αὐτὸν ἑκατέρωθεν καὶ τοὺς ἅμα αὐτῷ
Πέρσας κατὰ τὴν φάλαγγα αὐτὴν τῶν Μακεδόνων
ὡς μόνοι δὴ ἀντίρροποι τῇ φάλαγγι ἐτάχθησαν.
8Ἀλεξάνδρῳ δὲ ἡ στρατιὰ ἐκοσμήθη ὧδε. τὸ
μὲν δεξιὸν αὐτῷ εἶχον τῶν ἱππέων οἱ ἑταῖροι, ὧν
προετέτακτο ἡ ἴλη ἡ βασιλική, ἧς Κλεῖτος ὁ
Δρωπίδου ἰλάρχης ἦν, ἐπὶ δὲ ταύτῃ Γλαυκίου ἴλη,
ἐχομένη δ᾿ αὐτῆς ἡ Ἀρίστωνος, ἐπὶ δὲ ἡ Σωπόλιδος
τοῦ Ἑρμοδώρου, ἐπὶ δὲ ἡ Ἡρακλείδου τοῦ
Ἀντιόχου, ἐπὶ ταύτῃ δὲ ἡ Δημητρίου τοῦ Ἀλθαιμένους,
ταύτης δὲ ἐχομένη ἡ Μελεάγρου, τελευταία
δὲ τῶν [βασιλικῶν]2 ἰλῶν ἧς Ἡγέλοχος ὁ
Ἱπποστράτου ἰλάρχης ἦν. ξυμπάσης δὲ τῆς ἵππου
9τῶν ἑταίρων Φιλώτας ἦρχεν ὁ Παρμενίωνος. τῆς
δὲ φάλαγγος τῶν Μακεδόνων ἐχόμενον τῶν ἱππέων
πρῶτον τὸ ἄγημα ἐτέτακτο τῶν ὑπασπιστῶν
καὶ ἐπὶ τούτῳ οἱ ἄλλοι ὑπασπισταί· ἡγεῖτο δὲ
αὐτῶν Νικάνωρ ὁ Παρμενίωνος· τούτων δὲ
ἐχομένη ἡ Κοίνου τοῦ Πολεμοκράτους τάξις ἦν,
μετὰ δὲ τούτους ἡ Περδίκκου τοῦ Ὀρόντου, ἔπειτα
ἡ Μελεάγρου τοῦ Νεοπτολέμου, ἐπὶ δὲ ἡ Πολυπέρχοντος
τοῦ Σιμμίου, ἐπὶ δὲ ἡ Ἀμύντου τοῦ
Φιλίππου· ταύτης δὲ ἡγεῖτο Σιμμίας, ὅτι Ἀμύντας
ἐπὶ Μακεδονίας ἐς ξυλλογὴν στρατιᾶς ἐσταλμένος
10ἦν. τὸ δὲ εὐώνυμον τῆς φάλαγγος τῶν Μακεδόνων


1Deleted by Gronovius.2I have bracketed βασιλικῶν.258Anabasis of Alexander III

The elephants were posted ahead of [Darius’] royal 331 b.c. squadron, with fifty chariots. In front of the right7 wing had been posted the Armenian and Cappadocian cavalry and fifty chariots carrying scythes. The Greek mercenaries7 were stationed on either side of Darius and of the Persian troops with him, exactly opposite the Macedonian phalanx, as they were considered the only troops capable of being a counterpoise to it.
Alexander’s army was marshalled as follows.8 His8 right wing was held by the Companion cavalry, the royal squadron in front; it was commanded by Clitus son of Dropides; in successive order came those of Glaucias, Aristo, Sopolis son of Hermodorus, Heraclides son of Antiochus, Demetrius son of Althaemenes, Meleager and lastly that commanded by Hegelochus son of Hippostratus. The Companion cavalry as a whole was commanded by Philotas son of Parmenio. As for the Macedonian infantry phalanx,9 the agema of the hypaspists was stationed first next the cavalry and then the rest of the hypaspists; they were under Nicanor son of Parmenio; then came successively the battalions of Coenus son of Polemocrates, Perdiccas son of Orontes, Meleager son of Neoptolemus, Polyperchon son of Simmias and Amyntas son of Philip;9 this was led by Simmias, since Amyntas had been sent to Macedonia to collect troops. The left of the Macedonian phalanx was10
7Cf. 7, 1; never mentioned by D. and QC.8Cf. D. 57, 1–4; QC. 13, 26 ff., incomplete extracts from a common source which (i) gave the hypaspists the anachronistic name of silver-shields; (ii) gave the ethnic composition of phalanx battalions (cf. A. 16, 11); (iii) substituted Philip for Simmias as taxiarch.9An error for Andromenes, cf. 16, 10 and often.259