Arrian

μικρὰν τὴν βλάβην ἔσεσθαι ἐς τοῦ πολέμου τὴν
πρώτην δόξαν, τά τε ἄλλα καὶ τοὺς Ἕλληνας
νεωτεριεῖν πρὸς τοῦ ναυτικοῦ πταίσματος τὴν
9ἐξαγγελίαν ἐπαρθέντας. ταῦτα μὲν τῷ λογισμῷ
ξυντιθεὶς οὐκ ἐν καιρῷ ἀπέφαινε ναυμαχεῖν· τὸ
θεῖον δὲ αὐτὸς ἄλλῃ ἐξηγεῖσθαι· εἶναι μὲν γὰρ πρὸς
αὑτοῦ τὸν ἀετόν, ἀλλ᾿ ὅτι ἐπὶ γῇ καθήμενος
ἐφαίνετο, δοκεῖν οἱ μᾶλλόν τι σημαίνειν, ὅτι ἐκ γῆς
κρατήσει τοῦ Περσῶν ναυτικοῦ.
19. Καὶ ἐν τούτῳ Γλαύκιππος, ἀνὴρ τῶν δοκίμων
ἐν Μιλήτῳ, ἐκπεμφθεὶς παρὰ Ἀλέξανδρον
παρὰ τοῦ δήμου τε καὶ τῶν ξένων τῶν μισθοφόρων,
οἷς μᾶλλόν τι ἐπετέτραπτο ἡ πόλις, τά τε τείχη
ἔφη ἐθέλειν τοὺς Μιλησίους καὶ τοὺς λιμένας
παρέχειν κοινοὺς Ἀλεξάνδρῳ καὶ Πέρσαις καὶ τὴν
2πολιορκίαν ἐπὶ τούτοις λύειν ἠξίου. Ἀλέξανδρος
δὲ Γλαυκίππῳ μὲν προστάσσει ἀπαλλάττεσθαι κατὰ
τάχος ἐς τὴν πόλιν καὶ Μιλησίοις ἀπαγγέλλειν
παρασκευάζεσθαι ὡς μαχουμένους ἕωθεν. αὐτὸς δ᾿
ἐπιστήσας τῷ τείχει μηχανάς, καὶ τὰ μὲν καταβαλὼν
δι᾿ ὀλίγου τῶν τειχῶν, τὰ δὲ κατασείσας ἐπὶ
πολὺ προσῆγε τὴν στρατιὰν ὡς ἐπιβησομένους ᾗ
κατερήριπτο ἢ ἐσεσάλευτο τὸ τεῖχος, ἐφομαρτούντων
καὶ μόνον οὐ θεωμένων τῶν Περσῶν ἀπὸ τῆς
Μυκάλης πολιορκουμένους τοὺς φίλους σφῶν καὶ
ξυμμάχους.
3Ἐν τούτῳ δὲ καὶ οἱ ἀμφὶ Νικάνορα ἀπὸ τῆς
Λάδης τὴν ὁρμὴν τῶν ξὺν Ἀλεξάνδρῳ κατιδόντες
ἐς τὸν λιμένα ἐπέπλεον τῶν Μιλησίων παρὰ γῆν τὴν
εἰρεσίαν ποιούμενοι, καὶ κατὰ τὸ στόμα τοῦ
λιμένος, ᾗπερ τὸ στενότατον ἦν, ἀντιπρώρους βύζην
τὰς τριήρεις ὁρμίσαντες ἀποκεκλείκεσαν τῷ μὲν
78Anabasis of Alexander I

if they lost the engagement, it would be a serious 334 b.c. blow to their initial prestige in the war, especially with the Greeks also ready to blaze into revolt at the news of a naval defeat. Adducing these rational9 arguments, he showed that it was no time to fight by sea, and that he interpreted the omen differently: the eagle was indeed on his side but, since it was seen sitting on the land, it rather meant (he thought) that he would beat the Persian fleet from the land.4
19. Meanwhile, Glaucippus, one of the notables of Miletus, was sent to Alexander by the people and the foreign mercenaries to whose care the city had been chiefly entrusted, and declared that the citizens were prepared to open their walls and harbours to Alexander and the Persians in common; he demanded that on these terms he should raise the siege. Alexander, however, ordered Glaucippus to leave2 without delay for the city and tell the Milesians to be ready to fight at dawn. He personally saw to engines being set against the wall and, after knocking down part of the walling for a little way, and shattering it over a great distance, he brought up his force to be ready to go over where the wall had been demolished or shaken, though the Persians from Mycale were close by and all but witnesses of the siege of their friends and allies.
At this point Nicanor’s fleet from Lade, which3 had sighted Alexander’s attack and sailed into the harbour of Miletus, rowing along the coast, jammed their triremes, with prows facing an enemy attack, at the narrowest part of the entrance, and so barred

4Cf. 20, 1.79