Arrian

οὔτε πέμψαι τινὰ Ἀλέξανδρον παρ᾿ αὐτὸν ἐς
βεβαίωσιν τῆς πάλαι οὔσης φιλίας τε καὶ ξυμμαχίας,
διαβῆναί τε ξὺν στρατιᾷ ἐς τὴν Ἀσίαν καὶ
3πολλὰ κακὰ ἐργάσασθαι Πέρσας. τούτου ἕνεκα
καταβῆναι αὐτὸς τῇ χώρᾳ ἀμυνῶν καὶ τὴν ἀρχὴν
τὴν πατρῴαν ἀνασώσων. τὴν μὲν δὴ μάχην ὡς
θεῶν τῳ ἔδοξεν οὕτω κριθῆναι, αὐτὸς δὲ βασιλεὺς
παρὰ βασιλέως γυναῖκά τε τὴν αὑτοῦ αἰτεῖν καὶ
μητέρα καὶ παῖδας τοὺς ἁλόντας, καὶ φιλίαν
ἐθέλειν ποιήσασθαι πρὸς Ἀλέξανδρον καὶ ξύμμαχος
εἶναι Ἀλεξάνδρῳ· καὶ ὑπὲρ τούτων πέμπειν
ἠξίου Ἀλέξανδρον παρ᾿ αὑτὸν ξὺν Μενίσκῳ τε καὶ
Ἀρσίμᾳ τοῖς ἀγγέλοις τοῖς ἐκ Περσῶν ἥκουσι τοὺς
τὰ πιστὰ ληψομένους τε καὶ ὑπὲρ Ἀλεξάνδρου
δώσοντας.
4Πρὸς ταῦτα ἀντιγράφει Ἀλέξανδρος καὶ ξυμπέμπει
τοῖς παρὰ Δαρείου ἐλθοῦσι Θέρσιππον, παραγγείλας
τὴν ἐπιστολὴν δοῦναι Δαρείῳ, αὐτὸν δὲ μὴ
διαλέγεσθαι ὑπὲρ μηδενός. ἡ δὲ ἐπιστολὴ ἡ
Ἀλεξάνδρου ἔχει ὧδε· Οἱ ὑμέτεροι πρόγονοι
ἐλθόντες εἰς Μακεδονίαν καὶ εἰς τὴν ἄλλην Ἑλλάδα
κακῶς ἐποίησαν ἡμᾶς οὐδὲν προηδικημένοι· ἐγὼ
δὲ τῶν Ἑλλήνων ἡγεμὼν κατασταθεὶς καὶ τιμωρήσασθαι
βουλόμενος Πέρσας διέβην ἐς τὴν
5Ἀσίαν, ὑπαρξάντων ὑμῶν. καὶ γὰρ Περινθίοις
ἐβοηθήσατε, οἳ τὸν ἐμὸν πατέρα ἠδίκουν, καὶ εἰς
Θρᾴκην, ἧς ἡμεῖς ἤρχομεν, δύναμιν ἔπεμψεν
Ὦχος. τοῦ δὲ πατρὸς ἀποθανόντος ὑπὸ τῶν
ἐπιβουλευσάντων, οὓς ὑμεῖς συνετάξατε, ὡς αὐτοὶ
ἐν ταῖς ἐπιστολαῖς πρὸς ἅπαντας ἐκομπάσατε, καὶ
Ἀρσῆν ἀποκτείναντός σου μετὰ Βαγώου, καὶ τὴν
ἀρχὴν κατασχόντος οὐ δικαίως οὐδὲ κατὰ τὸν
174Anabasis of Alexander II

time Darius had been King of Persia, Alexander had 332 b.c. sent no envoy to him to confirm the ancient friendship and alliance, but had crossed with an army into Asia and had done great harm to the Persians. That was3 why Darius had come down to defend his country and to rescue his ancestral dominion. The battle had been decided as some god had willed; but as a king he begged a king to restore his captive mother, wife and children; and he was ready to make friendship
and an alliance with Alexander, and for these arrangements he thought it fitting that Alexander should send to him along with Meniscus and Arsimes (the envoys who had come from Persia) persons appointed to exchange pledges.
Alexander wrote a reply and sent Thersippus along4 with Darius’ envoys with instructions to deliver the letter, but not to discuss anything with Darius. This is how Alexander’s letter runs: ‘Your ancestors
invaded Macedonia and the rest of Greece [480–479 b.c.] and did us great harm, though we had done them no prior injury; I have been appointed hegemon of the Greeks, and invaded Asia in the desire to take
vengeance on Persia for your aggressions. For you5 assisted Perinthus, which wronged my father, and Ochus sent a force into Thrace, which was under our rule.4 My father was murdered by conspirators, whom you Persians organized, as you yourselves boasted in your letters to all the world;5 you assassinated Arses with the help of Bagoas, and seized the throne unjustly and in actual contravention


4Introd. n. 65. Nothing is known of an invasion of Thrace.5Introd. 46.175