Arrian

Περδίκκας [μὲν] τοῦ δευτέρου χάρακος εἴσω
παρελθεῖν βιαζόμενος αὐτὸς μὲν βληθεὶς πίπτει
αὐτοῦ καὶ ἀποκομίζεται κακῶς ἔχων ἐπὶ τὸ
στρατόπεδον, καὶ χαλεπῶς διεσώθη ἀπὸ τοῦ
τραύματος· τοὺς μέντοι Θηβαίους ἐς τὴν κοίλην
ὁδὸν τὴν κατὰ τὸ Ἡράκλειον φέρουσαν οἱ ἅμα
αὐτῷ εἰσπεσόντες ὁμοῦ τοῖς παρ᾿ Ἀλεξάνδρου
4τοξόταις συνέκλεισαν. καὶ ἔστε μὲν πρὸς τὸ
Ἡράκλειον ἀναχωροῦσιν εἵποντο τοῖς Θηβαίοις,
ἐντεῦθεν δὲ ἐπιστρεψάντων αὖθις σὺν βοῇ τῶν
Θηβαίων φυγὴ τῶν Μακεδόνων γίγνεται· καὶ
Εὐρυβώτας τε ὁ Κρὴς πίπτει ὁ τοξάρχης καὶ αὐτῶν
τῶν τοξοτῶν ἐς ἑβδομήκοντα· οἱ δὲ λοιποὶ
κατέφυγον πρὸς τὸ ἄγημα τὸ τῶν Μακεδόνων καὶ
5τοὺς ὑπασπιστὰς τοὺς βασιλικούς. κἀν τούτῳ
Ἀλέξανδρος τοὺς μὲν αὑτοῦ φεύγοντας κατιδών,
τοὺς Θηβαίους δὲ λελυκότας ἐν τῇ διώξει τὴν
τάξιν, ἐμβάλλει ἐς αὐτοὺς συντεταγμένῃ τῇ
φάλαγγι· οἱ δὲ ὠθοῦσι τοὺς Θηβαίους εἴσω τῶν
πυλῶν· καὶ τοῖς Θηβαίοις ἐς τοσόνδε ἡ φυγὴ
φοβερὰ ἐγίγνετο, ὥστε διὰ τῶν πυλῶν ὠθούμενοι
ἐς τὴν πόλιν οὐκ ἔφθησαν συγκλεῖσαι τὰς πύλας.
ἀλλὰ συνεσπίπτουσι γὰρ αὐτοῖς εἴσω τοῦ τείχους
ὅσοι τῶν Μακεδόνων ἐγγὺς φευγόντων εἴχοντο, ἅτε
καὶ τῶν τειχῶν διὰ τὰς προφυλακὰς τὰς πολλὰς
6ἐρήμων ὄντων. καὶ παρελθόντες ἐς τὴν Καδμείαν
οἱ μὲν ἐκεῖθεν κατὰ τὸ Ἀμφεῖον σύν τοῖς κατέχουσι
τὴν Καδμείαν ἐξέβαινον ἐς τὴν ἄλλην πόλιν, οἱ δὲ
κατὰ τὰ τείχη, ἐχόμενα ἤδη πρὸς τῶν συνεισπεσόντων
τοῖς φεύγουσιν, ὑπερβάντες ἐς τὴν ἀγορὰν
7δρόμῳ ἐφέροντο. καὶ ὀλίγον μέν τινα χρόνον
ἔμειναν οἱ τεταγμένοι τῶν Θηβαίων κατὰ τὸ
36Anabasis of Alexander I

behind the palisade; but he still retained the agema 335 b.c. and hypaspists outside. Then Perdiccas, trying to force his way into the second palisade, was wounded and fell on the spot; he was borne off to the camp in a serious condition; only with difficulty was he healed of his wound. The troops who had broken in with him along with Alexander’s archers hemmed the Thebans into the sunken road leading down by the Heracleum; so long as the Thebans were in retreat4 towards the Heracleum, the Macedonians followed; but then the Thebans turned at bay with shouting, and the Macedonians took flight. Eurybotas the Cretan, commander of the archers, fell with about seventy of his men; the rest took refuge with the Macedonian agema, and the royal hypaspists. At5 this point Alexander, seeing that his own men were in flight and that the Thebans had broken formation in the pursuit, charged them with phalanx in battle order. The Thebans were pushed inside the gates; their flight became a panic, so that while being thrust through the gates into the city they could not shut them in time. The Macedonians who were pressing on the fugitives passed with them inside the wall; the walls were undefended on account of the large number of advanced posts. Some Macedonians reached the Cadmea and thence6 went along the Ampheum,2 joined by the garrison of the Cadmea, and entered the rest of the city; those on the walls, already held by the troops that had poured in together with the fugitives, crossed over and rushed to the market-place. For a short while7 the Theban armed forces stood their ground by the

2A hill continuing the Cadmea northwards.37