Arrian

καὶ παρὰ τούτων ἔμαθον, ὅτι οὐ πόρρω εἴη
Δαρεῖος ξὺν δυνάμει πολλῇ.
3Βεβοηθήκεσαν γὰρ Δαρείῳ Ἰνδῶν τε ὅσοι
Βακτρίοις ὅμοροι καὶ αὐτοὶ Βάκτριοι καὶ Σογδιανοί·
τούτων μὲν πάντων ἡγεῖτο Βῆσσος ὁ τῆς
Βακτρίων χώρας σατράπης. εἵποντο δὲ αὐτοῖς καὶ
Σάκαι—Σκυθικὸν τοῦτο τὸ γένος τῶν τὴν Ἀσίαν
ἐποικούντων Σκυθῶν—οὐχ ὑπήκοοι οὗτοι Βήσσου,
ἀλλὰ κατὰ συμμαχίαν τὴν Δαρείου· ἡγεῖτο δὲ
αὐτῶν Μαυάκης· αὐτοὶ δὲ ἱπποτοξόται ἦσαν.
4Βαρσαέ<ν>της δὲ Ἀραχωτῶν σατράπης Ἀραχωτούς
τε ἦγε καὶ τοὺς ὀρείους Ἰνδοὺς καλουμένους.
Σατιβαρζάνης δὲ ὁ Ἀρείων σατράπης
Ἀρείους ἦγεν. Παρθυαίους δὲ καὶ Ὑρκανίους καὶ
Τοπείρους,1 τοὺς πάντας ἱππέας, Φραταφέρνης
ἦγεν. Μήδων δὲ ἡγεῖτο Ἀτροπάτης· ξυνετάττοντο
δὲ Μήδοις Καδούσιοί τε καὶ Ἀλβανοὶ καὶ
5Σακεσῖναι. τοὺς δὲ προσοίκους τῇ ἐρυθρᾷ θαλάσσῃ
Ὀροντοβάτης καὶ Ἀριοβαρζάνης καὶ Ὀ<ρ>ξίνης
ἐκόσμουν. Οὔξιοι δὲ καὶ Σουσιανοὶ ἡγεμόνα
παρείχοντο Ὀξάθρην τὸν Ἀβουλίτου. Βουπάρης
δὲ Βαβυλωνίων ἡγεῖτο. οἱ <δ᾿> ἀνάσπαστοι
Κᾶρες καὶ Σιττακηνοὶ σὺν Βαβυλωνίοις ἐτετάχατο.
Ἀρμενίων δὲ Ὀρόντης καὶ Μιθραύστης ἦρχε, καὶ
6Ἀριάκης Καππαδοκῶν. Σύρους δὲ τούς τε ἐκ τῆς



1Perhaps Ταπούρους; the spelling varies in different passages.246Anabasis of Alexander III

mounts. From these they learnt that Darius was 331 b.c. not far off with a large force.1
It was large because Darius had obtained the help3 of those Indians who bordered on the Bactrians, together with the Bactrians and Sogdianians themselves, all under the command of Bessus, the satrap of Bactria. They were joined by Sacae, a Scythian people, belonging to the Scyths who inhabit Asia, who came, not as subjects of Bessus, but on the basis of an alliance with Darius; Mauaces was their commander, and they were mounted archers.2 Barsaentes,4 satrap of the Arachotians, led both the Arachotians and the Indian hillmen, as they were called, Satibarzanes, their satrap, the Areians, Phrataphernes
the Parthyaeans, Hyrcanians and Topeirians, all cavalry, Atropates the Medes; along with the Medes, Cadusians, Albanians and Sacesinians were marshalled. The tribes bordering on the Red Sea5 were directed by Orontobates, Ariobarzanes and Orxines.3 The Uxians and Susianians had Oxathres son of Abulites as commander. Bupares was in command of the Babylonians. The Carians who had been transplanted4 and Sittacenians had been brigaded with the Babylonians. The Armenians were under Orontes and Mithraustes, the Cappadocians under Ariaces. The Syrians of Hollow Syria5 and all6
1QC. iv 10, 9 ff.; in 9, 1–10 and D. 39, 3 f. and 53 we have
some account of Persian mobilization and army movements;
D. 53, 1 says that his troops were given longer swords and
lances to match the Macedonian (cf. A. i 15, 5); QC. 9, 3 refers
to better defensive armour. Perhaps all this applies only to some contingents, cf. A. iii 13, 4; vii 6, 5. For following list cf. 11, 3 n. For troops from the eastern satrapies, separated from west Iran by the Elburz mountains and central Persian desert, and absent in 333 b.c. (QC. iii 2, 9) cf. D. 39, 3; QC. iv 9, 2.2Apparently from the Pamir highlands in Tadzhik, U.S.S.R., not nomad Scyths (Herrmann, RE s.v. Sakai).3QC. 12, 7 f. gives them different commands.4The Persians sometimes transplanted rebellious subjects.5Presumably men who had escaped from Issus.247