Arrian

ἔπλευσαν· κατακομισθέντες δὲ τῆς Τενέδου εἰς τὸν
Βόρειον καλούμενον λιμένα πέμπουσι παρὰ τοὺς
Τενεδίους καὶ κελεύουσι τὰς στήλας τὰς πρὸς
Ἀλέξανδρον καὶ τοὺς Ἕλληνας γενομένας σφίσι,
ταύτας μὲν καθελεῖν, πρὸς Δαρεῖον δὲ ἄγειν τὴν
εἰρήνην, ἣν ἐπὶ Ἀνταλκίδου [Δαρείῳ]1 συνέθεντο.
3Τενεδίοις δὲ τὰ μὲν τῆς εὐνοίας ἐς Ἀλέξανδρόν τε
καὶ τοὺς Ἕλληνας ἐποίει μᾶλλον, ἐν δὲ τῷ παρόντι
ἄπορον ἄλλως ἐδόκει ὅτι μὴ προσχωρήσαντας τοῖς
Πέρσαις σώζεσθαι· ἐπεὶ οὐδὲ Ἡγελόχῳ, ὅτῳ
προσετέτακτο <ὑπ᾿> Ἀλεξάνδρου αὖθις ξυναγαγεῖν
δύναμιν ναυτικήν, τοσαύτη ξυνηγμένη ἦν ὡς δι᾿
ὀλίγου προσδοκᾶν ἔσεσθαι ἄν σφισι παρ᾿ αὐτοῦ
τινα ὠφέλειαν. οὕτω μὲν δὴ οἱ ἀμφὶ Φαρνάβαζον
τοὺς Τενεδίους φόβῳ μᾶλλον ἢ ἐθέλοντας παρεστήσαντο.
4Ἐν δὲ τούτῳ Πρωτέας ὁ Ἀνδρονίκου ἐτύγχανε
μέν ξυναγαγὼν ἐξ Εὐβοίας τε καὶ Πελοποννήσου
ναῦς μακρὰς ὑπὸ Ἀντιπάτρου τεταγμένος, ὡς
εἶναί τινα ταῖς τε νήσοις φυλακὴν καὶ αὐτῇ τῇ
Ἑλλάδι, εἰ, καθάπερ ἐξηγγέλλετο, ἐπιπλέοιεν οἱ
βάρβαροι· πυθόμενος δὲ Δατάμην περὶ Σίφνον
ὁρμεῖν δέκα ναυσίν, αὐτὸς ἔχων πεντεκαίδεκα
νυκτὸς ἀνάγεται ἀπὸ Χαλκίδος τῆς ἐπὶ τῷ
5Εὐρίπῳ· καὶ προσχὼν ἕωθεν Κύθνῳ τῇ νήσῳ τὴν
μὲν ἡμέραν αὐτοῦ αὐλίζεται, ὡς σαφέστερόν τε
διαπυθέσθαι τὰ περὶ τῶν δέκα νεῶν καὶ ἅμα ἐν
νυκτὶ φοβερώτερον προσπεσεῖν τοῖς Φοίνιξιν· ὡς
δὲ ἔμαθε σαφῶς τὸν Δατάμην ξὺν ταῖς ναυσὶν ἐν
Σίφνῳ ὁρμοῦντα, ἐπιπλεύσας ἔτι νυκτὸς ὑπ᾿ αὐτὴν
τὴν ἕω καὶ ἀπροσδοκήτοις ἐπιπεσὼν ὀκτὼ μὲν ναῦς

1Δαρείῳ, see on ch. 1, 4.126Anabasis of Alexander II

hundred sail to Tenedos. They came to port in the333 b.c.
‘north harbour’ of Tenedos and ordered the city to destroy the inscribed pillars of the agreement concluded by Tenedos with Alexander and the Greeks, and to observe the peace of Antalcidas [made with Darius].3 The inclination of Tenedos3
was rather towards Alexander and the Greeks; but at the moment there seemed no hope of safety but in joining the Persians, since Hegelochus, who had received orders from Alexander to re-assemble a fleet, had not raised a force sufficient to make them expect any speedy help from him. It was in this way, rather by terrorism than by their consent, that Pharnabazus brought Tenedos over.
Meanwhile Proteas son of Andronicus had collected4 certain ships of the line from Euboea and the Peloponnese under a commission from Antipater, in order to protect the islands and mainland of Greece, in case, as reports suggested, the Persians descended there. On learning that Datames was anchored near Siphnos with ten ships, he weighed anchor with fifteen sail by night from Chalcis on the Euripus. At dawn he put in at the island of Cythnus,5 and encamped there during the day-time, to get clearer intelligence about the ten ships, and also to attack the Phoenicians, and by night, to create greater alarm. When he found for certain that Datames was anchored with the ships at Siphnos, he sailed there, while it was still night, attacked just at dawn when the enemy were expecting nothing, and

3Cf. ch. 1, 4 n.127