Arrian

μένον τὸν πόρον. καὶ γὰρ καὶ Μαζαῖος, ὅτῳ ἡ
φυλακὴ τοῦ ποταμοῦ ἐκ Δαρείου ἐπετέτραπτο,
ἱππέας μὲν ἔχων περὶ τρισχιλίους, <πεζοὺς
δὲ . . .>1 καὶ τούτων Ἕλληνας μισθοφόρους
δισχιλίους, τέως μὲν αὐτοῦ ἐπὶ τῷ ποταμῷ
2ἐφύλασσε, καὶ ἐπὶ τῷδε οὐ ξυνεχὴς ἡ γέφυρα
ἐζευγμένη ἦν ἔστε ἐπὶ τὴν ἀντιπέρας ὄχθην τοῖς
Μακεδόσι, δειμαίνουσι μὴ ἐπιθοῖντο οἱ ἀμφὶ
Μαζαῖον τῇ γεφύρᾳ ἵνα ἐπαύετο· Μαζαῖος δὲ ὡς
ἤκουσεν ἤδη προσάγοντα Ἀλέξανδρον, ᾤχετο
φεύγων ξὺν τῇ στρατιᾷ πάσῃ. καὶ εὐθὺς ὡς ἔφυγε
Μαζαῖος ἐπεβλήθησαν αἱ γέφυραι τῇ ὄχθῃ τῇ
πέραν καὶ διέβη ἐπ᾿ αὐτῶν ξὺν τῇ στρατιᾷ Ἀλέξανδρος.
3Ἔνθεν δὲ ἐχώρει ἄνω, ἐν ἀριστερᾷ ἔχων τὸν
Εὐφράτην ποταμὸν καὶ τῆς Ἀρμενίας τὰ ὄρη, διὰ
τῆς Μεσοποταμίας καλουμένης χώρας. οὐκ εὐθεῖαν
δὲ ἐπὶ Βαβυλῶνος ἦγεν ἀπὸ τοῦ Εὐφράτου
ὁρμηθείς, ὅτι τὴν ἑτέραν ἰόντι εὐπορώτερα τὰ
ξύμπαντα τῷ στρατῷ ἦν, καὶ χιλὸς τοῖς ἵπποις καὶ
τὰ ἐπιτήδεια ἐκ τῆς χώρας λαμβάνειν καὶ τὸ
4καῦμα οὐχ ὡσαύτως ἐπιφλέγον. ἁλόντες δέ τινες
κατὰ τὴν ὁδὸν τῶν ἀπὸ τοῦ Δαρείου στρατεύματος
κατασκοπῆς ἕνεκα ἀπεσκεδασμένων ἐξήγγειλαν,
ὅτι Δαρεῖος ἐπὶ τοῦ Τίγρητος ποταμοῦ κάθηται
ἐγνωκὼς εἴργειν Ἀλέξανδρον, εἰ διαβαίνοι· καὶ
εἶναι αὐτῷ στρατιὰν πολὺ μείζονα ἢ ξὺν ᾗ ἐν
5Κιλικίᾳ ἐμάχετο. ταῦτα ἀκούσας Ἀλέξανδρος ᾔει
σπουδῇ ὡς ἐπὶ τὸν Τίγρητα. ὡς δὲ ἀφίξετο, οὔτε
αὐτὸν Δαρεῖον καταλαμβάνει οὔτε τὴν φυλακήν,

1πέζους δὲ ?ἴσους Roos.242Anabasis of Alexander III

found the river crossing secured by two bridges. 331 b.c. The fact was that Mazaeus, to whom Darius had entrusted the defence of the river, with about three thousand cavalry and . . . 2 foot, including two thousand Greek mercenaries,3 for some time kept guard over the river, and so the bridge had not been2 completed by the Macedonians right up to the opposite bank, for fear that Mazaeus’ troops would attack the bridge where it stopped short; but on learning that Alexander was already marching up, Mazaeus hurried off with all his forces. As soon as Mazaeus fled, the bridges were carried right over to the far bank and Alexander crossed over them with his army.
Thence he continued inland through the country3 called Mesopotamia, keeping on his left the Euphrates and the mountains of Armenia. On setting out from the Euphrates he did not take the direct route for Babylon, since by going the other road all supplies were easier to obtain for the army, green fodder for the horses and provisions from the country, and the heat was less intense. Some of those who had been4 sent out in different directions from Darius’ army as scouts were captured, and reported that Darius was in position on the River Tigris, determined to check Alexander if he crossed, and that he had a much larger army than that with which he had fought in Cilicia. On hearing this Alexander hurried towards5 the Tigris, but once he arrived there he found neither Darius himself nor the guard which Darius had left


2The figure is lost. QC. gives Mazaeus 6,000 horse, thinks he was to defend Euphrates and then Tigris (sometimes confused, cf. 9, 7 and 9), and to ‘scorch the earth’ (9, 7 f. and 12–14; 10, 12–14), cf. D. 55, 1 relating only to Tigris.3App. VI 2.243