Appendices

the Persian empire from the east, there would have been as little trace of Persian authority after Darius’ death on the Mediterranean coast as there was in the valleys of the Indus and its tributaries.
3. However, just as frequent revolts in the west had at times reduced Persian dominion in the fourth century, so it could have contracted in India. Local rajahs could have made themselves independent, while retaining the official titles conferred by Persia, like later Nizams and Nabobs, or Dukes and Counts in mediaeval Europe. The facts that Al. was at first unaware that the Indus was not the upper Nile, knew nothing of the sea-route to Egypt and gave Nearchus a less venturesome task than Scylax suggest that the Persian nobility at his court were also ignorant of the lower Indus and that the maritime trade between its mouth and Egypt had ceased (cf. vi 1; Ind. 20, 1 and 5; 32). This implies that Sind had been lost since the fifth century. (It is immaterial that Aristotle, Politics 1332b 23 ff., knew about Scylax; we should not suppose that before leaving Macedon Al. took geographical lessons from him about a land he probably never then thought of entering or that he perused Herodotus, and that the stories of his ignorance must be mere inventions.) Again, ‘India’, though the name must have first denoted the Indus plain, had come to mean the country beyond the river, and Eratosthenes held that in Al’s time the Indus was the boundary between India and the Persian empire (Strabo xv 1, 10), while Megasthenes could aver that Alexander was the first to invade India, so defined, since Dionysus and Heracles (Ind. 5, 1–8; 9, 10 f.). This view was certainly propagated
546Appendices

to glorify Al., but it surely implies that there was no memory of Persian dominion beyond the Indus. It seems to me a mere fantasy to think that Al’s men mutinied on the Hyphasis, because they did not wish to proceed beyond the Persian frontiers, and consented to return home by the mouth of the Indus, because they would still be within its confines: they were war-weary, and probably deluded into thinking this the easiest route; legalistic considerations would not have operated. And it flouts all the evidence to assume that Al. himself now merely sought to complete the conquest of the Persian empire. Beyond the Indus, in his own estimation, he was already going further.
547