Arrian

Ἰβήρων τιμώμενον Ἡρακλέα, ἵνα καὶ στῆλαί τινες
Ἡρακλέους ὠνομασμέναι εἰσί, δοκῶ ἐγὼ τὸν
Τύριον εἶναι Ἡρακλέα, ὅτι Φοινίκων κτίσμα ἡ
Ταρτησσὸς καὶ τῷ Φοινίκων νόμῳ ὅ τε νεὼς
πεποίηται τῷ Ἡρακλεῖ τῷ ἐκεῖ καὶ αἱ θυσίαι
5θύονται. Γηρυόνην δέ, ἐφ᾿ ὅντινα ὁ Ἀργεῖος
Ἡρακλῆς ἐστάλη πρὸς Εὐρυσθέως τὰς βοῦς
ἀπελάσαι τὰς Γηρυόνου καὶ ἀγαγεῖν ἐς Μυκήνας,
οὐδέν τι προσήκειν τῇ γῇ τῇ Ἰβήρων Ἑκαταῖος ὁ
λογοποιὸς λέγει, οὐδὲ ἐπὶ νῆσόν τινα Ἐρύθειαν
<τῆς> ἔξω τῆς μεγάλης θαλάσσης σταλῆναι
Ἡρακλέα, ἀλλὰ τῆς ἠπείρου τῆς περὶ Ἀμπρακίαν
τε καὶ Ἀμφιλόχους βασιλέα γενέσθαι Γηρυόνην
καὶ ἐκ τῆς ἠπείρου ταύτης ἀπελάσαι Ἡρακλέα τὰς
6βοῦς, οὐδὲ τοῦτον φαῦλον ἆθλον τιθέμενον. οἶδα
δὲ ἐγὼ καὶ εἰς τοῦτο ἔτι εὔβοτον τὴν ἤπειρον
ταύτην καὶ βοῦς τρέφουσαν καλλίστας· καὶ ἐς
Εὐρυσθέα τῶν μὲν ἐξ Ἠπείρου βοῶν κλέος
ἀφῖχθαι καὶ τοῦ βασιλέως τῆς Ἠπείρου τὸ ὄνομα
τὸν Γηρυόνην οὐκ ἔξω τοῦ εἰκότος τίθεμαι· τῶν δὲ
ἐσχάτων τῆς Εὐρώπης Ἰβήρων οὔτ᾿ ἂν τοῦ βασιλέως
τὸ ὄνομα γιγνώσκειν Εὐρυσθέα, οὔτε εἰ βοῦς
καλαὶ ἐν τῇ χώρᾳ ταύτῃ νέμονται, εἰ μή τις τὴν
Ἥραν τούτοις ἐπάγων, ὡς αὐτὴν ταῦτα Ἡρακλεῖ
δι᾿ Εὐρυσθέως ἐπαγγέλλουσαν, τὸ οὐ πιστὸν τοῦ
λόγου ἀποκρύπτειν ἐθέλοι τῷ μύθῳ.
7Τούτῳ τῷ Ἡρακλεῖ τῷ Τυρίῳ ἔφη ἐθέλειν
θῦσαι Ἀλέξανδρος. ὡς δὲ ἀπηγγέλθη ταῦτα πρὸς
τῶν πρέσβεων εἰς τὴν Τύρον, τὰ μὲν ἄλλα ἔδοξέ
σφισι ποιεῖν ὅ τι περ ἐπαγγέλλοι Ἀλέξανδρος, ἐς


182Anabasis of Alexander II

Iberians at Tartessus, where certain Pillars have 332 b.c. also been named after him, is the Tyrian Heracles, since Tartessus is a Phoenician foundation3 and it is in the Phoenician style that the temple of Heracles there has been built and that the sacrifices are offered. Moreover, Geryones against whom the Argive Heracles5 was sent by Eurystheus, to drive off his oxen and bring them to Mycenae, has no connection with Iberia according to Hecataeus the historian4; nor in his view was Heracles sent to an island, Erytheia, beyond the Great Sea, but Geryones was king of the mainland in the region of Ambracia and the Amphilochi, and it was from this mainland here that Heracles drove off the oxen; and that was in itself no mean prize-task that he set himself either. What6 I do know5 is that this part of the mainland is capital pasture to this very day and rears excellent oxen; and I reckon it quite likely that the fame of these mainland oxen reached Eurystheus together with the name of the king of the mainland, Geryones; but I feel sure that Eurystheus would not have known the name of the king of the Iberians, right at the ends of Europe, nor whether there were fine cattle in those parts, unless anyone cares to bring in Hera and suppose that she passed on the news of them to Heracles through Eurystheus, and so to veil the unlikeliness of the tale with legend.6
It was to this Tyrian Heracles that Alexander said7 he wished to sacrifice. When this was announced at Tyre by the envoys, the Tyrians decided to obey




3This Iberian kingdom in south Spain was often confused in Roman times with the Phoenician colony of Gades (e.g. Sallust, Histories ii 5; Cicero, de senectute 69), which had a famous temple of Heracles (Melkarth).4Jacoby no. 1, F. 26. H. flourished c. 500 b.c.5Presumably from autopsy.6A. does not question but rationalizes the old legends.183