Arrian

ἀκροβολισμὸς παρ᾿ ἑκατέρων ἦν, οἱ Τριβαλλοὶ οὐ
μεῖον εἶχον· ὡς δὲ ἥ τε φάλαγξ πυκνὴ ἐνέβαλλεν ἐς
αὐτοὺς ἐρρωμένως καὶ οἱ ἱππεῖς οὐκ ἀκοντισμῷ
ἔτι, ἀλλ᾿ αὐτοῖς τοῖς ἵπποις ὠθοῦντες ἄλλῃ καὶ
ἄλλῃ προσέπιπτον, τότε δὴ ἐτράπησαν διὰ τοῦ
7νάπους εἰς τὸν ποταμόν. καὶ ἀποθνήσκουσι μὲν
τρισχίλιοι ἐν τῇ φυγῇ, ζῶντες δὲ ὀλίγοι καὶ τούτων
ἐλήφθησαν, ὅτι ὕλη τε δασεῖα πρὸ τοῦ ποταμοῦ ἦν
καὶ νὺξ ἐπιγενομένη τὴν ἀκρίβειαν τῆς διώξεως
ἀφείλετο τοὺς Μακεδόνας. αὐτῶν δὲ Μακεδόνων
τελευτῆσαι λέγει Πτολεμαῖος ἱππέας μὲν ἕνδεκα,
πεζοὺς δὲ ἀμφὶ τοὺς τεσσαράκοντα.
3. Ἀπὸ δὲ τῆς μάχης τριταῖος ἀφικνεῖται Ἀλέξανδρος
ἐπὶ τὸν ποταμὸν τὸν Ἴστρον, ποταμῶν
τῶν κατὰ τὴν Εὐρώπην μέγιστον ὄντα καὶ πλείστην
γῆν ἐπερχόμενον καὶ ἔθνη μαχιμώτατα ἀπείργοντα,
τὰ μὲν πολλὰ Κελτικά, ὅθεν γε καὶ αἱ
πηγαὶ αὐτῷ ἀνίσχουσιν, ὧν τελευταίους Κουάδους
2καὶ Μαρκομάνους· ἐπὶ δὲ Σαυροματῶν μοῖραν,
Ἰάζυγας· ἐπὶ δὲ Γέτας τοὺς ἀπαθανατίζοντας·
ἐπὶ δὲ Σαυρομάτας τοὺς πολλούς· ἐπὶ δὲ Σκύθας
ἔστε ἐπὶ τὰς ἐκβολάς, ἵνα ἐκδιδοῖ κατὰ πέντε
3στόματα ἐς τὸν Εὔξεινον πόντον. ἐνταῦθα καταλαμβάνει
αὐτῷ ἡκούσας ναῦς μακρὰς ἐκ Βυζαντίου
διὰ τοῦ πόντου τοῦ Εὐξείνου κατὰ τὸν ποταμόν.
ταύτας ἐμπλήσας τοξοτῶν τε καὶ ὁπλιτῶν τῇ νήσῳ
ἐπέπλει, ἵνα οἱ Τριβαλλοί τε καὶ οἱ Θρᾷκες
ξυμπεφευγότες ἦσαν, καὶ ἐπειρᾶτο βιάζεσθαι τὴν



12Anabasis of Alexander I

battle was still at long range, the Triballians did not 335 b.c. have the worst of it, but when the phalanx in close formation charged them in full force and the cavalry, no longer shooting, but actually thrusting them with their horses, fell on them here, there and everywhere, they turned in flight through the glen to the river. Three thousand perished in the flight, but7 only a few were captured alive, as the wood in front of the river was dense, and as nightfall prevented the Macedonians from any thorough pursuit. Of the Macedonians, according to Ptolemy, eleven cavalrymen and about forty foot-soldiers were killed.2
3. On the third day after the battle Alexander reached the Ister, the greatest river of Europe, traversing the greatest tract of country and acting as a barrier to the most warlike tribes, Celts for the most part1—its springs rising in Celtic territory; the farthest of these peoples are the Quadi and Marcomanni; then it passes the Iazyges, a branch of2 the Sauromatae, the Getae who call themselves immortals,2 most of the Sauromatae, and the Scythians down to the outlets, where it runs through five mouths into the Black Sea. There Alexander3 found at the mouth of the river warships come to join him from Byzantium through the Black Sea. He manned them with archers and hoplites and sailed against the island where the Triballians and Thracians had taken refuge, and attempted to force



1An explanatory note by A. The Quadi and Marcomanni were important in his time, not Al’s. They were German, the Getae Thracian; ‘Celts’ often has no precise ethnic or linguistic significance for Greeks, but denotes northern barbarians, sometimes Germans, though Ephorus (Jacoby no. 70 F. 30) in the fourth century put Celts in the western extremity of the world, Scythians in the north; the last term is used indifferently of all nomads.2Belief in immortality: Herodotus iv 93 f.13