Arrian
ΒΙΒΛΙΟΝ ΔΕΥΤΕΡΟΝ
1. Ἐκ δὲ τούτου Μέμνων τοῦ τε ναυτικοῦ
παντὸς ἡγεμὼν ἐκ βασιλέως Δαρείου καθεστηκὼς
καὶ τῆς παραλίου ξυμπάσης, ὡς ἐς Μακεδονίαν τε
καὶ τὴν Ἑλλάδα ἀποστρέψων τὸν πόλεμον, Χίον
μὲν λαμβάνει προδοσίᾳ ἐνδοθεῖσαν, ἔνθεν δὲ ἐπὶ
Λέσβου πλεύσας, ὡς οὐ προσεῖχον αὐτῷ οἱ
Μιτυληναῖοι, τὰς ἄλλας πόλεις τῆς Λέσβου προσηγάγετο.
2ταύτας δὲ παραστησάμενος καὶ προσχὼν
τῇ Μιτυλήνῃ τὴν μὲν πόλιν χάρακι διπλῷ ἐκ
θαλάσσης ἐς θάλασσαν ἀπετείχισε, στρατόπεδα δὲ
πέντε ἐποικοδομησάμενος τῆς γῆς ἐκράτει οὐ
χαλεπῶς. καὶ μέρος μέν τι τῶν νεῶν τὸν λιμένα
αὐτῶν ἐφύλασσε, τὰς δὲ ἐπὶ τὴν ἄκραν τῆς Λέσβου
τὸ Σίγριον, ἵνα ἡ προσβολὴ μάλιστά ἐστι ταῖς ἀπό
τε Χίου καὶ ἀπὸ Γεραιστοῦ καὶ Μαλέας ὁλκάσιν,
ἀποστείλας τὸν παράπλουν ἐν φυλακῇ εἶχεν, ὡς μή
τινα ὠφέλειαν κατὰ θάλασσαν γίγνεσθαι τοῖς
3Μιτυληναίοις. καὶ ἐν τούτῳ αὐτὸς μὲν νόσῳ
τελευτᾷ, καὶ εἴπερ τι ἄλλο καὶ τοῦτο ἐν τῷ τότε
ἔβλαψε τὰ βασιλέως πράγματα. Αὐτοφραδάτης δὲ
καὶ Φαρνάβαζος ὁ Ἀρταβάζου, ὅτῳ καὶ ἐπέτρεψε
τελευτῶν ὁ Μέμνων τὴν αὑτοῦ ἀρχὴν ἔστε Δαρεῖόν
τι ὑπὲρ αὐτῆς γνῶναι, ἀδελφιδῷ αὑτοῦ ὄντι, οὗτοι
4τῇ πολιορκίᾳ οὐκ ἀρρώστως προσέκειντο. καὶ οἱ
Μιτυληναῖοι τῆς τε γῆς εἰργόμενοι καὶ ἀπὸ θαλάσσης
πολλαῖς ναυσὶν ἐφορμούσαις φρουρούμενοι
πέμψαντες παρὰ τὸν Φαρνάβαζον ὁμολογίας ἐποιήσαντο,
τοὺς μὲν ξένους τοὺς παρ᾿ Ἀλεξάνδρου
122Anabasis of Alexander II


Book II
1. Subsequently Memnon, who had been appointed333 b.c. by Darius commander-in-chief of the whole navy and all the coast, sought to divert the war into Macedonia and Greece,1 and captured Chios, delivered over by treachery; thence he sailed to Lesbos, and though Mitylene did not adhere to him, he won over the remaining cities of Lesbos. After securing2 their support, he put in at Mitylene, fenced off the city by a double stockade from sea to sea, built up five camps and had no trouble in mastering its territory. While part of his fleet guarded the Mitylenean harbour, other ships were despatched to Sigrium, the promontory of Lesbos, where cargo vessels from Chios and Geraistus and Malea usually approach, and so guarded the sea-route, to prevent help coming to Mitylene by sea. While thus engaged, Memnon3 fell ill and died, the severest blow during this period to the Persian cause. But the blockade was vigorously carried on by Autophradates and Pharnabazus son of Artabazus, to whom, as his nephew, Memnon handed over his command at death, pending Darius’ decision on the matter. As the people of4
Mitylene were kept out of their land and guarded on the seaward side by many ships anchored offshore, they sent to Pharnabazus, and made an agreement to send away the mercenaries whom Alexander had

1For chs. 1 and 2 see generally Appendix II.123