Arrian

οὗτοι ἐς τὸ στρατόπεδον τὸ Ἀριοβαρζάνου ἔφυγον,
ἀλλ᾿ αὐτόθεν ὡς εἶχον ἐς τὰ ὄρη πεφοβημένοι,
ὥστε ἔλαθεν ὑπὸ τὴν ἕω ἐπιπεσὼν τῷ στρατοπέδῳ
τῶν πολεμίων. καὶ ἅμα μὲν προσέβαλλε τῇ τάφρῳ,
ἅμα δὲ αἱ σάλπιγγες ἐσήμαινον τοῖς ἀμφὶ Κρατερόν,
8καὶ Κρατερὸς προσῆγε τῷ προτειχίσματι. οἱ
πολέμιοι δὲ πάντοθεν ἀμφίβολοι γιγνόμενοι οὐδὲ ἐς
χεῖρας ἐλθόντες ἔφυγον, ἀλλὰ πανταχόθεν γὰρ
εἴργοντο, τῇ μὲν Ἀλεξάνδρου ἐπικειμένου, ἄλλῃ δὲ
τῶν ἀμφὶ Κρατερὸν παραθεόντων, ὥστε ἠναγκάσθησαν
οἱ πολλοὶ αὐτῶν ἐς τὰ τείχη ἀποστρέψαντες
φεύγειν· εἴχετο δὲ καὶ τὰ τείχη πρὸς τῶν Μακεδόνων
9ἤδη. Ἀλέξανδρος γὰρ τοῦτο αὐτὸ ὅπερ
ξυνέβη ὑποτοπήσας Πτολεμαῖον ἀπολελοίπει αὐτοῦ,
ἔχοντα τῶν πεζῶν ἐς τρισχιλίους, ὥστε οἱ μὲν
πλεῖστοι τῶν βαρβάρων ἐν χερσὶ πρὸς τῶν Μακεδόνων
κατεκόπησαν, οἱ δὲ καὶ ἐν τῇ φυγῇ φοβερᾷ
γενομένῃ κατὰ τῶν κρημνῶν ῥίψαντες ἀπώλοντο·
αὐτὸς δὲ ὁ Ἀριοβαρζάνης ξὺν ὀλίγοις ἱππεῦσιν ἐς
τὰ ὄρη ἀπέφυγεν.
10Ἀλέξανδρος δὲ σπουδῇ αὖθις ἦγεν ὡς ἐπὶ τὸν
ποταμὸν καὶ καταλαμβάνει ἤδη πεποιημένην ἐπ᾿
αὐτοῦ γέφυραν καὶ διαβαίνει ξὺν τῇ στρατιᾷ
εὐπετῶς. ἐντεῦθεν δὲ αὖθις σπουδῇ ἤλαυνεν ἐς
Πέρσας, ὥ<σ>τε ἔφθη ἀφικέσθαι πρὶν τὰ χρήματα
διαρπάσασθαι τοὺς φύλακας. ἔλαβε δὲ καὶ τὰ ἐν
Πασαργάδαις χρήματα ἐν τοῖς Κύρου τοῦ πρώτου
11θησαυροῖς. σατράπην μὲν δὴ Περσῶν κατέστησε
Φρασαόρτην τὸν Ῥεομίθρου παῖδα· τὰ βασίλεια δὲ
τὰ Περσικὰ ἐνέπρησε, Παρμενίωνος σώζειν ξυμβουλεύοντος,


286Anabasis of Alexander III

yet even they did not flee to Ariobarzanes’ camp, but 330 b.c. ran in terror from the spot just as they were to the mountains, so that he had not been observed by the time he assaulted the enemy’s camp about dawn. At the same moment as he attacked the trench, the bugles sounded, notifying Craterus’ troops, and Craterus assaulted the wall. So the enemy were8 caught on all sides, never so much as came to blows, and took to flight; but as they were hemmed in from all quarters, Alexander pressing on one side, Craterus’ troops hastening up on the other, most of them were forced to turn back to the walls for refuge. However, by this time the walls themselves were in Macedonian hands, for Alexander had surmised what actually9 happened, and had left Ptolemy8 there with some three thousand infantry, so that most of the Persians were cut down by the Macedonians at close quarters, while the others threw themselves over the cliffs in their flight, when it became a panic, and perished; Ariobarzanes himself escaped with a handful of horsemen to the hills.9
Once again Alexander marched at full speed to the10 river, found the bridge there already constructed and crossed with his army without difficulty. Thence he hurried on again towards Persia10 and arrived there before the garrison had plundered the treasure. He also captured the treasure which had been at Pasargadae in the treasury of Cyrus the First.11 He appointed11 Phrasaortes the son of Rheomithras satrap of Persia. He set the Persian palace on fire, though Parmenio urged him to preserve it, arguing, among



8See iii 29, 6 n.9QC. 4, 33 ff. gives him 5,000 men and makes him try to seize Persepolis and die fighting its garrison, but cf. A. iii 23, 7.10Persepolis. See App. X for what follows.11559–529 b.c.287