Arrian

ἐπὶ βασιλέα Ἀρτοξέρξην καὶ τὰ Κλεάρχου τε καὶ
τῶν ἅμα αὐτῷ ἁλόντων παθήματα καὶ ἡ κατάβασις
αὐτῶν ἐκείνων, ἣν Ξενοφῶν αὐτοὺς κατήγαγε, πολύ
τι ἐπιφανέστερα ἐς ἀνθρώπους Ξενοφῶντος ἕνεκά
ἐστιν ἢ Ἀλέξανδρός τε καὶ τὰ Ἀλεξάνδρου
4ἔργα. καίτοι Ἀλέξανδρος οὔτε ξὺν ἄλλῳ ἐστράτευσεν,
οὔτε φεύγων μέγαν βασιλέα τοὺς τῇ
καθόδῳ τῇ ἐπὶ θάλασσαν ἐμποδὼν γιγνομένους
ἐκράτησεν· ἀλλ᾿ οὐκ ἔστιν ὅστις ἄλλος εἷς ἀνὴρ
τοσαῦτα ἢ τηλικαῦτα ἔργα κατὰ πλῆθος ἢ μέγεθος
ἐν Ἕλλησιν ἢ βαρβάροις ἀπεδείξατο. ἔνθεν καὶ
αὐτὸς ὁρμηθῆναί φημι ἐς τήνδε τὴν ξυγγραφήν, οὐκ
ἀπαξιώσας ἐμαυτὸν φανερὰ καταστήσειν ἐς ἀνθρώπους
5τὰ Ἀλεξάνδρου ἔργα. ὅστις δὲ ὢν ταῦτα
ὑπὲρ ἐμαυτοῦ γιγνώσκω, τὸ μὲν ὄνομα οὐδὲν
δέομαι ἀναγράψαι, οὐδὲ γὰρ οὐδὲ ἄγνωστον ἐς
ἀνθρώπους ἐστίν, οὐδὲ πατρίδα ἥτις μοί ἐστιν οὐδὲ
γένος τὸ ἐμόν, οὐδὲ εἰ δή τινα ἀρχὴν ἐν τῇ ἐμαυτοῦ
ἦρξα· ἀλλ᾿ ἐκεῖνο ἀναγράφω, ὅτι ἐμοὶ πατρίς τε
καὶ γένος καὶ ἀρχαὶ οἵδε οἱ λόγοι εἰσί τε καὶ ἀπὸ
νέου ἔτι ἐγένοντο. καὶ ἐπὶ τῷδε οὐκ ἀπαξιῶ
ἐμαυτὸν τῶν πρώτων ἐν τῇ φωνῇ τῇ Ἑλλάδι, εἴπερ
οὖν καὶ Ἀλέξανδρον τῶν ἐν τοῖς ὅπλοις.
6Ἐξ Ἰλίου δὲ ἐς Ἀρίσβην ἧκεν, οὗ πᾶσα ἡ
δύναμις αὐτῷ διαβεβηκυῖα τὸν Ἑλλήσποντον
ἐστρατοπεδεύκει, καὶ τῇ ὑστεραίᾳ ἐς Περκώτην·
τῇ δὲ ἄλλῃ Λάμψακον παραμείψας πρὸς τῷ
Πρακτίῳ1 ποταμῷ ἐστρατοπέδευσεν, ὃς ῥέων ἐκ
τῶν ὀρῶν τῶν Ἰδαίων ἐκδιδοῖ ἐς θάλασσαν τὴν
μεταξὺ τοῦ Ἑλλησπόντου τε καὶ τοῦ Εὐξείνου
πόντου. ἔνθεν δὲ ἐς Ἕρμωτον ἀφίκετο, Κολωνὰς

1Freinsheim; προσακτίῳ A: παρ᾿ ἀκτήν Lane Fox 515.52Anabasis of Alexander I

the march up into Asia of the Ten Thousand with 334 b.c. Cyrus against King Artaxerxes, the sufferings of Clearchus and those captured with him, and the descent to the sea of those Ten Thousand under the leadership of Xenophon, are, thanks to Xenophon, far better known to the world than Alexander and Alexander’s exploits. Yet Alexander did not take4 the field in another’s army; he did not flee from the Great King, defeating only those who tried to stop the march down to the sea; no other single man performed such remarkable deeds, whether in number or magnitude, among either Greeks or barbarians. That, I declare, is why I myself have embarked on this history, not judging myself unworthy to make Alexander’s deeds known to men. Whoever I may be, this I know in my favour; I need5 not write my name, for it is not at all unknown among men, nor my country nor my family nor any office I may have held in my own land; this I do set on paper, that country, family, and offices I find and have found from my youth in these tales. That is why I think myself not unworthy of the masters of Greek speech, since my subject Alexander was among the masters of warfare.4
From Ilium Alexander came to Arisbe, where his6 whole force had encamped after crossing the Hellespont; next day to Percote, the next he passed Lampsacus and camped by the river Practius, which flows from Mount Ida and runs into the sea that lies between the Hellespont and the Black Sea. Then he reached Hermotus, passing by Colonae.

4I shall discuss this in an Appendix on A’s career in vol. II. For the striking and strange language (derived from Iliad vi 429 f.) cf. Aelius Aristides xxxiii 20; I owe these references to E. Bowie.53