Arrian

πλεόντων ἡμῶν τὴν θάλασσαν καὶ Κύπρου ἅμα
προσγενομένης θαλασσοκρατοῖμέν τε ἂν βεβαίως
καὶ ὁ ἐς Αἴγυπτον στόλος εὐμαρῶς ἡμῖν ἐν ταὐτῷ
γίγνεται. Αἴγυπτον δὲ παραστησαμένοις ὑπέρ τε
τῆς Ἑλλάδος καὶ τῆς οἰκείας οὐδὲν ἔτι ὕποπτον
ὑπολείπεται, τόν τε ἐπὶ Βαβυλῶνος στόλον μετὰ
τοῦ ἐς τὰ οἴκοι ἀσφαλοῦς καὶ ξὺν μείζονι ἅμα
ἀξιώσει ποιησόμεθα ἀποτετμημένοι τήν τε θάλασσαν
Περσῶν ξύμπασαν καὶ τὴν ἐπὶ τάδε τοῦ
Εὐφράτου γῆν.
18. Ταῦτα λέγων οὐ χαλεπῶς ἔπειθεν ἐπιχειρεῖν
τῇ Τύρῳ· καί τι καὶ θεῖον ἀνέπειθεν αὐτόν, ὅτι
ἐνύπνιον αὐτῆς ἐκείνης τῆς νυκτὸς ἐδόκει αὐτὸς μὲν
τῷ τείχει προσάγειν τῶν Τυρίων, τὸν δὲ Ἡρακλέα
δεξιοῦσθαί τε αὐτὸν καὶ ἀνάγειν ἐς τὴν πόλιν. καὶ
τοῦτο ἐξηγεῖτο Ἀρίστανδρος ὡς ξὺν πόνῳ ἁλωσομένην
τὴν Τύρον, ὅτι καὶ τὰ τοῦ Ἡρακλέους ἔργα
ξὺν πόνῳ ἐγένετο. καὶ γὰρ καὶ μέγα ἔργον τῆς
2Τύρου ἡ πολιορκία ἐφαίνετο. νῆσός τε γὰρ αὐτοῖς
ἡ πόλις ἦν καὶ τείχεσιν ὑψηλοῖς πάντῃ ὠχύρωτο·
καὶ τὰ ἀπὸ θαλάσσης πρὸς τῶν Τυρίων μᾶλλόν τι
ἐν τῷ τότε ἐφαίνετο, τῶν τε Περσῶν ἔτι θαλασσοκρατούντων
καὶ αὐτοῖς τοῖς Τυρίοις νεῶν ἔτι
πολλῶν περιουσῶν.
3Ὡς δὲ ταῦτα ὅμως ἐκράτησε, χῶμα ἔγνω
χωννύναι ἐκ τῆς ἠπείρου ὡς ἐπὶ τὴν πόλιν. ἔστι
δὲ πορθμὸς τεναγώδης τὸ χωρίον καὶ τὰ μὲν πρὸς
τῇ ἠπείρῳ τῆς θαλάσσης βραχέα καὶ πηλώδη
αὐτοῦ, τὰ δὲ πρὸς αὐτῇ τῇ πόλει, ἵνα τὸ βαθύτατον



186Anabasis of Alexander II

our Macedonian ships, and the Phoenician, and with 332 b.c.
Cyprus ours as well, we should hold the sea-power securely, and our expedition to Egypt would be easy on the very same account. But once we have brought Egypt over, we shall have no cause of
uneasiness for Greece and our own home, and we shall make the expedition to Babylon, with safety at home as well as enhanced prestige, with the whole sea and all the country this side of Euphrates cut off from Persia.’
18. With these words Alexander easily won over his staff to the attack on Tyre. In some degree an omen influenced him, for in a dream that very night he found himself approaching the wall of Tyre, and there was Heracles, stretching out his right hand, and conducting him into the city. Aristander interpreted this dream to mean that Tyre would be taken, but with an effort, for Heracles’ achievements involved effort.1 The fact is that the siege of Tyre was manifestly a large task.2 The city was an2 island, and had been fortified all round with high walls; and at that time the advantage by sea apparently lay with Tyre, as the Persians were still supreme at sea and the Tyrians also still had many ships available.
But as Alexander’s arguments, none the less, won3 the day, he decided to build a mole from the mainland to the city.3 The place is one where people cross over shoal-water; it has shallows and patches of mud towards the mainland; next to the city itself where


1QC. iv 2, 17; P. 24, 3 put this later in the siege.2It lasted 6 or 7 months, D. 46, 5; QC. iv 4, 9; P. 24, 3, c. Feb.–Aug. 332 b.c., cf. 24, 6 n. For its course cf. D. 40–46; QC. iv 2–4; P. 24 f. Al’s artillery: Marsden (cf. i 20, 8 n.), esp. 61 f. 102 f. Plan: Fuller 209.3Four stades, D. 40, 4; QC 2, 6.187