Arrian

νυκτὸς καὶ τῆς ἐπὶ ταύτῃ ἡμέρας ἔστε ἐπὶ μεσημβρίαν
ἀφικνεῖται ἔς τινα κώμην, ἵνα τῇ προτεραίᾳ
7ἐστρατοπεδεύκεσαν οἱ Δαρεῖον ἄγοντες. ἐνταῦθα
ἀκούσας ὅτι νυκτὸς ποιεῖσθαι τὴν πορείαν ἐγνωσμένον
εἴη τοῖς βαρβάροις, ἤλεγχε τοὺς προσχώρους,
εἰ δή τινα εἰδεῖεν ἐπιτομωτέραν ὁδὸν ἐπὶ τοὺς
φεύγοντας. οἱ δὲ εἰδέναι μὲν ἔφασαν, ἐρήμην δὲ
εἶναι τὴν ὁδὸν δι᾿ ἀνυδρίαν. ὁ δὲ ταύτην ἄγειν
ἐκέλευσε· καὶ γνοὺς ὅτι οὐχ ἕψονται οἱ πεζοὶ αὐτῷ
σπουδῇ ἐλαύνοντι τῶν μὲν ἱππέων ἐς πεντακοσίους
κατεβίβασεν ἀπὸ τῶν ἵππων, τοὺς ἡγεμόνας δὲ
τῶν πεζῶν καὶ τῶν ἄλλων ἐπιλεξάμενος τοὺς
κρατιστεύοντας ἐπιβῆναι τῶν ἵππων ἐκέλευσεν
8οὕτως ὅπως οἱ πεζοὶ ὡπλισμένοι ἦσαν. Νικάνορα
δὲ τὸν τῶν ὑπασπιστῶν ἡγεμόνα καὶ Ἄτταλον τὸν
τῶν Ἀγριάνων κατὰ τὴν ὁδόν, ἥντινα οἱ ἀμφὶ
Βῆσσον προὐκεχωρήκεσαν, τοὺς ὑπολειφθέντας
ἄγειν ἐκέλευσε, καὶ τούτους ὡς κουφότατα ἐσταλμένους,
τοὺς δὲ ἄλλους πεζοὺς ἐν τάξει ἕπεσθαι.
9αὐτὸς δὲ ἀμφὶ δείλην ἄγειν ἀρξάμενος δρόμῳ
ἡγεῖτο· διελθὼν δὲ τῆς νυκτὸς σταδίους ἐς τετρακοσίους
ὑπὸ τὴν ἕω ἐπιτυγχάνει τοῖς βαρβάροις
ἀτάκτως ἰοῦσι καὶ ἀνόπλοις, ὥστε ὀλίγοι μέν τινες
αὐτῶν ὡς ἀμυνούμενοι ὥρμησαν, οἱ δὲ πολλοὶ εὐθὺς
ὡς Ἀλέξανδρον αὐτὸν κατεῖδον οὐδὲ ἐς χεῖρας
ἐλθόντες ἔφευγον· καὶ οἱ τραπέντες ἐς ἀλκὴν
10ὀλίγων πεσόντων καὶ οὗτοι ἔφυγον. Βῆσσος δὲ
καὶ οἱ ξὺν αὐτῷ τέως μὲν ἐφ᾿ ἁρμαμάξης Δαρεῖον
μετὰ σφῶν ἐκόμιζον· ὡς δὲ ὁμοῦ ἤδη ἦν Ἀλέξανδρος,
Δαρεῖον μὲν Σατιβαρζάνης καὶ Βαρσαέντης
κατατρώσαντες αὐτοῦ ἀπέλιπον, αὐτοὶ δὲ
ἔφυγον ξὺν ἱππεῦσιν ἑξακοσίοις. Δαρεῖος δὲ ἀποθνήσκει
298Anabasis of Alexander III

accomplishing a great distance during the night and 330 b.c. the following day till noon, he reached a village where the party with Darius had bivouacked the day before. As he heard there that the barbarians had7 determined to travel by night, he asked the inhabitants whether they knew of any short cut to get to the fugitives. They replied that they did, but that the road was desolate for lack of water. He told them to guide him along this road, and seeing that his infantry would not keep up with him if he pushed on at full speed, he dismounted some five hundred horsemen, selected from the officers of the infantry and the rest those who had best kept up their strength, and ordered them to mount the horses, carrying their usual infantry arms. Nicanor the8 commander of the hypaspists, and Attalus commander of the Agrianians, were ordered to lead the men who were left behind along the road already taken by Bessus and his party with the lightest possible equipment, and the rest of the infantry were to follow in ordinary formation. Alexander then9 started off himself at evening, and led his troops on at full speed; during the night he covered up to four hundred stades, and just at dawn came upon the Persians marching in disorder without arms, so that only a few of them attempted resistance; as soon as they saw Alexander himself, most of them did not even wait to come to close quarters but took to flight; those who did turn to make a fight of it also fled on losing a few of their number. For a time Bessus and10 his immediate followers continued to convey Darius with them in the closed waggon; but when Alexander was right upon them, Satibarzanes and Barsaentes wounded Darius, left him where he was and escaped themselves with six hundred horsemen.
299