Appendices

pages’ conspiracy. The first event is placed by QC. viii 1, 19 ff. at Maracanda just after the retirement of Artabazus (cf. A. 16, 3; 17, 3), to whom in his account Clitus was designated successor, and before Al. wintered at Nautaca (viii 2, 13–19, cf. A. 13, 3; 18, 1), sc. in 328/327, i.e. over a year after the point at which A. chooses to recount it. The second and third he puts after the measures described by A. in 22, 1 (cf. QC. viii 5, 2); and in fact A. 22, 2 confirms that the pages’ conspiracy occurred then, i.e. at Bactra in the later part of that winter, 328—327. In QC. too (viii 5 ff.) the pages’ conspiracy follows immediately on Callisthenes’ objection to proscynesis, but Clitus’ murder was clearly several months earlier. Adopting (as usual) a logical rather than a temporal order, P. connects the three incidents not only with each other but also with the prior execution of Philotas, for his purpose is to illustrate the king’s tendency to behave despotically and the resistance it aroused; the Philotas affair itself is recounted immediately after particulars have been given of Al’s Orientalizing measures, even including his later marriage to Roxane (47, 4). The table of contents of D. xvii shows that he too described the death of Callisthenes immediately after that of Clitus and before other incidents which intervened temporally. And A. makes roughly the same kind of links. Yet his order is normally chronological. Why did he change it?
4. Little in these chapters comes from his main sources. Ar’s account of the death of Clitus is cited (8, 9), but it was clearly unsatisfactory, as it did not make clear ‘the origin of the drinking bout’, naturally enough, as Ar. was at pains to deny that
534Appendices

Al. was given to hard drinking, quite implausibly (vii 29, 4 n.), and to explain away another all-night sitting (iv 13, 5). Ar. gave a part in the affair to Ptolemy (different from that in QC. viii 1, 48), but A. does not cite Pt. to confirm or refute it, and presumably found nothing of it in Pt. Indeed the main account in 8, 1–8, is in oratio obliqua throughout after λέγουσι in 8, 2. Now it is evident that the writers in question do not include Ar., in view of the reference to Al’s ‘barbaric’ drinking habits (ibid.), and the suggestion that when he writes ‘they say’ Arrian means ‘Pt. says’ ought not to receive any consideration. The whole account in 8, 1–8, like that of A’s conduct after the murder (9, 2–4, 7 ff.), must then come from the ‘vulgate’; at most 9, 5 should be from Pt. or Ar. or both, and if from Pt., he may simply have reported that Clitus was killed with no circumstantial details, except that it was the result of Al’s failure to pay Dionysus due reverence, a failure he duly made good; for a similar reticence cf. ii 3, 8 n. (Ephippus fr. 3, in a quite different context, traced the wrath of Dionysus back to the destruction of Thebes; that shows how the same motiv could be adapted by different writers.) For an apologist the best course was to say as little as possible. Again, A’s whole account of proscynesis is certainly from the ‘vulgate’. Even when we come to the pages’ plot (para 11 f.), its origin (in Al’s arbitrary behaviour) is taken from ‘a prevalent story’; what the main sources told was simply that the conspirators, including Callisthenes, were detected and punished; they did not record Hermolaus’ defence (14, 2), which in the ‘vulgate’ contained bitter criticisms of Al., and by their silence on Callisthenes’ resistance to proscynesis, they obviously hoped to
535