Arrian

πανταχόθεν βαλλομένους τοὺς Τυρίους ἐν τῷ δεινῷ
ἀμφιβόλους γίγνεσθαι.
4Ὡς δὲ αἵ τε νῆες αἱ σὺν Ἀλεξάνδρῳ προσέσχον
τῇ πόλει καὶ αἱ γέφυραι ἐπεβλήθησαν τῷ τείχει
ἀπ᾿ αὐτῶν, ἐνταῦθα οἱ ὑπασπισταὶ εὐρώστως κατὰ
ταύτας ἀνέβαινον ἐπὶ τὸ τεῖχος. ὅ τε γὰρ Ἄδμητος
ἀνὴρ ἀγαθὸς ἐν τῷ τότε ἐγένετο καὶ ἅμα Ἀλέξανδρος
εἵπετο αὐτοῖς, τοῦ τε ἔργου αὐτοῦ καρτερῶς
ἁπτόμενος καὶ θεατὴς τῶν ἄλλων ὅτῳ τι λαμπρὸν
5κατ᾿ ἀρετὴν ἐν τῷ κινδύνῳ ἐτολμᾶτο. καὶ ταύτῃ
πρῶτον ᾗ ἐπετέτακτο Ἀλέξανδρος ἐλήφθη τὸ
τεῖχος, οὐ χαλεπῶς ἀποκρουσθέντων ἀπ᾿ αὐτοῦ
τῶν Τυρίων, ἐπειδὴ πρῶτον βεβαίῳ τε καὶ ἅμα οὐ
πάντῃ ἀποτόμῳ τῇ προσβάσει ἐχρήσαντο οἱ Μακεδόνες.
καὶ Ἄδμητος μὲν πρῶτος ἐπιβὰς τοῦ
τείχους καὶ τοῖς ἀμφ᾿ αὑτὸν ἐγκελευόμενος ἐπιβαίνειν
6βληθεὶς λόγχῃ ἀποθνήσκει αὐτοῦ· ἐπὶ δὲ αὐτῷ
Ἀλέξανδρος ἔσχε τὸ τεῖχος ξὺν τοῖς ἑταίροις. ὡς
δὲ εἴχοντο αὐτῷ πύργοι τε ἔστιν οἳ καὶ μεταπύργια,
αὐτὸς μὲν παρῄει διὰ τῶν ἐπάλξεων ὡς ἐπὶ τὰ
βασίλεια, ὅτι ταύτῃ εὐπορωτέρα ἐφαίνετο ἐς τὴν
πόλιν ἡ κάθοδος.
24. Οἱ δὲ ἐπὶ τῶν νεῶν, οἵ τε Φοίνικες κατὰ τὸν
λιμένα τὸν πρὸς Αἰγύπτου, καθ᾿ ὅνπερ καὶ ἐφορμοῦντες
ἐτύγχανον, βιασάμενοι καὶ τὰ κλεῖθρα
διασπάσαντες ἔκοπτον τὰς ναῦς ἐν τῷ λιμένι, ταῖς
μὲν μετεώροις ἐμβάλλοντες, τὰς δὲ ἐς τὴν γῆν
ἐξωθοῦντες, καὶ οἱ Κύπριοι κατὰ τὸν ἄλλον λιμένα
τὸν ἐκ Σιδῶνος φέροντα οὐδὲ κλεῖθρον τοῦτόν γε
ἔχοντα εἰσπλεύσαντες εἷλον εὐθὺς ταύτῃ τὴν πόλιν.
2τὸ δὲ πλῆθος τῶν Τυρίων τὸ μὲν τεῖχος, ὡς
ἐχόμενον εἶδον, ἐκλείπουσιν, ἀθροισθέντες δὲ κατὰ
206Anabasis of Alexander II

fire from all sides and not know where to turn in the 332 b.c. crisis.
As soon as Alexander’s ships closed upon the city4 and the gangways were let down on the wall from them, the hypaspists went down them gallantly on to the wall; Admetus then showed his courage and Alexander too was there with them, taking a strenuous part in the action itself and keeping his eyes open for any conspicuous display of courage, and daring by others in the danger. The part of the5 wall captured first was, in fact, that where Alexander had posted himself; the Tyrians were easily pushed off it, since for the first time the Macedonians had access that was secure and not absolutely sheer. Admetus, first on the wall, was wounded by a spear while calling on his men to mount, and died there;3 Alexander followed him and seized the wall with6 the Companions. When some of the towers and the curtains between them were in his possession, he passed on through the battlements towards the royal quarters; this way it appeared that descent into the city was easier.
24. To turn to the ships and their crews, the Phoenicians who were moored near the harbour facing Egypt, forcing their way and tearing asunder the booms, battered the ships in the harbour, ramming
some afloat, and driving others ashore; the Cyprians by the other harbour in the direction of Sidon, which did not even have a boom, sailed in and at once captured the city on this side. The main2 body of the Tyrians deserted the wall when they saw

3D. 45, 6 kills off Admetus earlier in the siege.207