Arrian

Σογδιανῶν ξυμπεφευγέναι αὐτῷ ἐξηγγέλλετο· καὶ
ἡ Ὀξυάρτου δὲ γυνὴ τοῦ Βακτρίου καὶ αἱ παῖδες αἱ
Ὀξυάρτου ἐς τὴν πέτραν ταύτην ξυμπεφευγέναι
ἐλέγοντο, Ὀξυάρτου αὐτὰς ὡς ἐς ἀνάλωτον δῆθεν
τὸ χωρίον ἐκεῖνο ὑπεκθεμένου, ὅτι καὶ αὐτὸς
ἀφειστήκει ἀπ᾿ Ἀλεξάνδρου. ταύτης γὰρ ἐξαιρεθείσης
οὐκέτι οὐδὲν ὑπολειφθήσεσθαι ἐδόκει τῶν
5Σογδιανῶν τοῖς νεωτερίζειν ἐθέλουσιν. ὡς δὲ
ἐπέλασαν τῇ πέτρᾳ, καταλαμβάνει πάντῃ ἀπότομον
ἐς τὴν προσβολὴν σιτία τε ξυγκεκομισμένους τοὺς
βαρβάρους ὡς ἐς χρόνιον πολιορκίαν. καὶ χιὼν
πολλὴ ἐπιπεσοῦσα τήν τε πρόσβασιν ἀπορωτέραν
ἐποίει τοῖς Μακεδόσι καὶ ἅμα ἐν ἀφθονίᾳ ὕδατος
τοὺς βαρβάρους διῆγεν. ἀλλὰ καὶ ὣς προσβάλλειν
6ἐδόκει τῷ χωρίῳ. καὶ γάρ τι καὶ ὑπέρογκον ὑπὸ
τῶν βαρβάρων λεχθὲν ἐς φιλοτιμίαν ξὺν ὀργῇ
ἐμβεβλήκει Ἀλέξανδρον. προκληθέντες γὰρ ἐς
ξύμβασιν καὶ προτεινομένου σφίσιν, ὅτι σώοις
ὑπάρξει ἐπὶ τὰ σφέτερα ἀπαλλαγῆναι παραδοῦσι τὸ
χωρίον, οἱ δὲ σὺν γέλωτι βαρβαρίζοντες πτηνοὺς
ἐκέλευον ζητεῖν στρατιώτας Ἀλέξανδρον, οἵτινες
αὐτῷ ἐξαιρήσουσι τὸ ὄρος, ὡς τῶν γε ἄλλων
7ἀνθρώπων οὐδεμίαν ὤραν σφίσιν οὖσαν. ἔνθα δὴ
ἐκήρυξεν Ἀλέξανδρος τῷ μὲν πρώτῳ ἀναβάντι
δώδεκα τάλαντα εἶναι τὸ γέρας, δευτέρῳ δὲ ἐπὶ
τούτῳ τὰ δεύτερα καὶ τρίτῳ τὰ ἐφεξῆς, ὡς τελευταῖον
εἶναι τῷ τελευταίῳ ἀνελθόντι τριακοσίους
δαρεικοὺς τὸ γέρας. καὶ τοῦτο τὸ κήρυγμα
παρώξυνεν ἔτι μᾶλλον καὶ ἄλλως τοὺς Μακεδόνας
ὡρμημένους.
19. Ξυνταξάμενοι δὴ ὅσοι πετροβατεῖν ἐν ταῖς
πολιορκίαις αὐτῷ μεμελετήκεσαν, ἐς τριακοσίους
400Anabasis Of Alexander IV

where, he was told, many of the Sogdianians had fled 327 b.c. for refuge; the wife of Oxyartes the Bactrian and his daughters were also said to have taken refuge on this rock, Oxyartes having put them there out of the way in a place he thought impregnable at the time of his own revolt from Alexander. Once this rock had been taken, Alexander thought that the Sogdianians who were ready to revolt would have no further recourse left. But when they approached the rock, Alexander5 found that it was sheer on all sides against attack, and that the tribesmen had stored provisions there for a long siege; a deep fall of snow made the approach more impracticable for the Macedonians, while it assured the tribesmen of abundant water. Yet even so Alexander decided to assault the place. A boastful remark by the barbarians had contributed6 to Alexander’s passionate pursuit of the glory of success; when summoned to make terms, which were offered on the basis that they would be allowed to go safe to their homes if they gave up the position, they told Alexander with barbaric laughter to look for soldiers with wings to capture the mountain for him, since no other men would give them any concern. Then Alexander proclaimed that the first to scale the7 height should have a prize of twelve Talents, the second a second prize, the third another prize and so on, the last to reach the top to have three hundred darics.4 Eager as the Macedonians already were, this proclamation still further increased their ardour.
19. So then when all had mustered who had practised rock-climbing in their previous sieges,

4Persian gold coins.401