Arrian

καὶ βωμοὺς ἱδρύσασθαι ὅθεν τε ἐστάλη ἐκ τῆς
Εὐρώπης καὶ ὅπου ἐξέβη τῆς Ἀσίας Διὸς ἀποβατηρίου
καὶ Ἀθηνᾶς καὶ Ἡρακλέους. ἀνελθόντα
δὲ ἐς Ἴλιον τῇ τε Ἀθηνᾷ θῦσαι τῇ Ἰλιάδι, καὶ τὴν
πανοπλίαν τὴν αὑτοῦ ἀναθεῖναι ἐς τὸν νεών, καὶ
καθελεῖν ἀντὶ ταύτης τῶν ἱερῶν τινα ὅπλων ἔτι ἐκ
8τοῦ Τρωικοῦ ἔργου σωζόμενα. καὶ ταῦτα λέγουσιν
ὅτι οἱ ὑπασπισταὶ ἔφερον πρὸ αὐτοῦ ἐς τὰς μάχας.
θῦσαι δὲ αὐτὸν καὶ Πριάμῳ ἐπὶ τοῦ βωμοῦ τοῦ
Διὸς τοῦ Ἑρκείου λόγος κατέχει, μῆνιν Πριάμου
παραιτούμενον τῷ Νεοπτολέμου γένει, ὃ δὴ ἐς
αὐτὸν καθῆκεν.
12. Ἀνιόντα δ᾿ αὐτὸν ἐς Ἴλιον Μενοίτιός τε ὁ
κυβερνήτης χρυσῷ στεφάνῳ ἐστεφάνωσε καὶ ἐπὶ
τούτῳ Χάρης ὁ Ἀθηναῖος ἐκ Σιγείου ἐλθὼν καί
τινες καὶ ἄλλοι, οἱ μὲν Ἕλληνες, οἱ δὲ ἐπιχώριοι·
. . . οἱ δὲ, ὅτι καὶ τὸν Ἀχιλλέως ἄρα τάφον
ἐστεφάνωσεν· Ἡφαιστίωνα δὲ λέγουσιν ὅτι τοῦ
Πατρόκλου τὸν τάφον ἐστεφάνωσε· καὶ εὐδαιμόνισεν
ἄρα, ὡς λόγος, Ἀλέξανδρος Ἀχιλλέα, ὅτι
2Ὁμήρου κήρυκος ἐς τὴν ἔπειτα μνήμην ἔτυχε. καὶ
μέντοι καὶ ἦν Ἀλεξάνδρῳ οὐχ ἥκιστα τούτου
ἕνεκα εὐδαιμονιστέος Ἀχιλλεύς, ὅτι αὐτῷ γε
Ἀλεξάνδρῳ, οὐ κατὰ τὴν ἄλλην ἐπιτυχίαν, τὸ
χωρίον τοῦτο ἐκλιπὲς ξυνέβη οὐδὲ ἐξηνέχθη ἐς
ἀνθρώπους τὰ Ἀλεξάνδρου ἔργα ἐπαξίως, οὔτ᾿ οὖν
καταλογάδην, οὔτε τις ἐν μέτρῳ ἐποίησεν· ἀλλ᾿
οὐδὲ ἐν μέλει ᾔσθη Ἀλέξανδρος, ἐν ὅτῳ Ἱέρων τε
καὶ Γέλων καὶ Θήρων καὶ πολλοὶ ἄλλοι οὐδέν τι
Ἀλεξάνδρῳ ἐπεοικότες, ὥστε πολὺ μεῖον γιγνώσκεται
τὰ Ἀλεξάνδρου ἢ τὰ φαυλότατα τῶν πάλαι
3ἔργων· ὁπότε καὶ ἡ τῶν μυρίων ξὺν Κύρῳ ἄνοδος
50Anabasis of Alexander I

that he set up altars both where he started 334 b.c. from Europe and where he landed in Asia to Zeus of Safe Landings, Athena, and Heracles, and that he then went up to Troy, and sacrificed to the Trojan Athena, dedicated his full armour in the temple, and took down in its place some of the dedicated arms yet remaining from the Trojan war, which, it is said,8 the hypaspists henceforth used to carry before him into battle. Then he sacrificed also to Priam at the altar of Zeus of Enclosures (so runs the story), praying Priam not to vent his anger on the race of Neoptolemus, of which he himself was a scion.
12. When Alexander reached Troy Menoetius the pilot crowned him with a golden wreath and then Chares the Athenian1 arrived from Sigeum with others, Greeks or natives of the place . . .2 Some say that Alexander crowned the tomb of Achilles, while Hephaestion, others say, placed a wreath on Patroclus’ tomb; and Alexander, so the story goes, blessed Achilles for having Homer to proclaim his fame to posterity.3 Alexander might well have2 counted Achilles happy on this score, since, fortunate as Alexander was in other ways, there was a great gap left here, and Alexander’s exploits were never celebrated as they deserved, either in prose or verse; there were not even choral lyrics for Alexander as for Hiero, Gelo, Thero and many others not to be compared with him, so that Alexander’s exploits are far less known than very minor deeds of old times. Why,3
1The Athenian general, earlier (10, 4) and later (iii 2, 6) hostile.2The text has a lacuna.3‘Vulgate’, as often with variant versions; A’s own reflections follow. (Hephaestion was Al’s most intimate friend.)51