Arrian

Περσῶν νόμον, ἀλλὰ ἀδικοῦντος Πέρσας, καὶ ὑπὲρ
ἐμοῦ πρὸς τοὺς Ἕλληνας γράμματα οὐκ ἐπιτήδεια
6διαπέμποντος, ὅπως πρός με πολεμῶσι, καὶ
χρήματα ἀποστέλλοντος πρὸς Λακεδαιμονίους καὶ
ἄλλους τινὰς τῶν Ἑλλήνων, καὶ τῶν μὲν ἄλλων
πόλεων οὐδεμιᾶς δεχομένης, Λακεδαιμονίων δὲ
λαβόντων, καὶ τῶν παρὰ σοῦ πεμφθέντων τοὺς
ἐμοὺς φίλους διαφθειράντων καὶ τὴν εἰρήνην, ἣν
τοῖς Ἕλλησι κατεσκεύασα, διαλύειν ἐπιχειρούντων,
ἐστράτευσα ἐπὶ σὲ ὑπάρξαντος σοῦ τῆς ἔχθρας.
7ἐπεὶ δὲ μάχῃ νενίκηκα πρότερον μὲν τοὺς σοὺς
στρατηγοὺς καὶ σατράπας, νῦν δὲ σὲ καὶ τὴν μετὰ
σοῦ δύναμιν, καὶ τὴν χώραν ἔχω τῶν θεῶν μοι
δόντων, ὅσοι τῶν μετὰ σοῦ παραταξαμένων μὴ ἐν
τῇ μάχῃ ἀπέθανον, ἀλλὰ παρ᾿ ἐμὲ κατέφυγον,
τούτων ἐπιμέλομαι καὶ οὐκ ἄκοντες παρ᾿ ἐμοί
εἰσιν, ἀλλὰ αὐτοὶ ἑκόντες ξυστρατεύονται μετ᾿
8ἐμοῦ. ὡς οὖν ἐμοῦ τῆς Ἀσίας ἁπάσης κυρίου
ὄντος ἧκε πρὸς ἐμέ. εἰ δὲ φοβῇ μὴ ἐλθὼν πάθῃς
τι ἐξ ἐμοῦ ἄχαρι, πέμπε τινὰς τῶν φίλων τὰ πιστὰ
ληψομένους. ἐλθὼν δὲ πρός με τὴν μητέρα καὶ τὴν
γυναῖκα καὶ τοὺς παῖδας καὶ εἰ ἄλλο τι θέλεις αἴτει
καὶ λάμβανε. ὅ τι γὰρ ἂν πείθῃς ἐμὲ ἔσται σοι.
9καὶ τοῦ λοιποῦ ὅταν πέμπῃς παρ᾿ ἐμέ, ὡς πρὸς
βασιλέα τῆς Ἀσίας πέμπε, μηδὲ [ἃ] ἐξ ἴσου
ἐπίστελλε, ἀλλ᾿ ὡς κυρίῳ ὄντι πάντων τῶν σῶν
φράζε εἴ του δέῃ· εἰ δὲ μή, ἐγὼ βουλεύσομαι περὶ
σοῦ ὡς ἀδικοῦντος. εἰ δ᾿ ἀντιλέγεις περὶ τῆς
βασιλείας, ὑπομείνας ἔτι ἀγώνισαι περὶ αὐτῆς καὶ
μὴ φεῦγε, ὡς ἐγὼ ἐπὶ σὲ πορεύομαι οὗ ἂν ᾖς.
15. Πρὸς μὲν Δαρεῖον ταῦτ᾿ ἐπέστειλεν. ἐπεὶ δ᾿
ἔμαθεν τά τε χρήματα ὅσα σὺν Κωφῆνι τῷ
176Anabasis of Alexander II

of Persian law, doing wrong to Persians; 332 b.c. you sent unfriendly letters to the Greeks about me,6 urging them to make war on me. You despatched sums of money to the Lacedaemonians and certain other Greeks, which no other city accepted but the Lacedaemonians. Your envoys destroyed my friends and sought to destroy the peace I had established in Greece.6 Although I marched against you, it was you that started the quarrel. As I have conquered7 in battle first your generals and satraps, and now yourself and your own force, and am in possession of the country by the gift of heaven, I hold myself responsible for all of your troops who did not die in the field but took refuge with me; they are with me of their own free will, and voluntarily serve in my army. You must then regard me as8 Lord of all Asia and come to me. If you fear that by coming you may receive some harm at my hands, send some of your friends to receive pledges. Ask for your mother, wife and children and what you will, when you have come, and you will receive them. You shall have whatever you persuade me to give. And in future when you send to me, make your9 addresses to the king of Asia,7 and do not correspond as an equal, but tell me, as lord of all your possessions, what you need; otherwise I shall make plans to deal with you as a wrongdoer. But if you claim the kingship, stand your ground and fight for it and do not flee, as I shall pursue you wherever you are.’
15. This was Alexander’s letter to Darius.1 When he learned that the moneys Darius had sent with



6Persian attempts to foster Greek resistance to Macedon all seem to be later than Philip’s invasion!7QC. iv 1, 7 and 13 f. with different details.1All this is apparently from A’s main source.177