Arrian

ὡς ἐξηγγέλθη Ἀλεξάνδρῳ, τοῦ μὲν διώκειν ἔτι
ἀπετράπετο, ἐπιστρέψας δὲ ξὺν τῇ ἵππῳ τῶν
ἑταίρων ὡς ἐπὶ τὸ δεξιὸν τῶν βαρβάρων ἦγε
δρόμῳ. καὶ πρῶτα μὲν τοῖς φεύγουσι τῶν πολεμίων
ἱππεῦσι, τοῖς τε Παρθυαίοις καὶ τῶν Ἰνδῶν
ἔστιν οἷς καὶ Πέρσαις τοῖς πλείστοις καὶ κρατίστοις
2ἐμβάλλει. καὶ ἱππομαχία αὕτη καρτερωτάτη τοῦ
παντὸς ἔργου ξυνέστη. ἐς βάθος τε γὰρ οἷα δὴ
ἰληδὸν τεταγμένοι ἀνέστρεφον οἱ βάρβαροι καὶ
ἀντιμέτωποι τοῖς ἀμφ᾿ Ἀλέξανδρον ξυμπεσόντες
οὔτε ἀκοντισμῷ ἔτι οὔτ᾿ ἐξελιγμοῖς τῶν ἵππων,
ἥπερ ἱππομαχίας δίκη, ἐχρῶντο, ἀλλὰ διεκπαῖσαι
πᾶς τις τὸ καθ᾿ αὑτόν, ὡς μόνην ταύτην σωτηρίαν
σφίσιν οὖσαν, ἐπειγόμενοι ἔκοπτόν τε καὶ ἐκόπτοντο
ἀφειδῶς, οἷα δὴ οὐχ ὑπὲρ νίκης ἀλλοτρίας ἔτι,
ἀλλ᾿ ὑπὲρ σωτηρίας οἰκείας ἀγωνιζόμενοι. καὶ
ἐνταῦθα πίπτουσι μὲν ἀμφὶ ἑξήκοντα τῶν ἑταίρων
τοῦ Ἀλεξάνδρου, καὶ τιτρώσκεται Ἡφαιστίων τε
αὐτὸς καὶ Κοῖνος καὶ Μενίδας· ἀλλὰ ἐκράτησε καὶ
τούτων Ἀλέξανδρος.
3Καὶ τούτων μὲν ὅσοι διεξέπαισαν διὰ τῶν ἀμφ᾿
Ἀλέξανδρον ἔφευγον ἀνὰ κράτος· Ἀλέξανδρος δὲ
ἐγγὺς ἦν προσμῖξαι ἤδη τῷ δεξιῷ κέρατι τῶν
πολεμίων. καὶ ἐν τούτῳ οἱ Θεσσαλοὶ ἱππεῖς
λαμπρῶς ἀγωνισάμενοι οὐχ ὑπελείποντο Ἀλεξάνδρῳ
τοῦ ἔργου· ἀλλὰ ἔφευγον γὰρ ἤδη οἱ ἀπὸ
τοῦ δεξιοῦ κέρως τῶν βαρβάρων, ὁπότε Ἀλέξανδρος
αὐτοῖς ξυνέμιξεν, ὥστε ἀποτραπόμενος
Ἀλέξανδρος ἐς τὸ διώκειν αὖθις Δαρεῖον ἐξώρμησε·
4καὶ ἐδίωξεν ἔστε φάος ἦν· καὶ οἱ ἀμφὶ Παρμενίωνα
τὸ καθ᾿ αὑτοὺς διώκοντες εἵποντο. ἀλλὰ
Ἀλέξανδρος μὲν διαβὰς τὸν ποταμὸν τὸν Λύκον
270Anabasis of Alexander III

this message, Alexander turned back from further 331 b.c. pursuit, and wheeling round with the Companion cavalry, came galloping down on the Persian right and charged first the enemy cavalry in flight, the Parthyaeans, some Indians and the Persians, the most numerous and best of the enemy forces. This proved2 the fiercest cavalry engagement of the whole action. The barbarians, who were drawn up in depth, since they were in squadrons, rallied, and clashed with Alexander’s troops front to front: there was no more javelin-throwing and no manoeuvring of horses, as usual in a cavalry engagement, but each strove hard to break his own way through; they kept on giving and taking blows unsparingly, treating this as the one hope of safety, inasmuch as they were men now no longer fighting for another’s victory, but for their own very lives. There about sixty of the Companions of Alexander fell, and Hephaestion himself, Coenus and Menidas were wounded. Still, Alexander overcame these enemies also.
Those of the Persians who broke their way through3 Alexander’s troops took to headlong flight, and Alexander was now ready to come to blows with the enemy’s right wing. Meanwhile the Thessalian cavalry, who fought brilliantly, showed no inferiority to Alexander in the action; in fact the barbarian right were already in flight when Alexander encountered them. So Alexander turned away and resumed his pursuit of Darius, which lasted as long as the light held; and Parmenio’s troops followed,4 pursuing their opponents. However, when Alexander had crossed the river Lycus,1 he encamped there,

1Greater Zab. Cf. D. 61, 1 f.; QC iv 16, 7 ff.; v 1, 3–10 for Darius’ flight and the pursuit to Arbela.271