Appendices
Appendix VII
The site of thapsacus
E. W. Marsden, Campaign of Gaugamela 81, with map and bibliographical references, observes that Thapsacus has been located anywhere between Jerablus and Deir ez Zor on the Euphrates; he prefers Sura without excluding somewhere near Meskene (which Strabo xvi 1, 13 might naturally suggest), but contra W. J. Farrell, JHS 1961, 153 ff., rejects Jerablus as inconsistent with our information about Al’s march. I can see no inconsistency; the railway from the coast of Phoenicia to Mosul crosses the Euphrates at Jerablus, and if Al., having presumably read the account in Xen. Anab, i 5 of the difficulty of marching towards Babylon down the left bank of the Euphrates, had decided in advance to take the Tigris route (cf. A. iii 7, 3), it would have been rational to march north as far as Jerablus. On this hypothesis it is much easier to see why A. could say (ibid.) that from the time he crossed the river he had on his left the Euphrates (sc. after its eastward bend to the north) and the Armenian mountains. Furthermore, after Issus, Darius was in a hurry to put the river between Al. and himself, but he crossed at Thapsacus, coming south from the Amanid Pass (ii 13, 1). It is hard to see why he should have deferred a crossing not only until the bend of the river near Meskene but for another 60 miles thereafter. Similarly in 401 Jerablus was the nearest crossing for Cyrus to make for from the Syrian Gates, and it also fits well with the information in Ar. ap. A. vii 19, 3; Strabo xvi 3, 3 that shipbuilding materials
486Appendices

and other cargoes could be shipped down- or upstream to Thapsacus whence they were conveyed by portage to or from the coast. However the bend of the river near Meskene cannot be ruled out; Sura by contrast seems too far east.
Appendix VIII
Geographical and chronological questions 333–326 b.c.
1. A., and sometimes QC. and D., may tell us that Al. marched from one point to another in so many days, or that he covered so many stades. These bits of information are recorded irregularly, and one bit is sometimes in one author, one in another. It is apparent that they are unmethodically excerpting from a much fuller body of material in their own sources, such as Pt. If we reject the hypothesis that Pt. or other historians writing after Al’s death had access to ‘royal journals’ (Introd. 14), data of this kind must have come to them in turn from some other contemporary source. Callisthenes may have recorded such data, but his history broke off early. Probably they used the records of the ‘bematists’, who accompanied Al. (cf. Tod 188), measured routes by bemata or paces (Pliny, Natural History vi 61), and published reports under the title of Stathmoi (Stages), which also contained descriptions of lands that Al. visited or merely heard of. These descriptions were not free from inventions and fables, but no doubt the Stathmoi were fairly accurate about Al’s actual
487