Arrian
3Ἀλλὰ καὶ ὣς Ἀλέξανδρος ἥπτετο τοῦ ἔργου·
οὕτως πάντα ᾤετο χρῆναι βατά τε αὑτῷ καὶ
ἐξαιρετέα εἶναι, ἐς τοσόνδε τόλμης τε καὶ εὐτυχίας
προκεχωρήκει. τέμνων δὴ τὰς ἐλάτας (πολλαὶ γὰρ
καὶ ὑπερύψηλοι ἐλάται ἦσαν ἐν κύκλῳ τοῦ ὄρους)
κλίμακας ἐκ τούτων ἐποίει, ὡς κάθοδον εἶναι ἐς τὴν
φάραγγα τῇ στρατιᾷ· οὐ γὰρ ἦν ἄλλως κατελθεῖν
4ἐς αὐτήν. καὶ τὰς μὲν ἡμέρας αὐτὸς Ἀλέξανδρος
ἐφειστήκει τῷ ἔργῳ τὸ ἥμισυ τοῦ στρατοῦ ἔχων
ἐργαζόμενον, τὰς δὲ νύκτας ἐν μέρει οἱ σωματοφύλακες
αὐτῷ εἰργάζοντο, Περδίκκας τε καὶ Λεοννάτος
καὶ Πτολεμαῖος ὁ Λάγου, τῷ λοιπῷ μέρει
τῆς στρατιᾶς τριχῇ διανενεμημένῳ, ὅπερ αὐτῷ ἐς
τὴν νύκτα ἀπετέτακτο. ἤνυτον δὲ τῆς ἡμέρας οὐ
πλέον ἤπερ εἴκοσι πήχεις καὶ τῆς νυκτὸς ὀλίγον
ἀποδέον, καίτοι ξυμπάσης τῆς στρατιᾶς ἐργαζομένης·
οὕτω τό τε χωρίον ἄπορον ἦν καὶ τὸ ἔργον
5ἐν αὐτῷ χαλεπόν. κατιόντες δ᾿ ἐς τὴν φάραγγα
πασσάλους κατεπήγνυον ἐς τὸ ὀξύτατον τῆς
φάραγγος, διέχοντας ἀλλήλων ὅσον ξύμμετρον πρὸς
ἰσχύν τε καὶ ξυνοχὴν τῶν ἐπιβαλλομένων. ἐπέβαλλον
δὲ πλέγματα ἐκ λύγων εἰς γεφύρας μάλιστα
ἰδέαν, καὶ ταῦτα ξυνδοῦντες χοῦν ἄνωθεν ἐπεφόρουν,
ὡς ἐξ ὁμαλοῦ γίγνεσθαι τῇ στρατιᾷ τὴν
πρόσοδον τὴν πρὸς τὴν πέτραν.
6Οἱ δὲ βάρβαροι τὰ μὲν πρῶτα κατεφρόνουν ὡς
ἀπόρου πάντῃ τοῦ ἐγχειρήματος· ὡς δὲ τοξεύματα
ἤδη ἐς τὴν πέτραν ἐξικνεῖτο καὶ αὐτοὶ ἀδύνατοι
ἦσαν ἄνωθεν ἐξείργειν τοὺς Μακεδόνας (ἐπεποίητο
γὰρ αὐτοῖς προκαλύμματα πρὸς τὰ βέλη, ὡς ὑπ᾿
αὐτοῖς ἀβλαβῶς ἐργάζεσθαι) ἐκπλαγεὶς ὁ Χοριήνης
πρὸς τὰ γιγνόμενα κήρυκα πέμπει πρὸς Ἀλέξανδρον,
408Anabasis Of Alexander IV
Even so, Alexander took the work in hand, as he3 327 b.c thought that no place should be beyond him to get up to and capture, to such a point of daring and success had he advanced.3 So he felled the pines (for there were many tall pines all round the mountain) and made ladders of them, to enable the army to descend into the ravine, as there was no other means to get down. By day Alexander himself4 superintended the operations, keeping half his army at work; by night his bodyguards worked in relays, Perdiccas, Leonnatus and Ptolemy son of Lagus, with the rest of the army, divided into three sections, which he had assigned for the night work. By daytime they could not complete more than twenty cubits, at night rather less, even though all the army was at work; so difficult was the ground, and so hard the work there. They would first descend into the5 ravine and fix stakes in its narrowest part, just so far apart from one another that they could be strong enough to bear and hold together the loads piled upon them. They would then fix upon the stakes withies plaited into wicker-work, very much in the shape of a bridge, bind these closely together and heap earth on them from above, so that the approach for the troops to the rock might be on the level.
At first the tribesmen treated the enterprise with6 contempt as wholly impracticable; but when at length arrows began to find the range of the rock, while they proved unable from above to interfere with the Macedonians who had made screens against the missiles, so as to work beneath them unharmed, Chorienes was aghast at what was happening and sent a herald to Alexander begging him to send

3Cf. ii 26, 3 n. No doubt A. follows Pt. (cf. § 4).409