Arrian

ταῖς νήσοις ὑπέμενεν, ὕστερον δὲ εἰς Ἁλικαρνασσὸν
παρ᾿ Αὐτοφραδάτην ἀφίκετο.
7Ἀλέξανδρος δὲ σατράπην μὲν Συρίᾳ τῇ κοιλῇ
Μένωνα τὸν Κερδίμμα ἐπέταξε δοὺς αὐτῷ εἰς
φυλακὴν τῆς χώρας τοὺς τῶν ξυμμάχων ἱππέας,
αὐτὸς δὲ ἐπὶ Φοινίκης ᾔει. καὶ ἀπαντᾷ αὐτῷ κατὰ
τὴν ὁδὸν Στράτων ὁ Γηροστράτου παῖς τοῦ
Ἀραδίων τε καὶ τῶν Ἀράδῳ προσοίκων βασιλέως·
ὁ δὲ Γηρόστρατος αὐτὸς μετ᾿ Αὐτοφραδάτου ἔπλει
ἐπὶ τῶν νεῶν, καὶ οἱ ἄλλοι οἵ τε τῶν Φοινίκων καὶ
οἱ τῶν Κυπρίων βασιλεῖς καὶ αὐτοὶ Αὐτοφραδάτῃ
8ξυνέπλεον. Στράτων δὲ Ἀλεξάνδρῳ ἐντυχὼν στεφανοῖ
χρυσῷ στεφάνῳ αὐτὸν καὶ τήν τε Ἄραδον
αὐτῷ τὴν νῆσον καὶ τὴν Μάραθον τὴν καταντικρὺ
τῆς Ἀράδου ἐν τῇ ἠπείρῳ ᾠκισμένην, πόλιν
μεγάλην καὶ εὐδαίμονα, καὶ Σιγῶνα καὶ Μαριάμμην
πόλιν καὶ τἆλλα ὅσα τῆς σφῶν ἐπικρατείας
ἐνδίδωσιν.
14. Ἔτι δὲ ἐν Μαράθῳ Ἀλεξάνδρου ὄντος
ἀφίκοντο παρὰ Δαρείου πρέσβεις, ἐπιστολήν τε
κομίζοντες Δαρείου καὶ αὐτοὶ ἀπὸ γλώσσης
δεησόμενοι ἀφεῖναι Δαρείῳ τὴν μητέρα καὶ τὴν
2γυναῖκα καὶ τοὺς παῖδας. ἐδήλου δὲ ἡ ἐπιστολή,
ὅτι Φιλίππῳ τε πρὸς Ἀρτοξέρξην φιλία καὶ
ξυμμαχία ἐγένετο καὶ, ἐπειδὴ Ἀρσῆς ὁ υἱὸς
Ἀρτοξέρξου ἐβασίλευσεν, ὅτι Φίλιππος ἀδικίας
πρῶτος ἐς βασιλέα Ἀρσῆν ἦρξεν οὐδὲν ἄχαρι ἐκ
Περσῶν παθών. ἐξ οὗ δὲ αὐτὸς βασιλεύει Περσῶν,




172Anabasis of Alexander II

among the islands, but later joined Autophradates 333 b.c. at Halicarnassus.3
Alexander appointed Menon son of Cerdimmas as7 332 b.c. satrap of ‘hollow’ Syria,4 giving him the allied cavalry to protect the country, while he himself proceeded towards Phoenicia. On his way he was met by Straton son of Gerostratus, king of the Aradians and people near Aradus; Gerostratus himself was sailing with Autophradates, like the rest of the Phoenician and Cypriot kings. On meeting8 Alexander, Straton crowned him with a golden crown and surrendered to him the island of Aradus and Mara thus which lay opposite it on the mainland, a large and prosperous city, with Sigon and the city of Mariamme and all the other places under his control.
14. While Alexander was still at Marathus, envoys reached him from Darius, bringing a letter from him;1 they were themselves to plead by word of mouth for the release to Darius of his mother, wife and children. The letter argued as follows: Philip2 had been in peace and alliance with Artaxerxes,2 and when Arses son of Artaxerxes became king,3 Philip first did wrong to King Arses, although he had sustained no injury from the Persians. From the




3App. II and VI.4A. presumably so describes north Syria, as distinct from the Phoenician coast and Palestine, which were parts of ‘Syria’, cf. A. B. Bosworth, CQ 1975 and iii 6, 8 n.1Significant variants in D. 39; QC. iv 1, 7 ff.; J. xi 12. D. makes Al. substitute a fictitious letter from Darius and reply to it. G. T. Griffith, Proceedings of Cambridge Philological Society 1968, 33 ff conjectures that A. used the fictitious letter. A. appears to be following his main sources, though the
summary of Darius’ letter and the ‘text’ of Al’s will be in his own words (Introd. 15). Al’s letter contains several allusions to ‘facts’ otherwise unattested; if they are really fictitious, they may be Al’s own propaganda.2Introd. n. 65.173