Arrian

γιγνώσκω· αἰσχύνομαι δέ, εἰ τὸν μὲν
Ἑλλήσποντον διέβην εὐπετῶς, τοῦτο δέ, σμικρὸν
ῥεῦμα,—οὕτω τῷ ὀνόματι τὸν Γράνικον ἐκφαυλίσας,—εἴρξει
ἡμᾶς τὸ μὴ οὐ διαβῆναι ὡς ἔχομεν.
7καὶ τοῦτο οὔτε πρὸς Μακεδόνων τῆς δόξης οὔτε
πρὸς τῆς ἐμῆς ἐς τοὺς κινδύνους ὀξύτητος ποιοῦμαι·
ἀναθαρρήσειν τε δοκῶ τοὺς Πέρσας <ὡς> ἀξιομάχους
Μακεδόσιν ὄντας, ὅτι οὐδὲν ἄξιον τοῦ σφῶν
δέους ἐν τῷ παραυτίκα ἔπαθον.”
14. Ταῦτα εἰπὼν Παρμενίωνα μὲν ἐπὶ τὸ
εὐώνυμον κέρας πέμπει ἡγησόμενον, αὐτὸς δὲ ἐπὶ
τὸ δεξιὸν παρῆγε. προετάχθησαν δὲ αὐτῷ
τοῦ μὲν δεξιοῦ Φιλώτας ὁ Παρμενίωνος, ἔχων
τοὺς ἑταίρους τοὺς ἱππέας καὶ τοὺς τοξότας καὶ
τοὺς Ἀγριᾶνας τοὺς ἀκοντιστάς· Ἀμύντας δὲ ὁ
Ἀρραβαίου τούς τε σαρισσοφόρους ἱππέας ἔχων
Φιλώτᾳ ἐπετάχθη καὶ τοὺς Παίονας καὶ τὴν ἴλην
2τὴν Σωκράτους. ἐχόμενοι δὲ τούτων ἐτάχθησαν οἱ
ὑπασπισταὶ τῶν ἑταίρων, ὧν ἡγεῖτο Νικάνωρ ὁ
Παρμενίωνος· ἐπὶ δὲ τούτοις ἡ Περδίκκου τοῦ
Ὀρόντου φάλαγξ· ἐπὶ δὲ ἡ Κοίνου τοῦ Πολεμοκράτους·
[ἐπὶ δὲ ἡ Κρατεροῦ τοῦ Ἀλεξάνδρου·]
ἐπὶ δὲ ἡ Ἀμύντου τοῦ Ἀνδρομένους· ἐπὶ δὲ ὧν
3Φίλιππος ὁ Ἀμύντου ἦρχε. τοῦ δὲ εὐωνύμου
πρῶτοι μὲν οἱ Θετταλοὶ ἱππεῖς ἐτάχθησαν, ὧν
ἡγεῖτο Κάλας ὁ Ἁρπάλου· ἐπὶ δὲ τούτοις οἱ
ξύμμαχοι ἱππεῖς, ὧν ἦρχε Φίλιππος ὁ Μενελάου·
ἐπὶ δὲ τούτοις οἱ Θρᾷκες, ὧν ἦρχεν Ἀγάθων·
ἐχόμενοι δὲ τούτων πεζοὶ ἥ τε Κρατεροῦ φάλαγξ
καὶ ἡ Μελεάγρου καὶ ἡ Φιλίππου ἔστε ἐπὶ τὸ μέσον
τῆς ξυμπάσης τάξεως.
58Anabasis of Alexander I

Parmenio, but I should feel ashamed if after crossing 334 b.c. the Hellespont easily, this petty stream (by this epithet did he belittle the Granicus) hinders us from crossing, just as we are. I consider this unworthy7 either of the prestige of the Macedonians or of my own celerity in dealing with dangers; I believe it would encourage the Persians to think themselves equal to fighting the Macedonians, since they have not experienced any immediate disaster to justify their alarm.’
14. After saying this, he sent off Parmenio to lead the left wing; he himself passed along to the right. In front of his right he had already posted Philotas son of Parmenio, with the Companion cavalry, the archers, and the Agrianian javelin-men. Next to Philotas Amyntas son of Arrabaeus was posted, with the lancers,1 the Paeonians and Socrates’ squadron. Next to them were marshalled the hypaspists of the2 Companions, led by Nicanor son of Parmenio; beside these was the phalanx2 of Perdiccas son of Orontes, then that of Coenus son of Polemocrates, [then that of Craterus son of Alexander,]3 then that of Amyntas son of Andromenes, then the troops under Philip son of Amyntas. On the left wing the3 Thessalian cavalry came first, commanded by Calas son of Harpalus, next, the allied cavalry under Philip son of Menelaus, then the Thracians under Agatho; on their right were the infantry, the phalanx regiments of Craterus, of Meleager and of Philip,4 up to the centre of the whole line.
1Amyntas: App. XI 5. ‘Lancers’: Introd. § 58; 64.2i.e. a battalion of the Foot-Companions, Introd. § 61.3Craterus was on the left (§ 3), as in other battles, ii 8, 4; iii 11, 10. Hence, these words are interpolated.4A. mentions Philip’s battalion twice, counting first from the right, then from the left.59