Arrian

κοίλης καὶ ὅσοι τῆς μεταξὺ τῶν ποταμῶν Συρίας
Μαζαῖος ἦγεν. ἐλέγετο δὲ ἡ πᾶσα στρατιὰ ἡ
Δαρείου ἱππεῖς μὲν ἐς τετρακισμυρίους, πεζοὶ δὲ ἐς
ἑκατὸν μυριάδας, καὶ ἅρματα δρεπανηφόρα διακόσια,
ἐλέφαντες δὲ οὐ πολλοί, ἀλλὰ ἐς πεντεκαίδεκα
μάλιστα Ἰνδοῖς τοῖς ἐπὶ τάδε τοῦ Ἰνδοῦ ἦσαν.
7Ξὺν ταύτῃ τῇ δυνάμει ἐστρατοπεδεύκει Δαρεῖος
ἐν Γαυγαμήλοις πρὸς ποταμῷ Βουμήλῳ, ἀπέχων
Ἀρβήλων τῆς πόλεως ὅσον ἑξακοσίους σταδίους,
ἐν χώρῳ ὁμαλῷ πάντῃ. καὶ γὰρ καὶ ὅσα ἀνώμαλα
αὐτοῦ ἐς ἱππασίαν, ταῦτα δὲ ἐκ πολλοῦ οἱ Πέρσαι
τοῖς τε ἅρμασιν ἐπελαύνειν εὐπετῆ πεποιήκεσαν καὶ
τῇ ἵππῳ ἱππάσιμα. ἦσαν γὰρ οἳ ἀνέπειθον
Δαρεῖον ὑπὲρ τῆς πρὸς Ἰσσῷ γενομένης μάχης,
ὅτι ἄρα ἐμειονέκτησε τῶν χωρίων τῇ στενότητι·
καὶ Δαρεῖος οὐ χαλεπῶς ἐπείθετο.
9. Ταῦτα ὡς ἐξηγγέλθη Ἀλεξάνδρῳ πρὸς τῶν
κατασκόπων τῶν Περσῶν ὅσοι ἑάλωσαν, ἔμεινεν
αὐτοῦ ἵνα ἐξηγγέλθη ἡμέρας τέσσαρας· καὶ τήν
[τε] στρατιὰν ἐκ τῆς ὁδοῦ ἀνέπαυσε, τὸ δὲ
στρατόπεδον τάφρῳ τε καὶ χάρακι ἐτείχισεν.
ἔγνω γὰρ τὰ μὲν σκευοφόρα ἀπολείπειν καὶ ὅσοι
τῶν στρατιωτῶν ἀπόμαχοι ἦσαν, αὐτὸς δὲ ξὺν τοῖς
μαχίμοις οὐδὲν ἄλλο ὅτι μὴ ὅπλα φέρουσιν ἰέναι ἐς
2τὸν ἀγῶνα. ἀναλαβὼν οὖν τὴν δύναμιν νυκτὸς
ἦγεν ἀμφὶ δευτέραν φυλακὴν μάλιστα, ὡς ἅμ᾿
ἡμέρᾳ προσμῖξαι τοῖς βαρβάροις. Δαρεῖος δέ, ὡς
προσηγγέλθη αὐτῷ προσάγων ἤδη Ἀλέξανδρος,
ἐκτάσσει τὴν στρατιὰν ὡς ἐς μάχην· καὶ Ἀλέξανδρος
ἦγεν ὡσαύτως τεταγμένους. καὶ ἀπεῖχε μὲν
248Anabasis of Alexander III

from Mesopotamian Syria were led by Mazaeus. 331 b.c. The number of Darius’ forces was said to be 40,000 horse, 1,000,000 foot, 200 chariots carrying scythes,6 and a few elephants; the Indians on this side of the Indus had some fifteen.7
With this army Darius had encamped at Gaugamela7 by the River Bumelus, about six hundred stades from the city of Arbela,8 in a position level on all sides. In fact where the ground was uneven for cavalry, the Persians had for some time past been making it easy for chariots to drive and for cavalry to ride over;9 for some argued that in the battle of Issus Darius had really had the worst of it because of the narrowness of the battlefield, and Darius very readily assented.
9. On receiving this information from the captured Persian scouts, Alexander stopped where he had received it for four days; he rested his army after the march and strengthened his camp by a ditch and palisade, as he had decided to leave behind the baggage animals and soldiers unfit for fighting, and to advance to battle himself with his fit troops burdened with nothing but their arms.1 So taking his2 force by night, he led them off just about the second watch, so as to meet the enemy at dawn. Darius, on hearing that Alexander was already advancing, arrayed his army for battle, while Alexander was also bringing up his army in battle array. The armies





6For description, D. 53, 2; QC. 9, 4 f.; previous use, Xenophon, Anabasis i 6, 1; Hellenica iv 1, 17 ff.7Appendix IX, 3.8Cf. vi 11, 4 (Pt. and Ar.); P. 31, 3; Strabo xvi 1, 3. QC. 9, 9 (unlike D. 53, 4) was perhaps aware of the truth.9QC. 9, 10.1QC. iv 10. 15. Vet some impedimenta were moved forward, cf. A. 12, 5; 14, 5; QC. 12, 3.249