Arrian

ὑπασπιστὰς παρεβοήθει, ἵνα μάλιστα ἐπιέζοντο οἱ
2Μακεδόνες. καὶ τούτους μὲν ἔσχε τὸ μὴ οὐκ
αἰσχρᾷ φυγῇ ὠσθῆναι κατὰ τοῦ χώματος, αὐτὸς δὲ
βάλλεται καταπέλτῃ διὰ τῆς ἀσπίδος διαμπὰξ καὶ
τοῦ θώρακος ἐς τὸν ὦμον. ὡς δὲ ἔγνω τὰ ἀμφὶ τὸ
τραῦμα ἀληθεύσαντα Ἀρίστανδρον, ἐχάρη, ὅτι καὶ
τὴν πόλιν δὴ αἱρήσειν ἐδόκει Ἀριστάνδρου ἕνεκα.
3Καὶ αὐτὸς μὲν τὸ τραῦμα ἐθεραπεύετο χαλεπῶς·
ἀφικνοῦνται δ᾿ αὐτῷ μετάπεμπτοι ἀπὸ θαλάσσης αἱ
μηχαναί, αἷς Τύρον εἷλε. καὶ χῶμα χωννύναι ἐν
κύκλῳ πάντοθεν τῆς πόλεως ἐκέλευσεν, εὖρος μὲν
ἐς δύο σταδίους, ὕψος δὲ ἐς πόδας πεντήκοντα καὶ
4διακοσίους. ὡς δὲ αἵ τε μηχαναὶ αὐτῷ ἐποιήθησαν
καὶ ἐπαχθεῖσαι κατὰ τὸ χῶμα κατέσεισαν τοῦ
τείχους ἐπὶ πολύ, ὑπονόμων τε ἄλλῃ καὶ ἄλλῃ
ὀρυσσομένων καὶ τοῦ χοῦ ἀφανῶς ἐκφερομένου τὸ
τεῖχος πολλαχῇ ἠρείπετο ὑφιζάνον κατὰ τὸ κενούμενον,
τοῖς τε βέλεσιν ἐπὶ πολὺ κατεῖχον οἱ
Μακεδόνες ἀναστέλλοντες τοὺς προμαχομένους τῶν
πύργων, ἐς μὲν τρεῖς προσβολὰς οἱ ἐκ τῆς πόλεως
ἀποθνησκόντων τε αὐτοῖς πολλῶν καὶ τιτρωσκομένων
5ὅμως ἀντεῖχον. τῇ τετάρτῃ δὲ τῶν Μακεδόνων
τὴν φάλαγγα πάντοθεν προσαγαγὼν Ἀλέξανδρος
τῇ μὲν ὑπορυσσόμενον τὸ τεῖχος
καταβάλλει, τῇ δὲ παιόμενον ταῖς μηχαναῖς κατασείει
ἐπὶ πολύ, ὡς μὴ χαλεπὴν ταῖς κλίμαξιν τὴν
6προσβολὴν κατὰ τὰ ἐρηριμμένα ἐνδοῦναι. αἵ τε
οὖν κλίμακες προσήγοντο τῷ τείχει καὶ ἔρις πολλὴ
ἦν τῶν Μακεδόνων ὅσοι τι ἀρετῆς μετεποιοῦντο


216Anabasis of Alexander II

and went to the help of the Macedonians where they 332 b.c. were most hardly pressed. He did, in fact, stay them2 from being driven down the mound in ignominious flight, but was himself hit by a shot from a catapult right through his shield and corselet in the shoulder. But his knowledge that Aristander had been right about the wound made him glad, since on Aristander’s account he thought that he would surely take the city too.
Alexander was not easily treated of his wound.3 However, the engines with which he had captured Tyre now arrived; he had sent for them by sea. He ordered a. mound to be erected the whole way round the city, two stades broad, two hundred and fifty feet high.1 When his engines had been constructed4 and brought up to the mound and had battered down much of the wall, tunnels were driven here and there and the earth below removed secretly, till the wall collapsed in several places, subsiding where the soil was emptied away, while the Macedonians controlled a large space with their volleys and drove back the defenders from the towers. The defenders, though losing many dead and wounded, held out against three onslaughts. But in the fourth Alexander brought up his phalanx5 of Macedonians on all sides, threw down the wall, now undermined, at one place, and brought it down for a great stretch in another, battered as it was with his engines, so that it was not hard to make the assault with ladders over the fallen parts. So the6 ladders were set against the wall, and there was much rivalry among those Macedonians who laid

1Though we could take the engines from Tyre to be additional to those mentioned in 26, 2 f., this sentence suggests that 26, 2–27, 2 and 27, 3 ff. are doublets, the first perhaps from Ar., the second from Pt.  So Wirth RE xxiii 2472.217