Arrian

γεραίρειν ἤπερ τελευτήσαντα ἐς οὐδὲν ὄφελος τῷ
τιμωμένῳ.
11. Λεχθέντων δὲ τούτων τε καὶ τοιούτων
λόγων πρὸς Ἀναξάρχου τοὺς μὲν μετεσχηκότας
τῆς βουλῆς ἐπαινεῖν τὸν λόγον καὶ δὴ ἐθέλειν
ἄρχεσθαι τῆς προσκυνήσεως, τοὺς Μακεδόνας δὲ
τοὺς πολλοὺς ἀχθομένους τῷ λόγῳ σιγῇ ἔχειν.
2Καλλισθένην δὲ ὑπολαβόντα, Ἀλέξανδρον μὲν,
εἰπεῖν, ὦ Ἀνάξαρχε, οὐδεμιᾶς ἀνάξιον ἀποφαίνω
τιμῆς ὅσαι ξύμμετροι ἀνθρώπῳ· ἀλλὰ διακεκρίσθαι
γὰρ τοῖς ἀνθρώποις ὅσαι τε ἀνθρώπιναι τιμαὶ καὶ
ὅσαι θεῖαι πολλοῖς μὲν καὶ ἄλλοις, καθάπερ ναῶν τε
οἰκοδομήσει καὶ ἀγαλμάτων ἀναστάσει καὶ τεμένη
ὅτι τοῖς θεοῖς ἐξαιρεῖται καὶ θύεται ἐκείνοις καὶ
σπένδεται, καὶ ὕμνοι μὲν ἐς τοὺς θεοὺς ποιοῦνται,
ἔπαινοι δὲ ἐς ἀνθρώπους—ἀτὰρ οὐχ ἥκιστα τῷ τῆς
3προσκυνήσεως νόμῳ. τοὺς μὲν γὰρ ἀνθρώπους
φιλεῖσθαι πρὸς τῶν ἀσπαζομένων, τὸ θεῖον δέ, ὅτι
ἄνω που ἱδρυμένον καὶ οὐδὲ ψαῦσαι αὐτοῦ θέμις,
ἐπὶ τῷδε ἄρα τῇ προσκυνήσει γεραίρεται, καὶ χοροὶ
τοῖς θεοῖς ἵστανται καὶ παιᾶνες ἐπὶ τοῖς θεοῖς
ᾄδονται. καὶ οὐδὲν θαυμαστόν, ὁπότε γε καὶ
αὐτῶν τῶν θεῶν ἄλλοις ἄλλαι τιμαὶ πρόσκεινται,
καὶ ναὶ μὰ Δία ἥρωσιν ἄλλαι, καὶ αὗται ἀποκεκριμέναι
4τοῦ θείου. οὔκουν εἰκὸς ξύμπαντα ταῦτα
ἀναταράσσοντας τοὺς μὲν ἀνθρώπους ἐς σχῆμα
ὑπέρογκον καθιστάναι τῶν τιμῶν ταῖς ὑπερβολαῖς,
τοὺς θεοὺς δὲ τό γε ἐπὶ σφίσιν ἐς ταπεινότητα οὐ
πρέπουσαν καταβάλλειν τὰ ἴσα ἀνθρώποις τιμῶντας.
οὔκουν οὐδὲ Ἀλέξανδρον ἀνασχέσθαι ἄν, εἰ
τῶν ἰδιωτῶν τις εἰσποιοῖτο ταῖς βασιλικαῖς τιμαῖς
5χειροτονίᾳ ἢ ψήφῳ οὐ δικαίᾳ. πολὺ ἂν οὖν
374Anabasis Of Alexander IV

when he was dead and the honour would profit him 328 b.c. nothing.
11. When Anaxarchus had said this and the like, those who shared in the scheme approved his argument and were actually ready to begin doing obeisance, but the Macedonians for the most part were opposed to it, though silent. Callisthenes broke in2 and said: ‘Anaxarchus, I declare Alexander unworthy of no honour appropriate for a man; but ? have used numerous ways of distinguishing all the honours which are appropriate for men and for gods; thus we build temples and erect images and set aside precincts for the gods, and we offer them sacrifices and libations and compose hymns to them, while eulogies are for men; but the most important distinction concerns the matter of obeisance. At3 greeting men receive a kiss, but what is divine, I suppose because it is seated above us and we are forbidden even to touch it, is for that very reason honoured by obeisance; dances, too, are held for the gods, and paeans sung in their praise. In this distinction there is nothing surprising, since among the gods themselves all are not honoured in the same way; and what is more, there are different honours for the heroes, distinct again from those paid to gods. It is not, therefore, proper to confuse all this, by raising4 mortals to extravagant proportions by excesses of honour, while bringing the gods, as far as men can, down to a demeaning and unfitting level by honouring them in the same way as men. So Alexander himself would not endure it for a moment, if some private person were to thrust himself into the royal honours by unjust election or vote, and the gods would have5
375