Arrian
3<ἕπεσθαι> μὴ μακρὰς ὁδοὺς ἄγοντα. οἱ δὲ ἀμφ᾿
αὐτὸν τὰ ὅπλα εἶχον μόνον καὶ δύο ἡμερῶν σιτία.
ἐλθὼν δὲ τήν τε νύκτα ὅλην καὶ τῆς ἐπιούσης
ἡμέρας μέχρι μεσημβρίας ὀλίγον χρόνον ἀναπαύσας
τὸν στρατὸν αὖθις ᾔει ὅλην νύκτα, καὶ ἅμα ἡμέρᾳ
ὑποφαινούσῃ παρῆν εἰς τὸ στρατόπεδον, ὅθεν
4ἀφωρμήκει ὀπίσω Βαγιστάνης. καὶ τοὺς μὲν πολεμίους
οὐ κατέλαβε, Δαρείου δὲ πέρι ἐπύθετο
αὐτὸν μὲν συνειλημμένον ἄγεσθαι ἐφ᾿ ἁρμαμάξης,
Βήσσῳ δὲ ἀντὶ Δαρείου εἶναι τὸ κράτος καὶ
ἡγεμόνα ὠνομάσθαι Βῆσσον πρός τε τῶν Βακτρίων
ἱππέων καὶ τῶν ἄλλων ὅσοι βάρβαροι ξυνέφευγον
Δαρείῳ, πλὴν Ἀρταβάζου καὶ τῶν Ἀρταβάζου
παίδων καὶ τῶν Ἑλλήνων τῶν μισθοφόρων·
τούτους δὲ πιστοὺς εἶναι Δαρείῳ, καὶ εἴργειν μὲν τὰ
γιγνόμενα οὐ δυνατοὺς εἶναι, ἐκτραπέντας δὲ ἔξω
τῆς λεωφόρου ὁδοῦ ὡς ἐπὶ τὰ ὄρη ἰέναι κατὰ σφᾶς,
οὐ μετέχοντας τοῖς ἀμφὶ Βῆσσον τοῦ ἔργου
5γνώμην δὲ πεποιῆσθαι τοὺς ξυλλαβόντας Δαρεῖον,
εἰ μὲν διώκοντα σφᾶς Ἀλέξανδρον πυνθάνοιντο,
παραδοῦναι Δαρεῖον Ἀλεξάνδρῳ καὶ σφίσι τι
ἀγαθὸν εὑρίσκεσθαι· εἰ δὲ τὸ ἔμπαλιν ἐπανεληλυθότα
μάθοιεν, τοὺς δὲ στρατιάν τε ξυλλέγειν
ὅσην πλείστην δύναιντο καὶ διασώζειν ἐς τὸ κοινὸν
τὴν ἀρχήν. Βῆσσον δὲ ἐν τῷ παρόντι ἐξηγεῖσθαι
κατ᾿ οἰκειότητά τε τὴν Δαρείου καὶ ὅτι ἐν τῇ αὐτοῦ
σατραπείᾳ τὸ ἔργον ἐγίγνετο.
6Ταῦτα ἀκούσαντι Ἀλεξάνδρῳ ἀνὰ κράτος διωκτέα
ἐφαίνετο. καὶ ἤδη μὲν ἐξέκαμνον οἵ τε
ἄνδρες καὶ οἱ ἵπποι ὑπὸ τῇ ταλαιπωρίᾳ τῇ ξυνεχεῖ·
ἀλλὰ καὶ ὣς ἦγε, καὶ διελθὼν ὁδὸν πολλὴν τῆς τε
296Anabasis of Alexander III

His own men had nothing but their arms and two days’3 330 b.c. rations. Travelling all night and the next day till noon, he rested his troops a short time and then went on again all night, and at dawn he reached the camp, from which Bagistanes had started back. But he did4 not overtake the enemy, though he learnt that Darius was being carried in a closed waggon under arrest, that Bessus had the sovereignty in place of Darius and had been saluted as leader by the Bactrian cavalry and the other barbarians who had fled with Darius, except by Artabazus2 and his sons and the Greek mercenaries, that they were loyal to Darius, and as they were unable to prevent what was taking place, had turned off the main road and were making for the mountains3 by themselves, taking no part in the action of Bessus and his followers, while those who had5 seized Darius had decided, if they learned that Alexander was pursuing them, to give him up to Alexander and make good terms for themselves, but if they learned that he had turned back, to collect as large an army as they could and preserve their power in common; Bessus was in command for the time because of his relationship to Darius and because the act was done in his satrapy.4
On hearing this, Alexander decided that he must6 pursue with the utmost vigour. Already his men and horses were growing utterly wearied under the continued hardship; none the less, he pressed on, and



2Connected by marriage with Darius, and also with Memnon (i 12, 9 n.), he had spent some years in exile at Philip’s court, and was loyal first to Darius, then to Al.3Of Tapuria (23, 1), i.e. Elburz.4A mistake; Bessus’ satrapy was not Parthyaea but Bactria.297