Arrian

καὶ ὁπλίταις δὲ οὐκ ὀλίγοις, καὶ οἱ ἐν τῇ πόλει
κατειλημμένοι προσκείσεσθαι ἀπαλλαττομένοις
ἤμελλον· τά τε χωρία δι᾿ ὧν ἡ πάροδος ἦν τῷ
Ἀλεξάνδρῳ στενὰ καὶ ὑλώδη ἐφαίνετο, τῇ μὲν πρὸς
τοῦ ποταμοῦ ἀπειργόμενα, τῇ δὲ ὄρος ὑπερύψηλον
ἦν καὶ κρημνοὶ πρὸς τοῦ ὄρους, ὥστε οὐδὲ ἐπὶ
τεσσάρων ἀσπίδων ἂν τῷ στρατεύματι ἡ πάροδος
ἐγένετο.
6. Ἔνθα δὴ ἐκτάσσει τὸν στρατὸν Ἀλέξανδρος
ἕως ἑκατὸν καὶ εἴκοσι τὸ βάθος τῆς φάλαγγος.
ἐπὶ τὸ κέρας δὲ ἑκατέρωθεν διακοσίους ἱππέας
ἐπιτάξας παρήγγελλε σιγῇ ἔχειν τὸ παραγγελλόμενον
2ὀξέως δεχομένους. καὶ τὰ μὲν πρῶτα
ἐσήμηνεν ὀρθὰ ἀνατεῖναι τὰ δόρατα τοὺς ὁπλίτας,
ἔπειτα ἀπὸ ξυνθήματος ἀποτεῖναι ἐς προβολήν, καὶ
νῦν μὲν ἐς τὸ δεξιὸν ἐγκλῖναι τῶν δοράτων τὴν
σύγκλεισιν, αὖθις δὲ ἐπὶ τὰ ἀριστερά. καὶ αὐτὴν
δὲ τὴν φάλαγγα ἔς τε τὸ πρόσω ὀξέως ἐκίνησε καὶ
3ἐπὶ τὰ κέρατα ἄλλοτε ἄλλῃ παρήγαγε. καὶ οὕτω
πολλὰς τάξεις τάξας τε καὶ μετακοσμήσας ἐν
ὀλίγῳ χρόνῳ, κατὰ τὸ εὐώνυμον οἷον ἔμβολον
ποιήσας τῆς φάλαγγος ἐπῆγεν ἐπὶ τοὺς πολεμίους.
οἱ δὲ πάλαι μὲν ἐθαύμαζον τήν τε ὀξύτητα ὁρῶντες
καὶ τὸν κόσμον τῶν δρωμένων· τότε δὲ προσάγοντας
ἤδη τοὺς ἀμφὶ Ἀλέξανδρον οὐκ ἐδέξαντο,
4ἀλλὰ λείπουσι τοὺς πρώτους λόφους. ὁ δὲ καὶ
ἐπαλαλάξαι ἐκέλευσε τοὺς Μακεδόνας καὶ τοῖς δόρασι
δουπῆσαι πρὸς τὰς ἀσπίδας· οἱ δὲ Ταυλάντιοι
ἔτι μᾶλλον ἐκπλαγέντες πρὸς τῆς βοῆς ὡς πρὸς τὴν
πόλιν ἐπανήγαγον σπουδῇ τὸν στρατόν.
5Ἀλέξανδρος δὲ λόφον τινὰς κατέχοντας ἰδὼν οὐ
πολλοὺς τῶν πολεμίων, παρ᾿ ὃν αὐτῷ ἡ πάροδος
24Anabasis of Alexander I

of hoplites, and the forces enclosed in the city were 335 b.c. likely to attack as Alexander’s men drew off, while the ground through which Alexander must pass seemed narrow and forested, bounded on the one side by the river, and on the other by a lofty mountain and cliffs on the side of the mountain, so that the army could not have passed through even four abreast.
6. In the circumstances Alexander drew up his phalanx with a depth of 120 files. On either wing he posted 200 horsemen, bidding them keep silent and smartly obey the word of command; the hoplites2 were ordered first to raise their spears upright, and then, on the word, to lower them for a charge, swinging their serried points first to the right, then to the left; he moved the phalanx itself smartly forward, and then wheeled it alternately to right and left. Thus he deployed and manoeuvred it in many3 difficult formations in a brief time, and then making a kind of wedge from his phalanx on the left, he led it to the attack. The enemy, long bewildered both at the smartness and the discipline of the drill, did not await the approach of Alexander’s troops, but abandoned the first hills. Alexander ordered the4 Macedonians to raise their battle-cry and clang their spears upon their shields, and the Taulantians, even more terrified at the noise, hastily withdrew back to the city.
Alexander saw that a few of the enemy were holding5 a hill on his line of march, and ordered his
25