Arrian

τὴν στάσιν. ἔτι δὲ περὶ αὐτῶν τούτων βουλευομένοις
ἐλθεῖν τὸν Μίδαν ὁμοῦ τῷ πατρὶ καὶ τῇ
μητρὶ καὶ ἐπιστῆναι τῇ ἐκκλησίᾳ αὐτῇ ἁμάξῃ.
6τοὺς δὲ ξυμβαλόντας τὸ μαντεῖον τοῦτον ἐκεῖνον
γνῶναι ὄντα, ὅντινα ὁ θεὸς αὐτοῖς ἔφραζεν,
ὅτι ἄξει ἡ ἅμαξα· καὶ καταστῆσαι μὲν αὐτοὺς
βασιλέα τὸν Μίδαν, Μίδαν δὲ αὐτοῖς τὴν στάσιν
καταπαῦσαι, καὶ τὴν ἅμαξαν τοῦ πατρὸς ἐν τῇ ἄκρᾳ
ἀναθεῖναι χαριστήρια τῷ Διὶ τῷ βασιλεῖ ἐπὶ τοῦ
ἀετοῦ τῇ πομπῇ. πρὸς δὲ δὴ τούτοις καὶ τόδε περὶ
τῆς ἁμάξης ἐμυθεύετο, ὅστις λύσειε τοῦ ζυγοῦ τῆς
ἁμάξης τὸν δεσμόν, τοῦτον χρῆναι ἄρξαι τῆς
7Ἀσίας. ἦν δὲ ὁ δεσμὸς ἐκ φλοιοῦ κρανίας καὶ
τούτου οὔτε τέλος οὔτε ἀρχὴ ἐφαίνετο. Ἀλέξανδρος
δὲ ὡς ἀπόρως μὲν εἶχεν ἐξευρεῖν λύσιν τοῦ
δεσμοῦ, ἄλυτον δὲ περιιδεῖν οὐκ ἤθελε, μή τινα καὶ
τοῦτο ἐς τοὺς πολλοὺς κίνησιν ἐργάσηται, οἱ μὲν
λέγουσιν, ὅτι παίσας τῷ ξίφει διέκοψε τὸν δεσμὸν
καὶ λελύσθαι ἔφη· Ἀριστόβουλος δὲ λέγει ἐξελόντα
τὸν ἕστορα τοῦ ῥυμοῦ, ὃς ἦν τύλος διαβεβλημένος
διὰ τοῦ ῥυμοῦ διαμπάξ, ξυνέχων τὸν
δεσμόν, ἐξελκύσαι ἔξω τοῦ ῥυμοῦ τὸ <ν> ζυγόν.
8ὅπως μὲν δὴ ἐπράχθη τὰ ἀμφὶ τῷ δεσμῷ τούτῳ
Ἀλεξάνδρῳ οὐκ ἔχω ἰσχυρίσασθαι. ἀπηλλάγη δ᾿
οὖν ἀπὸ τῆς ἁμάξης αὐτός τε καὶ οἱ ἀμφ᾿ αὐτὸν ὡς
τοῦ λογίου τοῦ ἐπὶ τῇ λύσει τοῦ δεσμοῦ ξυμβεβηκότος.
καὶ γὰρ καὶ τῆς νυκτὸς ἐκείνης βρονταί τε
καὶ σέλας ἐξ οὐρανοῦ ἐπεσήμηναν· καὶ ἐπὶ τούτοις
ἔθυε τῇ ὑστεραίᾳ Ἀλέξανδρος τοῖς φήνασι θεοῖς τά
τε σημεῖα καὶ τοῦ δεσμοῦ τὴν λύσιν.
130Anabasis of Alexander II

king and he would put an end to the strife. While333 b.c.
they were still discussing this, Midas arrived with his parents and stopped, waggon and all, for the assembly to see. The Phrygians, interpreting this6
oracle, decided that he was the man who the gods had told them would come in a waggon, and made him king, and he put an end to the civil strife. He set up his father’s waggon in the acropolis as a thank-offering to Zeus the King for sending the eagle. Over and above this there was a legend about the waggon, that anyone who untied the knot of the yoke would rule Asia. The knot was of cornel bark, and you7
could not see where it began or ended. Alexander was unable to find how to untie the knot but unwilling to leave it tied, in case this caused a disturbance among the masses; some say that he struck it with his sword, cut the knot, and said it was now untied—but Aristobulus says that he took out the pole-pin, a bolt driven right through the pole, holding the knot together, and so removed the yoke from the pole. I cannot say with confidence what Alexander8
actually did about this knot, but he and his suite certainly left the waggon with the impression that the oracle about the undoing of the knot had been fulfilled, and in fact that night there was thunder and lightning, a further sign from heaven; so Alexander in thanksgiving offered sacrifice next day to whatever gods had shown the signs and the way to undo the knot.3
3P. 18 also cites Ar. against the general view that Al. cut the knot (QC. iii 1. 14–19; J, xi 7). Pt. evidently did not confirm Ar., hence A’s hesitation. Yet A. is confident about the impression made on Al. and his suite, and about the subsequent omen and sacrifice; on these matters Pt. must have agreed with Ar., and he cannot then have ignored the incident, but just failed to say how Al. loosed the knot; for a curious parallel, v 7, 1. Al’s success doubtless encouraged his claim after Issus to be lord of ‘Asia’ (14, 7 f., apparently from Pt. and/or Ar. cf. QC, P. and J.; iii 15, 5 n.). See Introd. n. 64.131