Arrian

τε αὐτῷ ὡς ἐς μάχην καὶ αὖθις διακινδυνεύειν,
Σκύθας τε γὰρ αὐτῷ ἥκειν καὶ Καδουσίους συμμάχους,
τὰ μὲν ὑποζύγια καὶ τοὺς τούτων φύλακας
καὶ τὴν ἄλλην κατασκευὴν ἕπεσθαι ἐκέλευσε, τὴν
στρατιὰν δὲ τὴν ἄλλην ἀναλαβὼν ἦγεν ἐσταλμένους
ὡς ἐς μάχην. καὶ ἀφικνεῖται δωδεκάτῃ ἡμέρᾳ ἐς
4Μηδίαν. ἔνθα ἔμαθεν οὐκ οὖσαν ἀξιόμαχον δύναμιν
Δαρείῳ οὐδὲ Καδουσίους ἢ Σκύθας αὐτῷ
συμμάχους ἥκοντας, ἀλλ᾿ ὅτι φεύγειν ἐγνωκὼς εἴη
Δαρεῖος· ὁ δὲ ἔτι μᾶλλον ἦγε σπουδῇ. ὡς δὲ
ἀπεῖχεν Ἐκβατάνων ὅσον τριῶν ἡμερῶν ὁδόν,
ἐνταῦθα ἀπήντα αὐτῷ Βισθάνης ὁ Ὤχου παῖς τοῦ
5πρὸ Δαρείου βασιλεύσαντος Περσῶν· καὶ οὗτος
ἀπήγγειλεν, ὅτι Δαρεῖος ἐς πέμπτην ἡμέραν εἴη
πεφευγὼς ἔχων τά τε κρήματα <τὰ> ἐκ Μήδων ἐς
ἑπτακισχίλια τάλαντα καὶ στρατιὰν ἱππέας μὲν ἐς
τρισχιλίους, πεζοὺς δὲ ἐς ἑξακισχιλίους.
Ἐλθὼν δὲ ἐς Ἐκβάτανα Ἀλέξανδρος τοὺς μὲν
Θετταλοὺς ἱππέας καὶ τοὺς ἄλλους ξυμμάχους
ἀποπέμπει ὀπίσω ἐπὶ θάλασσαν, τόν τε μισθὸν
ἀποδοὺς αὐτοῖς ἐντελῆ τὸν ξυντεταγμένον καὶ
6δισχίλια παρ᾿ αὑτοῦ τάλαντα ἐπιδούς· ὅστις δὲ
ἰδίᾳ βούλοιτο ἔτι μισθοφορεῖν παρ᾿ αὐτῷ, ἀπογράφεσθαι
ἐκέλευσε· καὶ ἐγένοντο οἱ ἀπογραψάμενοι
οὐκ ὀλίγοι. Ἐπόκιλλον δὲ τὸν Πολυειδοῦς ἔταξε
καταγαγεῖν αὐτοὺς ὡς ἐπὶ θάλασσαν, ἱππέας
ἄλλους ἔχοντα ἐς φυλακὴν αὐτῶν· οἱ γὰρ Θεσσαλοὶ
τοὺς ἵππους αὐτοῦ ἀπέδοντο. ἐπέστειλε δὲ καὶ


290Anabasis of Alexander III

since he had been joined by Scythian and Cadusian 303 b.c. allies, he ordered the draught animals with their keepers and all the rest of the stores to follow, while he took the rest of the army with him ready for battle. He reached Media on the twelfth day. There he4 learned that Darius’ force was not capable of fighting and that the Cadusians and Scythians had not arrived to help him, but that Darius had resolved on flight. Alexander marched on all the more rapidly. But when he was about three days’ journey from Ecbatana he was met by Bisthanes son of Ochus, the predecessor of Darius as King of Persia, who reported that Darius5 had fled four days before, with his treasure from Media of seven thousand Talents and with about three thousand cavalry and about six thousand infantry.1
On arriving at Ecbatana, Alexander sent back the Thessalian cavalry and the rest of the allies to the sea, giving the agreed pay in full, and adding as a personal gift two thousand Talents; on his orders any individual6 who wanted to continue serving in his army as a mercenary was to enrol, and a great number did so enrol.2 He appointed Epocillus son of Polyides to conduct them to the sea, with other cavalry to escort them, for the Thessalians sold their horses on the spot.


1For Darius’ plans and movements from Gaugamela to
arrest by Bessus see D. 64, 1; 73, 1; QC. v 1, (3–9); 8–12.
The Cadusii lived in mountains SW. of Caspian (Strabo xi 7, 1)
and the Scythians of §3 presumably W. of Caspian, as Ecbatana is the intended mobilization centre; Darius finally decided to carry on the war in east Iran (QC. v 9, 5 ff.); D. 73, 2 gives him 30,000 Persians and Greek mercenaries, QC. 8, 3 f. 34,000 foot (including 4,000 mercenaries, but cf. 23, 9 n.) and 4,000 horse. See App. VIII.2Cf. iii 25, 4; 29, 4; v 27, 5; D. 74, 3 and QC. vi 2, 17 (dismissal at Hecatompylos, cf. 23, 1 n.); P. 42, 3 (after news of Darius’ arrest); A. v 27, 5 n. QC. v 7, 12 records arrival in Media of reinforcements for Al. from Cilicia of 5000 foot and 1000 horse—under ‘Plato’ of Athens (Berve no. 732)! For Alexander’s army after Ecbatana (Hamadan) see App. XIII.291