Arrian
17. Ἄρας δὲ ἐκ Σούσων καὶ διαβὰς τὸν Πασιτιγριν
ποταμὸν ἐμβάλλει εἰς τὴν Οὐξίων γῆν.
Οὐξίων δὲ οἱ μὲν τὰ πεδία οἰκοῦντες τοῦ τε
σατράπου τῶν Περσῶν ἤκουον καὶ τότε Ἀλεξάνδρῳ
σφας ἐνέδοσαν· οἱ δὲ ὄρειοι καλούμενοι
Οὔξιοι Πέρσαις τε οὐχ ὑπήκοοι ἦσαν καὶ τότε
πέμψαντες παρ᾿ Ἀλέξανδρον οὐκ ἄλλως παρήσειν
ἔφασαν τὴν ἐπὶ Πέρσας ἰόντα ξὺν τῇ δυνάμει ἢ
λαβεῖν ὅσα καὶ παρὰ τοῦ Περσῶν βασιλέως ἐπὶ τῇ
2παρόδῳ ἐλάμβανον. καὶ τούτους ἀποπέμπει Ἀλέξανδρος,
ἥκειν κελεύσας ἐπὶ τὰ στενά, ὧν κρατοῦντες
ἐπὶ σφίσιν ἐδόκουν τὴν πάροδον εἶναι τὴν ἐς
Πέρσας, ἵνα καὶ παρ᾿ αὑτοῦ λάβοιεν <τὰ> τεταγμένα.
αὐτὸς δὲ ἀναλαβὼν τοὺς σωματοφύλακας
τοὺς βασιλικοὺς καὶ τοὺς ὑπασπιστὰς καὶ τῆς
ἄλλης στρατιᾶς ἐς ὀκτακισχιλίους τῆς νυκτὸς ᾔει
ἄλλην ἢ τὴν φανερὰν ἡγησαμένων αὐτῷ τῶν
3Σουσίων. καὶ διελθὼν ὁδὸν τραχεῖαν καὶ δύσπορον
ἐν μιᾷ ἡμέρᾳ ἐπιπίπτει ταῖς κώμαις τῶν Οὐξίων,
καὶ λείαν τε πολλὴν ἔλαβε καὶ αὐτῶν ἔτι ἐν ταῖς
εὐναῖς ὄντων πολλοὺς κατέκτεινεν· οἱ δὲ ἀπέφυγον
ἐς τὰ ὄρη. αὐτὸς δὲ ᾔει σπουδῇ ἐπὶ τὰ στενά, ἵνα
ἀπαντήσεσθαι οἱ Οὔξιοι πανδημεῖ ἐδόκουν ληψόμενοι
4τὰ τεταγμένα. Κρατερὸν δὲ ἔτι πρόσθεν
ἀπέστειλε τὰ ἄκρα καταληψόμενον, ἔνθα ᾤετο
βιαζομένους τοὺς Οὐξίους ἀποχωρήσειν. αὐτὸς δὲ
πολλῷ τάχει ᾔει· καὶ φθάνει τε κρατήσας τῶν
παρόδων καὶ ξυντεταγμένους τοὺς ἀμφ᾿ αὑτὸν ἔχων
ἐξ ὑπερδεξίων χωρίων ἐπῆγεν ὡς ἐπὶ τοὺς βαρβάρους.
5οἱ δὲ τῷ τε τάχει τῷ Ἀλεξάνδρου ἐκπλαγέντες
καὶ τοῖς χωρίοις, οἷς μάλιστα δὴ ἐπεποίθεσαν,
πλεονεκτούμενοι ἔφυγον οὐδὲ εἰς χεῖρας
280Anabasis of Alexander III
17. Leaving Susa and crossing the river Pasitigris 330 b.c. [Karun], Alexander invaded the land of the Uxians.1 The Uxians who inhabited the plains had obeyed the Persian satrap, and now surrendered to Alexander; but the Uxian hillmen, as they were called, were not subject to Persia, and now sent a message to Alexander that they would only permit him to take the route towards Persia with his army if they received what they used to receive from the Persian king on his passage. Alexander sent them away, with2 orders to go to the pass, their control of which made them think that the way through to Persia was in their hands, in order to receive from him too what was prescribed. He took the royal bodyguards, the hypaspists and some eight thousand of the rest of the army, marched by night on a road different from the obvious way, with Susian guides, and passing along a3 rough and difficult path in one day, fell upon the Uxian villages, obtained a great deal of plunder, and killed many of them still in their beds; the rest escaped to the hills. Then he marched swiftly to the pass where the Uxians were likely to meet him in full force, to receive what was prescribed. He sent Craterus even4 further in advance, to seize the heights where he supposed the Uxians would retreat under pressure, but he himself came on very rapidly, got first to the pass and occupied it, and with his men in due battle order led them from a commanding position to attack the Uxians. Astounded at Alexander’s speed of5 movement, and placed at a disadvantage by the very terrain in which they had put their chief trust, they fled without so much as coming to close quarters.

1After 3 days march, D. 67; QC. v 3, 1 ff. There are various discrepancies from A. in their accounts.281