Arrian

τελευτῇ πλημμεληθέντων ἔς τε αὑτὸν καὶ ἐς
Φίλιππον· καὶ Θηβαίοις δὲ τῆς [τε] ἀποστάσεως
ἀπέφαινεν αἰτίους οὐ μεῖον ἢ τοὺς αὐτῶν Θηβαίων
6νεωτερίσαντας. Ἀθηναῖοι δὲ τοὺς μὲν ἄνδρας οὐκ
ἐξέδοσαν, πρεσβεύονται δὲ αὖθις παρὰ Ἀλέξανδρον,
ἀφεῖναι δεόμενοι τὴν ὀργὴν τοῖς ἐξαιτηθεῖσι·
καὶ Ἀλέξανδρος ἀφῆκε, τυχὸν μὲν αἰδοῖ
τῆς πόλεως, τυχὸν δὲ σπουδῇ τοῦ ἐς τὴν Ἀσίαν
στόλου, οὐκ ἐθέλων οὐδὲν ὕποπτον ἐν τοῖς Ἕλλησιν
ὑπολείπεσθαι. Χαρίδημον μέντοι μόνον τῶν
ἐξαιτηθέντων τε καὶ οὐ δοθέντων φεύγειν ἐκέλευσε·
καὶ φεύγει Χαρίδημος ἐς τὴν Ἀσίαν παρὰ βασιλέα
Δαρεῖον.
11. Ταῦτα δὲ διαπραξάμενος ἐπανῆλθεν εἰς
Μακεδονίαν· καὶ τῷ τε Διὶ τῷ Ὀλυμπίῳ τὴν
θυσίαν τὴν ἀπ᾿ Ἀρχελάου ἔτι καθεστῶσαν ἔθυσε
καὶ τὸν ἀγῶνα ἐν Αἰγαῖς διέθηκε τὰ Ὀλύμπια· οἱ
δὲ καὶ ταῖς Μούσαις λέγουσιν ὅτι ἀγῶνα ἐποίησε.
2καὶ ἐν τούτῳ ἀγγέλλεται τὸ Ὀρφέως τοῦ Οἰάγρου
τοῦ Θρᾳκὸς ἄγαλμα τὸ ἐν Πιερίδι ἱδρῶσαι
ξυνεχῶς· καὶ ἄλλοι ἄλλα ἐπεθείαζον τῶν μάντεων,
Ἀρίστανδρος δέ, ἀνὴρ Τελμισσεύς, μάντις, θαρρεῖν
ἐκέλευσεν Ἀλέξανδρον· δηλοῦσθαι γάρ, ὅτι ποιηταῖς
ἐπῶν τε καὶ μελῶν καὶ ὅσοι ἀμφὶ ᾠδὴν
ἔχουσι πολὺς πόνος ἔσται ποιεῖν τε καὶ ᾄδειν
Ἀλέξανδρον καὶ τὰ Ἀλεξάνδρου ἔργα.
3Ἅμα δὲ τῷ ἦρι ἀρχομένῳ ἐξελαύνει ἐφ᾿ Ἑλλησπόντου,
τὰ μὲν κατὰ Μακεδονίαν τε καὶ τοὺς
Ἕλληνας Ἀντιπάτρῳ ἐπιτρέψας, αὐτὸς δὲ ἄγων
πεζοὺς μὲν σὺν ψιλοῖς τε καὶ τοξόταις οὐ πολλῷ


46Anabasis of Alexander I

at Philip’s death, against himself and Philip. He 335 b.c. also showed that they were just as guilty of the Theban rebellion as the Theban revolutionaries themselves. The Athenians did not give up the6 men, but sent a second embassy to Alexander, begging him to relent to those whose surrender he had demanded. Alexander did so, whether from reverence for Athens, or because he was anxious to hurry on his Asian expedition and did not wish to leave any ill-feeling behind in Greece.4 Charidemus alone, however, of those men whose surrender he had demanded but not obtained, he ordered to be exiled; and he took refuge in Asia with King Darius.5
11. After completing these operations Alexander returned to Macedonia, where he offered the traditional sacrifice (established by Archelaus) to Olympian Zeus and celebrated the Olympian games at Aegae: others add1 that he held games in honour of the Muses. Meanwhile, it was reported that2 the statue of Orpheus, son of Oeagrus the Thracian, in Pieria, had sweated continuously; the seers interpreted this variously, but Aristander of Telmissus encouraged Alexander by saying that it meant that makers of epics and choric songs and writers of odes would be hard at work on poetry and hymns honouring Alexander and his exploits.
In early spring he marched to the Hellespont,3 334 b.c. leaving Macedonian and Greek affairs in charge of Antipater. His infantry including light troops and archers numbered not much above thirty thou-


4Cf P. 13, 1 f. Only a hint of the difficulty of reducing
Athens, Introd. 43.5This well-known general was allegedly first honoured, then executed by Darius, D. 30; QC. iii 2, 10 ff. (with variants).1‘Vulgate cf. D. 16, 3 f. A. omits D’s story (16, 1 f.) that Al. rejected the advice of Parmenio and Antipater to defer the expedition till he had married and had a son.47