Arrian

ἤδη γὰρ αὐτῷ καὶ ἱππακοντισταὶ
2τάξις ἦσαν. ἐπελθὼν δὲ τὸ πολὺ μέρος τῆς χώρας
τῶν Μάρδων πολλοὺς μὲν ἀπέκτεινεν αὐτῶν
φεύγοντας, οὓς δέ τινας ἐς ἀλκὴν τετραμμένους,
πολλοὺς δὲ ζῶντας ἔλαβεν. οὐ γὰρ ἔστιν ὅστις
χρόνου ἐμβεβλήκει ἐς τὴν γῆν αὐτῶν ἐπὶ πολέμῳ
διά τε δυσχωρίαν καὶ ὅτι πένητες οἱ Μάρδοι καὶ
μάχιμοι ἐπὶ τῇ πενίᾳ ἦσαν. οὔκουν οὐδὲ Ἀλέξανδρον
ἐμβαλεῖν ἄν ποτε δείσαντες, ἄλλως τε καὶ
προκεχωρηκότα ἤδη ἐς τὸ πρόσω, ταύτῃ μᾶλλόν τι
3ἀφύλακτοι ἡλίσκοντο. πολλοὶ δὲ αὐτῶν καὶ ἐς τὰ
ὄρη κατέφυγον, ἃ δὴ ὑπερύψηλά τε καὶ ἀπότομα
αὐτοῖς ἐν τῇ χώρᾳ ἐστίν, ὡς πρὸς ταῦτά γε οὐχ
ἥξοντα Ἀλέξανδρον. ἐπεὶ δὲ καὶ ταύτῃ προσῆγεν,
οἱ δὲ πέμψαντες πρέσβεις σφᾶς τε αὐτοὺς ἐνέδοσαν
καὶ τὴν χώραν· καὶ Ἀλέξανδρος αὐτοὺς μὲν
ἀφῆκεν, σατράπην δὲ ἀπέδειξεν αὐτῶν Αὐτοφραδάτην,
ὅνπερ καὶ Ταπούρων.
4Αὐτὸς δὲ ἐπανελθὼν εἰς τὸ στρατόπεδον, ἔνθενπερ
ὡρμήθη ἐς τῶν Μάρδων τὴν γῆν, κατέλαβε
τοὺς Ἕλληνας τοὺς μισθοφόρους ἥκοντας καὶ τοὺς
Λακεδαιμονίων πρέσβεις, οἳ παρὰ βασιλέα Δαρεῖον
ἐπρέσβευον, Καλλιστρατίδαν τε καὶ Παύσιππον καὶ
Μόνιμον καὶ Ὀνόμαντα, καὶ Ἀθηναίων Δρωπίδην.
τούτους μὲν δὴ ξυλλαβὼν ἐν φυλακῇ εἶχε, τοὺς
Σινωπέων δὲ ἀφῆκεν, ὅτι Σινωπεῖς οὔτε τοῦ
κοινοῦ τῶν Ἑλλήνων μετεῖχον, ὑπὸ Πέρσαις τε
τεταγμένοι οὐκ ἀπεικότα ποιεῖν ἐδόκουν παρὰ τὸν
5βασιλέα σφῶν πρεσβεύοντες. ἀφῆκεν δὲ καὶ τῶν
ἄλλων Ἑλλήνων, ὅσοι πρὸ τῆς εἰρήνης τε καὶ τῆς
ξυμμαχίας τῆς πρὸς Μακεδόνας γενομένης παρὰ
308Anabasis of Alexander III

cavalry and the mounted javelin-men, for by 330 b.c. this time they formed a battalion. Passing through2 the greater part of the Mardian country, he killed many of them in flight, and some who had offered resistance; a great number were captured alive. Now, no one had invaded their country for a long time, owing to the difficulty of the terrain, and because the Mardians were not only poor, but warlike. So they could never have had any apprehension that Alexander would invade their country, especially as he had already marched so far beyond it, and for this reason they were taken more off their guard. But many of them also took refuge in the3 mountains, which are very high and precipitous in their country, feeling sure that Alexander would not penetrate so far. But when he actually reached this refuge, they sent envoys and surrendered themselves and their country; and Alexander released them, and appointed as their satrap Autophradates, whom he had also made satrap of the Tapurians.
He himself returned to the camp from which he4 had set out for the Mardian land, and found that the mercenary Greeks had arrived with the Lacedaemonian envoys who were on an embassy to king Darius, Callistratidas, Pausippus, Monimus and Onomas, with Dropides from Athens. He arrested these men and kept them in custody, but released envoys from Sinope, since the Sinopeans were not part of the Greek league but subject to Persia, and he did not think they were acting unreasonably in sending an embassy to their own king.2 He released the other5 Greeks too who served the Persians as mercenaries before the peace and alliance made (by the Greeks)

2QC. 5, 6 ff.; cf. Introd. 40; App. VI. QC. says the Athenian Democrates fell on his sword.309