Arrian

ἐξεῖλον γὰρ αὐτὴν ἐν τριάκοντα ἡμέραις προσκαθήμενοι
οἱ ξὺν Ἡφαιστίωνι. καὶ αὐτὸς μὲν
Ἄστις ἀποθνήσκει, τῆς πόλεως δὲ ἐπιμελεῖσθαι
ἐτάχθη Σαγγαῖος, ὃς ἔτι πρόσθεν πεφευγὼς
Ἄστιν παρὰ Ταξίλην ηὐτομολήκει· καὶ τοῦτο ἦν
αὐτῷ τὸ πιστὸν πρὸς Ἀλέξανδρον.
23. Ἀλέξανδρος δέ, ἄγων τοὺς ὑπασπιστὰς καὶ
τῶν ἑταίρων ἱππέων ὅσοι μὴ σὺν Ἡφαιστίωνι
ἐτετάχατο καὶ τῶν ἀσθεταίρων1 καλουμένων τὰς
τάξεις καὶ τοὺς τοξότας καὶ τοὺς Ἀγριᾶνας καὶ
τοὺς ἱππακοντιστάς, προὐχώρει ἐς τὴν Ἀσπ<ασ>ίων
τε καὶ Γουραίων χώραν καὶ Ἀσσακηνῶν.
2πορευθεὶς δὲ παρὰ τὸν Χόην καλούμενον ποταμὸν
ὀρεινήν τε ὁδὸν καὶ τραχεῖαν καὶ τοῦτον διαβὰς
χαλεπῶς τῶν μὲν πεζῶν τὸ πλῆθος βάδην ἕπεσθαί
οἱ ἐκέλευσεν, αὐτὸς δὲ ἀναλαβὼν τοὺς ἱππέας
ξύμπαντας καὶ τῶν πεζῶν τῶν Μακεδόνων ἐς
ὀκτακοσίους ἐπιβιβάσας τῶν ἵππων ξὺν ταῖς ἀσπίσι
ταῖς πεζικαῖς σπουδῇ ἦγεν, ὅτι τοὺς ταύτῃ οἰκοῦντας
βαρβάρους ξυμπεφευγέναι ἔς τε τὰ ὄρη τὰ
κατὰ τὴν χώραν ἐξηγγέλλετο αὐτῷ καὶ ἐς τὰς
3πόλεις ὅσαι ὀχυραὶ αὐτῶν ἐς τὸ ἀπομάχεσθαι. καὶ
τούτων τῇ πρώτῃ καθ᾿ ὁδὸν πόλει ᾠκισμένῃ
προσβαλὼν τοὺς μὲν πρὸ τῆς πόλεως τεταγμένους
ὡς εἶχεν ἐξ ἐφόδου ἐτρέψατο καὶ κατέκλεισεν ἐς
τὴν πόλιν, αὐτὸς δὲ τιτρώσκεται βέλει διὰ τοῦ
θώρακος ἐς τὸν ὦμον· τὸ δὲ τραῦμα οὐ χαλεπὸν
αὐτῷ ἐγένετο· ὁ γὰρ θώραξ ἔσχε τὸ μὴ οὐ διαμπὰξ
διὰ τοῦ ὤμου ἐλθεῖν τὸ βέλος· καὶ Πτολεμαῖος ὁ
Λάγου ἐτρώθη καὶ Λεοννάτος.
1πεζεταίρων editors, but cf. Introd. n. 99.416Anabasis Of Alexander IV

which he had fled for refuge; for Hephaestion and327–6 b.c. his troops captured it after a siege of thirty days. Astis himself was put to death and Sangaeus appointed to govern the city; he had previously escaped from Astis and gone over to Taxilas; this guaranteed his loyalty to Alexander.
23. Taking the hypaspists, all the Companion cavalry not detailed with Hephaestion, and the battalions of the so-called asthetairoi,1 with the archers, Agrianians, and mounted javelin-men,2 Alexander advanced to the district of the Aspasians, Guraeans and Assacenians.3 After marching along2 the river called Cheos by a mountainous, rough route, and crossing the river with some difficulty, he ordered the infantry force to follow him at marching pace, while he took all the cavalry himself with about eight hundred of the Macedonian foot-soldiers, whom he had mounted, with their infantry shields, and moved at full speed, as he had learnt that the barbarians living here had fled for refuge to the hills of the district and to the cities which were their defensive strongholds. Attacking the first of these cities3 which was built on his route without making preparations, he put to flight the forces drawn up in front of the city and at the first onslaught shut them up in the city, though he himself received an arrow wound through the corselet in his shoulder. (The wound caused him little trouble, for the breastplate prevented the dart passing right through the shoulder.) Ptolemy son of Lagus and Leonnatus were also wounded.
1Introd. n. 992Introd. § 59.3QC. viii 10 f. recounts operations described in rest of this book, with variants, mostly of small value.417