Appendices

and that even P.’s citations from it must be second-hand. A. alludes to it only once (10, 1, from which we are not to infer that it was actually in the history that Callisthenes claimed that Al’s fame would depend on what he wrote), and not in such a way as to indicate that he had read it. It seems clear to me that he had not; otherwise we should expect a different account of the visit to Siwah, nor would Ar. have been cited in iii 11, 3, if he was himself drawing on Callisthenes; indeed we should expect explicit citations elsewhere, even if A. preferred other authorities. Probably he had assumed that the work was too adulatory because written in Al’s lifetime (pref. 2).
12. In his account of the pages’ conspiracy A. draws
13, 1—4 from the ‘vulgate’ (cf. QC. viii 6, 1–11) and contrasts Ar. with the ‘vulgate’ in 13, 5 f. (QC. 6, 12 ff. combines their versions), whereas Pt. is probably used in 13, 7, as he is named as an agent in the discovery of the plot. (I see no reason to think that he concealed the role played by Leonnatus, QC. 6, 22, as he had no known quarrel with Leonnatus, and A. probably derives from Pt. honourable mentions of Leonnatus in other places; if QC. is right, we may tax A. himself with a careless omission.) Pt. also recorded that the conspirators under torture implicated Callisthenes (Ar. concurring) and that he was racked and hanged (14, 1 and 3). However for Hermolaus’
speech to the army justifying his conduct, A. turns again to the ‘vulgate’; the speech is embellished in QC. viii 7 f., who also gives Al. a reply. So it would seem that Pt. and Ar. adopted the same laconic style for this affair as for the fall of Philotas, merely recording that a plot was discovered and the
542Appendices

authors punished by the army (what they said of the fate of the pages has dropped out in A’s version), and passing over in silence those aspects of Al’s behaviour which provoked Macedonian discontent.
13. A. himself was disconcerted by the discrepancy in their stories of Callisthenes’ fate (14, 3 f.); he does not notice Chares’ statement (P. 55, 5) that Callisthenes died after seven months in fetters, but in 325! As Jacoby observed, ‘Pt. denied Callisthenes’ innocence, Chares his execution, and Ar. both.’ A. failed to see that what Pt. and Ar. said and omitted required a more critical assessment than he attempts. For QC. Callisthenes is ‘in caput regis innoxius, sed haudquaquam aulae et assentantium accommodatus ingenio’, and Al. himself repented of his death, another device for exculpation (viii 8, 20 ff.); in his story the pages confessed, but not under torture and without implicating Callisthenes (6, 24 ff.; 7, 10), and it was only after trial that they were all tortured to death. P. too cites as proof of Callisthenes’ innocence a letter of Al. to Craterus, Attalus and Alcetas (55, 3), which gives a somewhat different account: the pages did not denounce Callisthenes even under torture. J. R. Hamilton (see his Commentary ad loc.) supposes this letter to be genuine, since the addressees were in fact absent on mission at the time (A. iv 22, 1, cf. QC. viii 5, 2), and that would have been unknown to a forger; but this argument ignores the obvious possibility that a forger used a current history in which such true information could have been found; in my view (Introd. 15) all such letters stand, or rather fall, together, and this letter does no more than attest yet another variant in the ‘vulgate’. (It must have purported to give some justification,
543