Arrian
3εὐοπλοτάτους ἀμφ᾿ αὑτὸν εἶχε· καὶ ἐπειδὴ ἔμαθεν
ὑπὲρ τῶν Αὐταριατῶν πυνθανόμενον Ἀλέξανδρον,
οἵτινές τε καὶ ὁπόσοι εἶεν, οὐκ ἔφη χρῆναι ἐν λόγῳ
τίθεσθαι Αὐταριάτας· εἶναι γὰρ ἀπολεμωτάτους
τῶν ταύτῃ· καὶ αὐτὸς ἐμβαλεῖν ἐς τὴν χώραν
αὐτῶν, ὡς ἀμφὶ τὰ σφέτερα μᾶλλόν τι ἔχοιεν. καὶ
κελεύσαντος Ἀλεξάνδρου ἐσβάλλει ἐς αὐτούς καὶ
ἐμβαλὼν ἦγε καὶ ἔφερε τὴν χώραν αὐτῶν.
4Αὐταριᾶται μὲν δὴ ἀμφὶ τὰ αὑτῶν εἶχον· Λάγγαρος
δὲ τά τε ἄλλα ἐτιμήθη μεγάλως πρὸς
Ἀλεξάνδρου καὶ δῶρα ἔλαβεν, ὅσα μέγιστα παρὰ
βασιλεῖ τῷ Μακεδόνων νομίζεται· καὶ τὴν ἀδελφὴν
τὴν Ἀλεξάνδρου Κύναν καὶ ταύτην ὡμολόγησε
δώσειν αὐτῷ ἐς Πέλλαν ἀφικομένῳ Ἀλέξανδρος.
5Ἀλλὰ Λάγγαρος μὲν ἐπανελθὼν οἴκαδε νόσῳ
ἐτελεύτησεν. Ἀλέξανδρος δὲ παρὰ τὸν Ἐριγόνα
ποταμὸν πορευόμενος ἐς Πέλλιον πόλιν ἐστέλλετο.
ταύτην γὰρ κατειλήφει ὁ Κλεῖτος ὡς ὀχυρωτάτην
τῆς χώρας· καὶ τρὸς ταύτην ὡς ἧκεν Ἀλέξανδρος,
καταστρατοπεδεύσας πρὸς τῷ Ἐορδαϊκῷ ποταμῷ
6τῇ ὑστεραίᾳ ἐγνώκει προσβάλλειν τῷ τείχει. οἱ δὲ
ἀμφὶ τὸν Κλεῖτον τὰ κύκλῳ τῆς πόλεως ὄρη
ὑπερδέξιά τε ὄντα καὶ δασέα κατεῖχον, ὡς πάντοθεν
ἐπιτίθεσθαι τοῖς Μακεδόσιν, εἰ τῇ πόλει προσβάλλοιεν·
Γλαυκίας δὲ αὐτῷ ὁ τῶν Ταυλαντίων
7βασιλεὺς οὔπω παρῆν. Ἀλέξανδρος μὲν δὴ τῇ
πόλει προσῆγεν· οἱ δὲ πολέμιοι σφαγιασάμενοι
παῖδας τρεῖς καὶ κόρας ἴσας τὸν ἀριθμὸν καὶ κριοὺς
μέλανας τρεῖς, ὥρμηντο μὲν ὡς δεξόμενοι ἐς χεῖρας
τοὺς Μακεδόνας· ὁμοῦ δὲ γενομένων ἐξέλιπον
καίτοι καρτερὰ ὄντα τὰ κατειλημμένα πρὸς σφῶν
20Anabasis of Alexander I

pists he had; and when he learnt that Alexander was3 335 b.c. enquiring who the Autariates were and how numerous, he told him not to trouble about them, as they were the least warlike of the tribesmen in those parts; he would himself invade their country, so that they might be preoccupied with their own affairs. On Alexander’s instructions he invaded and devastated their country. Thus the Autariates were kept4 busy at home. Langarus received great honours from Alexander and what were considered at the court of Macedon the greatest gifts. Alexander actually promised to wed his sister Cyna3 to him, when he came to Pella. However, after reaching5 home, Langarus sickened and died.
Alexander, marching along the river Erigon [Cerna Reka], made for Pellium, a city Clitus had occupied, as the strongest in the country. When he reached it, he camped by the river Eordaicus [Devoll] and decided to assault the wall next day.4 Clitus’ forces held the heights surrounding the city,6 which were commanding and thickly wooded, so as to attack the Macedonians from all sides, if they made the assault on the city, but Glaucias, king of the Taulantians, was not yet present. Alexander7 proceeded against this city, on which the enemy sacrificed three boys and three girls and three black rams, and advanced to close combat with the Macedonians; but once engaged, they deserted the


3Or Cynnana, previously married to Al’s cousin, Amyntas (Introd. 46). The Agrianians, a Paeonian branch of the Thracians on the upper Strymon, provided a valuable contingent for the Asian expedition.4Hammond (§1 n.) places Pellium by the modern Goricë about 25 km S.E. of Lake Ochrid in the fertile plain of Poloskë watered by the river Devoll (Eordaicus); the operations can only be followed with maps as detailed as he supplies.21