Arrian

πυλῶν τῶν Κασπίων. τῶν δὲ συμφευγόντων
Δαρείῳ πολλοὶ μὲν ἀπολιπόντες αὐτὸν ἐν τῇ φυγῇ
ἐπὶ τὰ αὑτῶν ἕκαστοι ἀπεχώρουν, οὐκ ὀλίγοι δὲ
3καὶ Ἀλεξάνδρῳ σφᾶς ἐνεδίδοσαν. Ἀλέξανδρος δὲ
ὡς ἀπέγνω κατὰ πόδας αἱρήσειν Δαρεῖον, μείνας
αὐτοῦ πέντε ἡμέρας καὶ ἀναπαύσας τὸν στρατὸν
Μηδίας μὲν σατράπην ἀπέδειξεν Ὀξυδάτην Πέρσην
ἄνδρα, ὃς ἐτύγχανε πρὸς Δαρείου ξυνειλημμένος καὶ
ἐν Σούσοις εἰργόμενος· τοῦτο αὐτῷ ἐς πίστιν ἦν
πρὸς Ἀλέξανδρον· αὐτὸς δὲ ὡς ἐπὶ Παρθυαίους
4ἦγε. καὶ τῇ μὲν πρώτῃ πρὸς ταῖς Κασπίαις
πύλαις ἐστρατοπέδευσε, τῇ δευτέρᾳ δὲ εἴσω παρῆλθε
τῶν πυλῶν ἔστε οἰκούμενα ἦν. ἐπισιτισόμενος1
δὲ αὐτόθεν, ὅτι ἔρημον τὴν πρόσω χώραν
ἤκουεν, ἐς προνομὴν ἐκπέμπει Κοῖνον ξὺν ἱππεῦσί
τε καὶ τῶν πεξῶν ὀλίγοις.
21. Καὶ ἐν τούτῳ ἀφικνεῖται παρ᾿ αὐτὸν ἀπὸ τοῦ
Δαρείου στρατοπέδου Βαγιστάνης Βαβυλώνιος
ἀνὴρ τῶν γνωρίμων καὶ ξὺν τούτῳ Ἀντίβηλος τῶν
Μαζαίου παίδων. οὗτοι ἀπήγγειλαν ὅτι Ναβαρζάνης
τε, χιλιάρχης τῶν ξὺν Δαρείῳ φευγόντων
ἱππέων, καὶ Βῆσσος ὁ Βακτρίων σατράπης καὶ
Βαρσαέντης ὁ Ἀραχωτῶν καὶ Δραγγῶν σατράπης
2ξυνειληφότες εἶεν Δαρεῖον. ταῦτα ἀκούσας Ἀλέξανδρος
ἔτι μᾶλλον ἦγε σπουδῇ, τοὺς ἐταίρους
μόνους ἔχων ἀμφ᾿ αὑτὸν καὶ τοὺς προδρόμους
ἱππέας καὶ τῶν πεζῶν τοὺς εὐρωστοτάτους τε καὶ
κουφοτάτους ἐπιλεξάμενος, οὐδὲ τοὺς ἀμφὶ Κοῖνον
προσμείνας ἐκ τῆς προνομῆς ἐπανελθεῖν. τοῖς δὲ
ὑπολειπομένοις ἐπιστήσας Κρατερὸν προστάττει

1ἐπισιτισόμενος Krüger; ἐπισιτισάμενος codd.294Anabasis of Alexander III

quick and had already passed the Caspian gates. 330 b.c. Many of those who shared his flight deserted him during its course, and went off to their homes, and a good number had surrendered to Alexander. Despairing3 of capturing Darius by close pursuit, Alexander remained there five days and rested his force; he appointed Oxydates satrap of Media, a Persian who had been arrested by Darius and imprisoned at Susa;2 this made Alexander trust him. Alexander then marched towards the Parthyaeans. The first4 day he encamped by the Caspian gates, on the second he passed within the gates to the limit of the inhabited country. In order to get provisions there, since he heard that the country beyond was desert, he sent Coenus to forage with cavalry and a few foot-soldiers.
21. At this point Bagistanes came to him from Darius’ camp, a Babylonian and a noble, with Antibelus, one of Mazaeus’ sons. They reported that Nabarzanes, chiliarch of the cavalry which had shared Darius’ flight, Bessus satrap of Bactria and Barsaentes satrap of the Arachotians and the Drangians1 had arrested Darius. On learning this Alexander pressed2 on faster than ever, with only the Companions, the mounted prodromoi, and the strongest and lightest of the infantry, carefully selected, without even waiting for Coenus and his men to return from foraging. He put Craterus in command of those left behind and ordered him to follow, but not by forced marches.


2QC. vi 2, 11 puts this after Darius’ death.1Elsewhere called Zarangians.295