Arrian

γραφή, τά τε ἐκείνων πάντα τις ἀναλεξάμενος καὶ
τοῖσδε τοῖς ἡμετέροις ἐντυχὼν οὕτω θαυμαζέτω.
1. Λέγεται δὴ Φίλιππος μὲν τελευτῆσαι ἐπὶ
ἄρχοντος Πυθοδήλου Ἀθήνησι· παραλαβόντα δὲ
τὴν βασιλείαν Ἀλέξανδρον, παῖδα ὄντα Φιλίππου,
ἐς Πελοπόννησον παρελθεῖν· εἶναι δὲ τότε ἀμφὶ τὰ
2εἴκοσιν ἔτη Ἀλέξανδρον. ἐνταῦθα ξυναγαγόντα
τοὺς Ἕλληνας, ὅσοι ἐντὸς Πελοποννήσου ἦσαν,
αἰτεῖν παρ᾿ αὐτῶν τὴν ἡγεμονίαν τῆς ἐπὶ τοὺς
Πέρσας στρατιᾶς, ἥντινα Φιλίππῳ ἤδη ἔδοσαν· καὶ
αἰτήσαντα λαβεῖν παρ᾿ ἑκάστων πλὴν Λακεδαιμονίων·
Λακεδαιμονίους δὲ ἀποκρίνασθαι μὴ εἶναί
σφισι πάτριον ἀκολουθεῖν ἄλλοις, ἀλλ᾿ αὐτοὺς
3ἄλλων ἐξηγεῖσθαι. νεωτερίσαι δὲ ἄττα καὶ τῶν
Ἀθηναίων τὴν πόλιν. ἀλλὰ Ἀθηναίους γε τῇ
πρώτῃ ἐφόδῳ Ἀλεξάνδρου ἐκπλαγέντας καὶ πλείονα
ἔτι τῶν Φιλίππῳ δοθέντων Ἀλεξάνδρῳ εἰς τιμὴν
συγχωρῆσαι. ἐπανελθόντα δὲ ἐς Μακεδονίαν ἐν
παρασκευῇ εἶναι τοῦ ἐς τὴν Ἀσίαν στόλου.
4Ἅμα δὲ τῷ ἦρι ἐλαύνειν ἐπὶ Θρᾴκης, ἐς Τριβαλλοὺς
καὶ Ἰλλυριούς, ὅτι τε νεωτερίζειν ἐπύθετο
Ἰλλυριούς τε καὶ Τριβαλλούς, καὶ ἅμα ὁμόρους
ὄντας οὐκ ἐδόκει ὑπολείπεσθαι ὅτι μὴ πάντῃ
ταπεινωθέντας οὕτω μακρὰν ἀπὸ τῆς οἰκείας στελλόμενον.
5ὁρμηθέντα δὴ ἐξ Ἀμφιπόλεως ἐμβαλεῖν
εἰς Θρᾴκην τὴν τῶν αὐτονόμων καλουμένων




4Anabasis of Alexander I
occurred to me too to compose this history should express his surprise only after perusing all their works and then reading mine.1
1. Now we are told2 that the death of Philip occurred 336 b.c. in the archonship of Pythodelus at Athens; then about twenty, Alexander succeeded, as Philip’s son, and arrived in the Peloponnesus. There he assembled2
the Peloponnesian Greeks and requested from them the leadership of the Persian expedition, which they had already granted to Philip. Each people agreed except the Lacedaemonians, who replied that their country’s tradition did not permit them to follow others; it was theirs to take the lead. At Athens too3
there was a revolutionary movement, but the Athenians collapsed at Alexander’s first approach and conceded to him honours still greater than had been given to Philip. Alexander returned to Macedonia and began to get ready for the Asian expedition.
At the advent of spring3 he marched towards4 335 b.c. Thrace against the Triballi and Illyrians, since he learned that they were restless; moreover, as they marched with his borders, he did not think it well to leave them behind him, when going on an expedition so far from home, unless they had been thoroughly humbled. Starting from Amphipolis, he invaded5 the part of Thrace that belongs to the independent



1For A’s sources Introd. 10–23; a fuller discussion will
appear in vol. II.2The ‘tale’ is apparently not from the ‘vulgate’, but
rather what all tell; § 1–3 summarize well-known facts (Introd. 38, 49); § 4-ch. 6 at end give a seamless narrative in which direct speech replaces indirect at the end of 1, 5, presumably from Pt./Ar.; Pt. is actually cited in 2, 7 and followed in 4, 6–8.3Perhaps this suggests too early a date; 4, I may indicate that it was early June when Al. was on the Danube; 5, 9 that the harvest was already in near Pellium; Thebes did not fall till October (10, 2 n.).5