Arrian

ὀλίγον ὕστερον ἐκ τῶν τραυμάτων πρὶν
ὀφθῆναι Ἀλεξάνδρῳ.
22. Ἀλέξανδρος δὲ τὸ μὲν σῶμα τοῦ Δαρείου ἐς
Πέρσας ἀπέπεμψε, θάψαι κελεύσας ἐν ταῖς βασιλικαῖς
θήκαις, καθάπερ καὶ οἱ ἄλλοι οἱ πρὸ
Δαρείου βασιλεῖς· σατράπην δὲ ἀπέδειξε Παρθυαίων
καὶ Ὑρκανίων Ἀμμινάπην Παρθυαῖον·
ἦν δὲ οὗτος τῶν Αἴγυπτον ἐνδόντων Ἀλεξάνδρῳ
μετὰ Μαζάκου. Τληπόλεμος δὲ Πυθοφάνους τῶν
ἑταίρων ξυνετάχθη αὐτῷ σκοπεῖν τὰ ἐν Παρθυαίοις
τε καὶ Ὑρκανίοις.
2Τοῦτο τὸ τέλος Δαρείῳ ἐγένετο ἐπὶ ἄρχοντος
Ἀθηναίοις Ἀριστοφῶντος μηνὸς Ἑκατομβαιῶνος,
ἀνδρὶ τὰ μὲν πολέμια, εἴπερ τινὶ ἄλλῳ, μαλθακῷ τε
καὶ οὐ φρενήρει, εἰς δὲ τἆλλα οὐδὲν ἀνεπιεικὲς
ἔργον ἀποδειξαμένῳ ἢ οὐδὲ ἐγγενόμενον αὐτῷ
ἀποδείξασθαι, ὅτι ὁμοῦ μὲν ἐς τὴν βασιλείαν παρελθεῖν,
ὁμοῦ δὲ προσπολεμεῖσθαι πρός τε Μακεδόνων
καὶ τῶν Ἑλλήνων ξυνέβη. οὔκουν οὐδὲ
ἐθέλοντι ἐξῆν ἔτι ὑβρίζειν ἐς τοὺς ὑπηκόους ἐν
μείζονι κινδύνῳ ἤπερ ἐκεῖνοι καθεστηκότι. ζῶντι
μὲν δὴ ξυμφοραὶ αὐτῷ ἄλλαι ἐπ᾿ ἄλλαις ξυνηνέχθησαν,
3οὐδέ τις ἀνακωχὴ ἐγένετο ἐπειδὴ πρῶτον
ἐς τὴν ἀρχὴν παρῆλθεν· ἀλλὰ εὐθὺς μὲν τὸ τῶν
σατραπῶν ἐπὶ Γρανίκῳ πταῖσμα ξυνέβη τὸ ἱππικόν,
εὐθὺς δὲ Ἰωνία τε καὶ Αἰολὶς εἴχοντο καὶ Φρύγες
ἀμφότεροι καὶ Λυδία καὶ Κᾶρες πλὴν Ἁλικαρνασσέων·
4ὀλίγον δὲ ὕστερον καὶ Ἁλικαρνασσὸς
ἐξῄρητο, ἐπὶ δὲ ἡ παραλία πᾶσα ἔστε ἐπὶ Κιλικίαν·
ἔνθεν δὲ ἡ αὐτοῦ ἐπ᾿ Ἰσσῷ ἧσσα, ἵνα τήν τε μητέρα


300Anabasis of Alexander III

Darius died of his wound soon after, before Alexander 330 b.c. had seen him.5
22. Alexander sent Darius’ body to Persepolis, ordering it to be buried in the royal tomb, like the other kings who ruled before him.1 He appointed as satrap of the Parthyaeans and Hyrcanians Amminapes, a Parthyaean; he was one of those with Mazacus, who had surrendered Egypt to Alexander.2 Tlepolemus son of Pythophanes, one of the Companions, was associated in the appointment with him, to superintend Parthyaea and Hyrcania.
This was the end of Darius, when Aristophon was2 archon at Athens in the month Hecatombaeon.3 No man showed less spirit or sense in warfare; but in other matters he committed no offence, perhaps for lack of opportunity, since the moment of his accession was also the moment of the attack on him by the Macedonians and Greeks. So even if he had had the will, he was no longer free to play the tyrant to his subjects, as his position was more dangerous than theirs. His life was one series of disasters, with no3 respite, after his accession. The cavalry disaster of his satraps on the Granicus happened at once, and at once Ionia and Aeolis were in the enemy’s hands, with both Phrygias, Lydia and all Caria except Halicarnassus; the loss of Halicarnassus, and then of all4 the coast-line as far as Cilicia soon followed. Next came his defeat at Issus, where he saw his mother




5In the ‘vulgate’ Darius was still alive when found by the Macedonians, QC. v 13, 24 f. (broken by lacuna); P. 43; J. xi 15.1Cf. vi 29.2QC. vi 4, 25 puts this in Hyrcania, ignoring Tlepolemus. Amminapes was eventually replaced by Phrataphernes (iii 23, 4) at least by 326 b.c. (v 20, 7) but perhaps not as early as autumn 330 b.c. (cf. iii 28, 2).3July 330, cf. App. VIII 6–10. A’s reflections follow.301