Arrian
4ἀπόβασιν. οἱ δὲ βάρβαροι ἀπήντων ἐπὶ τὸν
ποταμόν, ὅπῃ αἱ νῆες προσπίπτοιεν· αἱ δὲ ὀλίγαι τε
ἦσαν καὶ ἡ στρατιὰ οὐ πολλὴ <ἡ> ἐπ᾿ αὐτῶν, καὶ
τῆς νήσου τὰ πολλὰ ἀπότομα ἐς προσβολήν, καὶ τὸ
ῥεῦμα τοῦ ποταμοῦ τὸ παρ᾿ αὐτήν, οἷα δὴ ἐς στενὸν
συγκεκλεισμένον, ὀξὺ καὶ ἄπορον προσφέρεσθαι.
5Ἔνθα δὴ Ἀλέξανδρος ἀπαγαγὼν τὰς ναῦς ἔγνω
διαβαίνειν τὸν Ἴστρον ἐπὶ τοὺς Γέτας τοὺς πέραν
τοῦ Ἴστρου ᾠκισμένους, ὅτι τε συνειλεγμένους
ἑώρα πολλοὺς ἐπὶ τῇ ὄχθῃ τοῦ Ἴστρου, ὡς
εἴρξοντας, εἰ διαβαίνοι, — ἦσαν γὰρ ἱππεῖς μὲν ἐς
τετρακισχιλίους, πεζοὶ δὲ πλείους τῶν μυρίων —καὶ
ἅμα πόθος ἔλαβεν αὐτὸν ἐπέκεινα τοῦ Ἴστρου
6ἐλθῖν. τῶν μὲν δὴ νεῶν ἐπέβη αὐτός· τὰς δὲ
διφθέρας, ὑφ᾿ αἷς ἐσκήνουν, τῆς κάρφης πληρώσας
καὶ ὅσα μονόξυλα πλοῖα ἐκ τῆς χώρας ξυναγαγών
—ἦν δὲ καὶ τούτων εὐπορία πολλή, ὅτι τούτοις
χρῶνται οἱ πρόσοικοι τῷ Ἴστρῳ ἐφ᾿ ἁλιείᾳ τε τῇ
ἐκ τοῦ Ἴστρου καὶ εἴποτε παρ᾿ ἀλλήλους ἀνὰ τὸν
ποταμὸν στέλλοιντο καὶ λῃστεύοντες ἀπ᾿ αὐτῶν οἱ
πολλοί—ταῦτα ὡς πλεῖστα ξυναγαγὼν διεβίβαζεν
ἐπ᾿ αὐτῶν τῆς στρατιᾶς ὅσους δυνατὸν ἦν ἐν τῷ
τοιῷδε τρόπῳ. καὶ γίγνονται οἱ διαβάντες ἅμα
Ἀλεξάνδρῳ ἱππεῖς μὲν ἐς χιλίους καὶ πεντακοσίους,
πεζοὶ δὲ ἐς τετρακισχιλίους.
4. Διέβαλον δὲ τῆς νυκτὸς ᾗ λήιον ἦν σίτου
βαθύ· καὶ ταύτῃ μᾶλλόν τι ἔλαθον προσχόντες τῇ
ὄχθῃ. ὑπὸ δὲ τὴν ἕω Ἀλέξανδρος διὰ τοῦ ληίου
ἦγε, παραγγείλας τοῖς πεζοῖς πλαγίαις ταῖς σαρίσσαις
ἐπικλίνοντας τὸν σῖτον οὕτω προάγειν ἐς τὰ
οὐκ ἐργάσιμα. οἱ δὲ ἱππεῖς ἔστε μὲν διὰ τοῦ ληίου
2προῄει ἡ φάλαγξ ἐφείποντο· ὡς δὲ ἐκ τῶν
14Anabasis of Alexander I

a landing. The barbarians, however, came down to4 335 b.c. the river-side wherever the ships touched land; these were few in number, and carried only a small force; the island was for the most part steep for landing; and the current past the island, as was natural in a narrow strait, was swift and difficult to contend with.
Thereupon Alexander withdrew his ships and decided5 to cross the Ister to attack the Getae settled on the farther side, both because he saw a large force of them gathered on the bank, to repel him, should he cross—there were about four thousand mounted men, and more than ten thousand on foot—and also because he had been seized with a longing3 to go beyond the river. He himself embarked in the fleet;6 he filled the leather tent covers with hay, collected as many as possible of the boats from the countryside made from single tree trunks (they were plentiful, for the river-side dwellers use them for fishing, at times for river expeditions among themselves, and even more for thieving), and ferried across as much of his force as he could in this way. About fifteen hundred cavalry and four thousand foot-soldiers crossed with him.
4. The crossing was made at night where there was a deep cornfield, and this concealed them more, as they reached the bank. About dawn, Alexander led the troops through the field, ordering the infantry to smooth down the corn with their spears, held obliquely, and so advance to untilled ground. As long as the phalanx was marching through the corn the cavalry followed; but when they emerged2
3Appendix V 3.15