Appendices

only 8,000 in all escaped from Issus (H. W. Parke, Greek Mercenary Soldiers 199 thinks even this figure too high); moreover, A. seems to make them all go with Amyntas to Egypt (whereas D. and QC. iv 1, 27 give Amyntas only 4,000); there they must have sustained further losses (A. ii 13, 2 f.), and it is not recorded that any from this party ultimately went to Crete. However, A. is probably wrong in thinking that all the survivors from Issus were with Amyntas; the 2,000 still in Darius’ service in 331 (hi 7, 1; 16, 2; in QC. iv 1, 3 they number 4,000) may be another remnant. All that we can say is that some who had fought at Issus found their way to Agis.
3. A. says that at Tyre in 331, perhaps as late as early July (App. VIII 4), Al. sent Amphoterus with ships to help the loyal Peloponnesians against a movement of revolt in the Peloponnese led by Sparta; he also ordered 100 Phoenician and Cypriote ships to Greece (iii 6, 2 f.). By contrast QC. iv 8, 15 makes him despatch Amphoterus from Egypt to free Crete and clear the seas of piracy, whereas A. iii 2, 6 does not suggest that Amphoterus, as well as Hegelochus, came to Egypt at all. Perhaps we can partially reconcile their evidence by assuming that Amphoterus’
original instructions, given in Egypt, were amended when it was clear that the prime danger was no longer in Crete but in Greece. Prima facie A. seems to imply that Al. had already heard at latest in early July of Agis’ success in raising other Peloponnesians in revolt. It is no objection that he sent only ships when troops were most needed to defeat the rebels. Al. could not spare troops without postponing his offensive in Mesopotamia. He could reckon that Antipater could outmatch Agis by land
482Appendices

without reinforcements. On the other hand a fleet, which he was free to send, could provide Antipater, in case of need, with the means of rapidly transporting forces by sea; it could cut off Agis, who was now presumably back at Sparta, from further supplies of soldiers from Crete, and it could help to neutralize Athens; at the very same time Al. at last ordered the release of Athenian prisoners taken in 334 (contrast i 29, 5), to conciliate that city (iii 6, 2). And, though our accounts of the revolt say nothing of the part played by Al’s ships, they may in fact have served at least the last two purposes. It is more puzzling that in December 331 (iii 16, 10) Al. was to be joined by Amyntas, son of Andromenes, whom he had despatched home to bring him reinforcements late in 332 (D. 49, 1; QC. iv 6, 30) and who now brought him 6,500 Macedonians, 4,100 Thracians and 4,000–5,000 Peloponnesians (D. 65, 1; QC. v 1, 40 f.); these men can hardly have started later than July, if they marched all the way, but if they were shipped to Syria, they would have set out even later, and it seems strange that Antipater should have let them go, if he was then aware of the full dimensions of the revolt. That may suggest that in July, though the situation in the Peloponnese was already menacing, Sparta’s allies were not yet committed to war and that Antipater did not feel justified in delaying compliance with Al’s orders for reinforcements. It was perhaps from Amyntas that Al. himself first learned in December that the seditious movement in the Peloponnese had culminated in war, and as he then sent Antipater money for his operations, he did not yet know that the revolt had been repressed (iii 16, 10). All this must cast some doubt on the statement in QC. vi 1, 21 that the revolt broke out
483