Appendices

defeats the Persian right without help in the end. It does more credit too to Al. as a general to suppose that he turned back from his initial pursuit, in case Parmenio were in danger. However, in retrospect it appeared a misfortune that Darius had escaped, and as the facts were that Parmenio had more difficulty in overcoming the enemy and that Al. did turn back to help him, those who sought to depreciate Parmenio (perhaps with Al’s encouragement) made out that he was to blame for the incompleteness of the victory. If it were also a fact that he had sent a message to Al. early in the battle, or rather before it had started, pointing out that he needed reinforcement if he were to block an outflanking movement, it was easier perhaps to fabricate a second message in support of the contention that his failings had hampered Al’s success. And since P. cites Callisthenes on these failings in the context in which he mentions the second message, the story, whether true or false, may probably be his, and invented after Parmenio’s death; note that he did not describe an event of winter 332/1 till after summer 330 (App. V 3), so that his record was in substantial arrears. I have indeed little doubt that Al’s official version of the battle largely springs from Callisthenes.
Appendix X
Persepolis
1. Though D. 69 and QC. v 5, 1 if. (unlike A.) say that Persepolis was surrendered to Al. by the Persian officer, Tiridates, to whom Al. allegedly confided
514Appendices

the Persian treasury (QC. 6, 11), they also hold that Al. sacked the city on entry (D. 70; QC. 6, 1–9), and P. 37, 2 cites one of Al’s supposed letters as evidence that he ordered the massacre of the inhabitants. A’s account is so misleadingly brief, considering that Al. stayed at Persepolis from January to May 330 (App. VIII 6), that these stories cannot be discounted. The burning of the palace (iii 18, 11 f.) (confirmed by excavations, see E. Schmidt, Persepolis I 78) is plausibly set by QC. 7 and P. 38, 1 on the eve of his departure for Ecbatana, though D. 72 puts it before Al’s campaign against neighbouring’ cities’, which occurred in March-April (App. VIII 6) and in QC’s account (6, 11 if.) before the fire; it is at least probable that he deferred the act till he had ceased to require it as a residence. A. clearly gives the official view, adopted by Pt. and Ar. (also in Strabo xv 3, 6, who often uses Ar.), that it was deliberate retribution for the burning of Greek temples by the Persians in 480; it accords with this that Al. disbanded the Greek allies, even the Thessalians, at Ecbatana (iii 19, 5 and note); this was nearer home than Persepolis, and moreover Al. had then learned that Darius had been unable to mobilize another powerful army (iii 19, 4); the Panhellenic aims of the war had now been realized (Introd. 39 if.), and all that remained was to fulfil Al’s personal or Macedonian designs of conquest. (This is brought out in D. 74, 3; QC. vi 2, 15–4, 1; P. 47, 1 and J. xii 3 with variations.) However, the arson was inconsistent with the role he was about to assume as the rightful successor of Darius; hence, it was officially admitted that he regretted it later, not at once (P. 38, 4) but on his return to Persepolis in 324 (vi 30, 1). By contrast, in the ‘vulgate’, going back to Clitarchus (Jacoby
515