Arrian
7Αὐτὸς δὲ ἐπὶ τὸν Ὄξον τε ποταμὸν ᾔει αὖθις καὶ
εἰς τὴν Σογδιανὴν προχωρεῖν ἐγνώκει, ὅτι πολλοὺς
τῶν Σογδιανῶν ἐς τὰ ἐρύματα ξυμπεφευγέναι
ἠγγέλλετο οὐδὲ ἐθέλειν κατακούειν τοῦ σατράπου,
ὅστις αὐτοῖς ἐξ Ἀλεξάνδρου ἐπετέτακτο. στρατοπεδεύοντος
δὲ αὐτοῦ ἐπὶ τῷ ποταμῷ τῷ Ὄξῳ οὐ
μακρὰν τῆς σχηνῆς τῆς αὐτοῦ Ἀλεξάνδρου πηγὴ
ὕδατος καὶ ἄλλη ἐλαίου πηγὴ πλησίον αὐτῆς
8ἀνέσχε. καὶ Πτολεμαίῳ τῷ Λάγου τῷ σωματοφύλακι
ἐπειδὴ ἐσηγγέλθη τὸ τέρας, Πτολεμαῖος
Ἀλεξάνδρῳ ἔφρασεν. Ἀλέξανδρος δὲ ἔθυεν ἐπὶ
τῷ φάσματι ὅσα οἱ μάντεις ἐξηγοῦντο. Ἀρίστανδρος
δὲ πόνων εἶναι σημεῖον τοῦ ἐλαίου τὴν πηγὴν
ἔφασκεν, ἀλλὰ καὶ νίκην ἐπὶ τοῖς πόνοις σημαίνειν.
16. Διαβὰς οὖν ξὺν μέρει τῆς στρατιᾶς ἐς τὴν
Σογδιανήν, Πολυπέρχοντα δὲ καὶ Ἄτταλον καὶ
Γοργίαν καὶ Μελέαγρον αὐτοῦ ἐν Βάκτροις ὑπολιπόμενος
τούτοις μὲν παρήγγειλεν τὴν τε χώραν ἐν
φυλακῇ ἔχειν, ὡς μή τι νεωτερίσωσιν οἱ ταύτῃ
βάρβαροι, καὶ τοὺς ἔτι ἀφεστηκότας αὐτῶν ἐξαιρεῖν·
2αὐτὸς δὲ ἐς πέντε μέρη διελὼν τὴν ἅμα οἷ
στρατιὰν τῶν μὲν Ἡφαιστίωνα ἄρχειν ἔταξε, τῶν
δὲ Πτολεμαῖον τὸν Λάγου τὸν σωματοφύλακα·
τοῖς τρίτοις δὲ Περδίκκαν ἐπέταξε· τῆς δὲ τετάρτης
τάξεως Κοῖνος καὶ Ἀρτάβαζος ἡγοῦντο
αὐτῷ· τὴν δὲ πέμπτην μοῖραν ἀναλαβὼν αὐτὸς
3ἐπῄει τὴν χώραν ὡς ἐπὶ Μαράκανδα. καὶ οἱ ἄλλοι
ὡς ἑκάστοις προὐχώρει ἐπῄεσαν, τοὺς μέν τινας
τῶν ἐς τὰ ἐρύματα ξυμπεφευγότων βίᾳ ἐξαιροῦντες,
τοὺς δὲ καὶ ὁμολογίᾳ προσχωροῦντάς σφισιν
ἀναλαμβάνοντες. ὡς δὲ ξύμπασα αὐτῷ ἡ δύναμις
ἐπελθοῦσα τῶν Σογδιανῶν τῆς χώρας τὴν πολλὴν
390Anabasis Of Alexander IV
He himself returned to the river Oxus; he had7 Spring 328 b.c. determined to move into Sogdiana, since it was reported that many of the Sogdianians had taken refuge in their forts and would not obey the satrap set over them by Alexander. While he was encamped on the river Oxus, not far from his own tent a spring of water, and another of oil near by, came up from the ground. When this prodigy was notified8 to Ptolemy son of Lagus, the royal bodyguard, he told Alexander, and Alexander sacrificed on account of this portent as the soothsayers directed. Aristander said that the spring of oil was a sign of tribulations to come, but that it portended victory after the tribulations.4
16. Passing with part of his force into Sogdiana, he left behind Polyperchon, Attalus, Gorgias and Meleager there in Bactra and told them to protect the country, prevent the barbarians there giving trouble and destroy those still in revolt. He himself2 divided the force with him into five parts, and appointed Hephaestion to command one, Ptolemy son of Lagus, the bodyguard, another; the third was put under Perdiccas, and the fourth brigade was commanded by Coenus and Artabazus; he took the fifth himself and invaded the country in the direction of Maracanda. Each of the other divisions carried3 out such attacks as its success allowed, violently destroying some of those who had taken refuge in the forts, and accepting the surrender of others by agreement. But when his whole force, after traversing the greater part of Sogdiana, arrived at Maracanda,

4Presumably from Pt. Cf. P. 57, 4 f. (with no mention of Pt.). Strabo xi 7, 3 puts the discovery of petroleum on the Ochus, perhaps following Ar., cf. Pearson, LH 169.391