Diodorus of Sicily

δύναμιν διελόμενος κατὰ πόλεις διέδωκεν εἰς
χειμασίαν.
4Περὶ δὲ τούτους τοὺς χρόνους καὶ Μιθριδάτης,
ὑπήκοος ὢν Ἀντιγόνῳ καὶ δόξας ἀφίστασθαι πρὸς
τοὺς περὶ Κάσανδρον, ἀνῃρέθη περὶ Κίον τῆς
Μυσίας, ἄρξας αὐτῆς καὶ Μυρλείας1 ἔτη τριάκοντα
καὶ πέντε· τὴν δὲ δυναστείαν διαδεξάμενος Μιθριδάτης
πολλοὺς προσεκτήσατο, τῆς δὲ Καππαδοκίας
καὶ Παφλαγονίας ἦρξεν ἔτη τριάκοντα ἕξ.
112. Ἐν δὲ ταῖς αὐταῖς ἡμέραις Κάσανδρος μετὰ
τὴν ἀπαλλαγὴν τὴν Δημητρίου τὰς μὲν κατὰ τὴν
Θετταλίαν πόλεις ἀνεκτήσατο, Πλείσταρχον δὲ
μετὰ δυνάμεως ἐξέπεμψεν εἰς τὴν Ἀσίαν βοηθήσοντα
τοῖς περὶ Λυσίμαχον. οἱ δὲ συναποσταλέντες
ἦσαν πεζοὶ μὲν μύριοι δισχίλιοι, ἱππεῖς δὲ
2πεντακόσιοι. ὁ δὲ Πλείσταρχος ἐπειδὴ παραγενόμενος
ἐπὶ τὸ στόμα τοῦ Πόντου κατέλαβε τοὺς
τόπους προκατεχομένους ὑπὸ τῶν πολεμίων, ἀπογνοὺς
τὴν διάβασιν παρῆλθεν εἰς Ὀδησσόν, ἣ κεῖται
μεταξὺ μὲν τῆς τε Ἀπολλωνίας καὶ Καλλαντίας,2
κατ᾿ ἀντικρὺ δὲ τῆς ἐν τῷ πέραν Ἡρακλείας,
3ἐχούσης τι μέρος τῆς Λυσιμάχου δυνάμεως. οὐκ
ἔχων δ᾿ ἱκανὰ πόρια πρὸς τὴν τῶν στρατιωτῶν διάβασιν
τριχῇ διεμέρισε τὴν δύναμιν. τὴν μὲν οὖν
πρώτην ἀποστολὴν συνέβη διασωθῆναι πρὸς τὴν
Ἡράκλειαν, τὴν δὲ δευτέραν ὑπὸ τῶν περὶ τὸ στόμα
τοῦ Πόντου φυλακίδων νεῶν ἁλῶναι. κατὰ τὴν


1Μυρλείας Post: Ἀρρίνης RX, Μαρίνης F.2Καλλαντίας Palmer: Γαλατίας.440Book XX

army into winter quarters, dividing it among the 302 b.c. cities.
At about this time Mithridates,1 who was subject to Antigonus but appeared to be shifting his allegiance to Cassander, was slain at Cius in Mysia after having ruled that city and Myrlea2 for thirty-five years; and Mithridates,3 inheriting the kingdom, added many new subjects and was king of Cappadocia and Paphlagonia for thirty-six years.
112. In these same days Cassander, after the departure of Demetrius, took possession of the cities of Thessaly and sent Pleistarchus with an army into Asia to aid Lysimachus. Those sent with him were twelve thousand foot-soldiers and five hundred horsemen. But when Pleistarchus came to the entrance of the Pontus, he found that the region had already been taken over by the enemy and, abandoning the crossing, he turned aside to Odessus, which lies between Apollonia and Callantia, directly opposite to Heraclea on the opposite shore, where a part of the army of Lysimachus was quartered. Since he did not have ships enough for transporting his soldiers, he divided his army into three contingents. Now the first force sent out came safe to Heraclea, but the second was captured by the guard-ships at the entrance to the Pontus. When Pleistarchus himself



1Mithridates II of Cius in Bithynia, son of Ariobarzanes, cp. Book 16. 90. 2.2Myrlea, later called Apamea, was an important port near Cius; but see critical note.3Mithridates III of Cius and I of Pontus, if identical with the Mithridates of Book 19. 40. 2, and Plutarch, Demetrius, 4, is son of an Ariobarzanes who is probably the brother of Mithridates II. In our passage, then, the nephew succeeds his uncle.441