Diodorus of Sicily

ὑπὸ τῆς ἐνδείας διεφθάρησαν, τῶν δ᾿ ἱππέων οἱ
μὲν ἔξω τάξεως ὄντες οὐ σιτομετρούμενοι τὸ
παράπαν σχεδὸν ἅπαντες ἐτελεύτησαν, οὐκ ὀλίγοι
δὲ καὶ τῶν στρατιωτῶν τῆς ὁμοίας καταστροφῆς
4ἔτυχον. ἔνιοι δὲ τῶν βαρβάρων, τῆς φύσεως κατισχυούσης
τὴν εὐλάβειαν, ἐσαρκοφάγουν ἀναλεγόμενοι
τὰ σώματα τῶν ἀποθνησκόντων. ταχὺ δὲ
τῆς πόλεως πληρουμένης νεκρῶν οἱ προεστηκότες
τοῦ περὶ τὴν βασίλισσαν συστήματος τὰ μὲν
κατώρυττον τῶν σωμάτων, τὰ δ᾿ ὑπὲρ τῶν τειχῶν
ἐξερρίπτουν, ὥστ᾿ εἶναι καὶ τὴν θέαν τὴν
τούτων ἀπεχθῆ καὶ τὴν δυσωδίαν ἀνυπομένητον
μὴ μόνον γυναιξὶ βασιλίσσαις καὶ τρυφῆς οἰκείαις,
ἀλλὰ καὶ τῶν στρατιωτῶν τοῖς εἰωθόσι
κακοπαθεῖν.
50. Τοῦ δ᾿ ἔαρος ἀρχομένου καὶ τῆς ἐνδείας ἀεὶ
μᾶλλον αὐξανομένης συνέδραμον πολλοὶ τῶν στρατιωτῶν
καὶ τὴν Ὀλυμπιάδα παρεκάλουν αὐτοὺς
ἀφεῖναι διὰ τὴν ἀπορίαν. ἡ δὲ οὔτε σιτομετρεῖν
αὐτοὺς δυναμένη τὸ παράπαν οὔτε τὴν πολιορκίαν
2λῦσαι συνεχώρησεν ἀπαλλάττεσθαι. ὁ δὲ Κάσανδρος
προσδεξάμενος ἅπαντας τοὺς αὐτομολήσαντας
καὶ φιλανθρώπως χρησάμενος διαπέστειλεν ἐπὶ τὰς
πόλεις· ἤλπιζε γὰρ παρὰ τούτων πυθομένους τοὺς
Μακεδόνας τὴν Ὀλυμπιάδος ἀσθένειαν ἀπελπιεῖν
3αὐτῆς τὰ πράγματα. οὐ κακῶς δ᾿ αὐτοῦ στοχασαμένου
περὶ τοῦ μέλλοντος, οἱ μὲν συναγωνίζεσθαι
διεγνωκότες τοῖς πολιορκουμένοις μετενόησαν καὶ
πρὸς Κάσανδρον ἀπεχώρησαν, μόνοι δὲ τῶν ἐν
Μακεδονίᾳ τὴν εὔνοιαν διεφύλαξαν Ἀριστόνους καὶ
Μόνιμος, ὧν Ἀριστόνους μὲν Ἀμφιπόλεως ἐκυρίευεν,
4ὁ δ᾿ ἕτερος Πέλλης. ἡ δ᾿ Ὀλυμπιὰς ὁρῶσα
364Book XIX

died from lack of nourishment, the horsemen that 316 b.c. were not in the ranks and did not receive any food whatever nearly all perished, and no small number of the soldiers also met the same fate. Some of the non-Greeks, their natural needs overcoming their scruples, found flesh to eat by collecting the bodies of the dead. Since the city was being quickly filled with corpses, those in charge of the queen’s company,1 though they buried some of the bodies, threw others over the city wall. The sight of these was horrible, and their stench was unbearable, not merely to ladies who were of the queen’s court and addicted to luxury, but also to those of the soldiers who were habituated to hardship.
50. As spring came on and their want increased from day to day, many of the soldiers gathered together and appealed to Olympias to let them go because of the lack of supplies. Since she could neither issue any food at all nor break the siege, she permitted them to withdraw. Cassander, after welcoming all the deserters and treating them in most friendly fashion, sent them to the various cities; for he hoped that when the Macedonians learned from them how weak Olympias was, they would despair of her cause. And he was not mistaken in his surmise about what would happen: those who had resolved to fight on the side of the besieged forces changed their minds and went over to Cassander; and the only men in Macedonia to preserve their loyalty were Aristonoiis and Monimus, of whom Aristonoüs was ruler of Amphipolis and Monimus of Pella. But Olympias, when she saw that most of

1Cp. chap. 35. 7.365