Diodorus of Sicily

αὐτοὺς τὸ μὲν πρῶτον κατέμενεν ἐν Ἰταλίᾳ μετὰ
τῶν κοινοπραγούντων καὶ καταλαμβάνεσθαι τὴν
τῶν Κροτωνιατῶν πόλιν ἐπιχειρήσας ἐξέπεσε καὶ
μετ᾿ ὀλίγων εἰς Τάραντα διεσώθη. ταχθεὶς δὲ
παρὰ τοῖς Ταραντίνοις ἐν τῇ τῶν μισθοφόρων τάξαι
καὶ πολλαῖς καὶ παραβόλοις ἐγχειρῶν πράξεσιν εἰς
2ὑποψίαν ἦλθεν καινοτομεῖν. διόπερ ἀπολυθεὶς καὶ
ταύτης τῆς στρατείας συνήθροισε τοὺς κατὰ τὴν
Ἰταλίαν φυγάδας καὶ Ῥηγίνοις πολεμουμένοις ὑπὸ
τῶν περὶ τὸν Ἡρακλείδην καὶ Σώστρατον ἐβοήθησεν.
3ἔπειτα τῆς ἐν Συρακούσσαις δυναστείας
καταλυθείσης καὶ τῶν περὶ τὸν Σώστρατον φυγόντων
κατῆλθεν εἰς τὴν πατρίδα. συνεκπεσόντων δὲ
τοῖς δυνάσταις πολλῶν ἐνδόξων ἀνδρῶν, ὡς ἂν τῆς
ὀλιγαρχίας κεκοινωνηκότων τῆς τῶν ἑξακοσίων
τῶν ἐπιφανεστάτων, ἐνέστη πόλεμος τοῖς φυγάσι
πρὸς τοὺς ἀντεχομένους τῆς δημοκρατίας. συμμαχούντων
δὲ τῶν Καρχηδονίων τοῖς περὶ τὸν
Σώστρατον φυγάσιν ἐγίνοντο κίνδυνοι συνεχεῖς καὶ
παρατάξεις ἁδρῶν δυνάμεων,1 ἐν αἷς Ἀγαθοκλῆς,
ποτὲ μὲν ἰδιώτης ὤν, ποτὲ δὲ ἐφ᾿ ἡγεμονίας τεταγμένος,
ὑπελήφθη δραστικὸς εἶναι καὶ φιλότεχνος ἐκ
τοῦ πρὸς ἕκαστον τῶν καιρῶν ἐπινοεῖσθαί τι τῶν
χρησίμων· ὧν ἓν ἔπραξε καὶ μάλα μνήμης ἄξιον.
4στρατοπεδευόντων γάρ ποτε τῶν Συρακοσίων πλησίον
τῆς Γέλας αὐτὸς μὲν νυκτὸς παρεισέπεσεν
εἰς τὴν πόλιν μετὰ χιλίων στρατιωτῶν, οἱ δὲ περὶ
τὸν Σώστρατον ἐπιφανέντες μετὰ μεγάλης καὶ



1ἁδρῶν δυνάμεως Dindorf: ἀνδρῶν καὶ δυνάμεων.236Book XIX

at first in Italy with those who made common 317 b.c. cause with him. Undertaking to establish himself in Croton,1 he was driven out and with a few others escaped to Tarentum. While among the Tarentines he was enrolled in the ranks of the mercenaries, and because he took part in many hazardous actions he was suspected of revolutionary designs. When he for this reason was released from this army also, he gathered together the exiles from all parts of Italy and went to the aid of Rhegium, which was then being attacked by Heracleides and Sostratus. Then when the cabal in Syracuse was brought to an end and the party of Sostratus was expelled, Agathocles returned to his own city. Many citizens of repute had been exiled along with the cabal on the ground that they had been members of the oligarchy of the Six Hundred Noblest,2 and now war arose between these exiles and those who were supporting the democracy. As the Carthaginians became allies of the exiles with Sostratus, there were constant engagements and pitched battles between strong forces, in which Agathocles, sometimes as a private soldier, sometimes appointed to a command, was credited with being energetic and ingenious, for in each emergency he contrived some helpful device. One instance of the kind is well worth mentioning. Once when the Syracusans were in camp near Gela, he stole into the city at night with a thousand men, but Sostratus with a large force in battle array appeared


1At this time Croton was controlled by an oligarchy in
sympathy with the the Six Hundred at Syracuse. In spite of the failure related in the text, the democracy soon established itself, and in 317–316 repulsed and then destroyed the forces of the oligarchy (cp. chaps 3. 3 and 10. 3–4).2This seems to have been a political coterie rather than a regular governing body (Cary, Cambridge Ancient History, 7. 618).237