Diodorus of Sicily
53. Ὁ δὲ Κλεόμβροτος πυθόμενος τοὺς πολεμίους
προκατειληφέναι τὰς παρόδους, τὸ μὲν ταύτῃ
ποιεῖσθαι τὴν διέξοδον ἀπέγνω, πορευθεὶς δὲ διὰ
τῆς Φωκίδος, καὶ διεξελθὼν τὴν παραθαλαττίαν
ὁδὸν χαλεπὴν οὖσαν, ἐνέβαλεν εἰς τὴν Βοιωτίαν
ἀκινδύνως· ἐν παρόδῳ δέ τινα τῶν πολισματίων
χειρωσάμενος δέκα1 τριήρων ἐγκρατὴς ἐγένετο.
2μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα καταντήσας εἰς τὰ καλούμενα Λεῦκτρα
κατεστρατοπέδευσε καὶ τοὺς στρατιώτας ἐκ
τῆς ὁδοιπορίας ἀνελάμβανεν. οἱ δὲ Βοιωτοὶ προάγοντες
ἐπὶ τοὺς πολεμίους, ὡς ἤγγισαν αὐτοῖς
καὶ λόφους τινὰς ὑπερβαλόντες ἄφνω κατενόησαν
τοὺς Λακεδαιμονίους ἐπέχοντας ἅπαν τὸ Λευκτρικὸν
πεδίον, κατεπλάγησαν ἰδόντες τὸ μέγεθος
3τῆς δυνάμεως. συνεδρευσάντων δὲ τῶν βοιωταρχῶν
καὶ βουλευομένων, πότερον χρὴ μένειν καὶ
πρὸς πολλαπλασίονα δύναμιν διαγωνίζεσθαι ἢ τὴν
ἀναχώρησιν ποιησάμενοι ἐν τόποις ὑπερδεξίοις2 συστήσονται
τὴν μάχην, ἔτυχον αἱ γνῶμαι τῶν ἡγεμόνων
ἴσαι γενόμεναι. ἓξ γὰρ ὄντων βοιωταρχῶν
τρεῖς μὲν ᾤοντο δεῖν ἀπάγειν τὴν δύναμιν, τρεῖς
δὲ μένειν καὶ διαγωνίζεσθαι, ἐν οἷς ἦν καὶ ὁ Ἐπαμεινώνδας
συνεξαριθμούμενος. ἀπορίας δ᾿ οὔσης
μεγάλης καὶ δυσκρίτου τῶν βοιωταρχῶν ὁ ἕβδομος
ἧκεν, ὃν πείσας Ἐπαμεινώνδας ὁμόψηφον3 ἑαυτῷ
γενέσθαι προετέρησε τῆς γνώμης. ὁ μὲν οὖν ὑπὲρ
4τῶν ὅλων ἀγὼν τοῦτον τὸν τρόπον ἐκυρώθη. ὁ
δ᾿ Ἐπαμεινώνδας ὁρῶν τοὺς στρατιώτας δεισιδαιμονοῦντας
ἐπὶ τοῖς γεγονόσι σημείοις, ἐφιλοτιμεῖτο
διὰ τῆς ἰδίας ἐπινοίας καὶ στρατηγίας μεταθεῖναι

1δέκα Vogel (cp. chap. 78. 4), δώδεκα Wurm (cp. Xenophon,
Hell. 6. 4. 3): τε καὶ PA, καὶ cet.2ὑπερδεξίοις Reiske: δεξιοῖς.3ὁμόψηφον Rhodoman: ὁμόψυχον.100Book XV
53. Cleombrotus, learning that the enemy had 371/0 b.c. seized the pass first, decided against forcing a passage there, proceeded instead through Phocis, and, when he had traversed the shore road which was difficult, entered Boeotia without danger. In his passage he took some of the fortresses and seized ten triremes.1 Later, when he reached the place called Leuctra, he encamped there and allowed the soldiers to recover after their march. As the Boeotians neared the enemy in their advance, and then, after surmounting some ridges, suddenly caught sight of the Lacedaemonians covering the entire plain of Leuctra, they were astounded at beholding the great size of the army. And when the boeotarchs held a conference2 to decide whether they ought to remain and fight it out with an army that many times outnumbered them, or whether they should retreat and join battle in a commanding position, it chanced that the votes of the leaders were equal. For of the six boeotarchs, three thought that they should withdraw the army, and three that they should stay and fight it out, and among the latter Epameinondas was numbered. In this great and perplexing deadlock, the seventh boeotarch came to vote, whom Epameinondas persuaded to vote with him, and thus he carried the day. So the decision to stake all on the issue of battle was thus ratified. But Epameinondas, who saw that the soldiers were superstitious on account of the omens that had occurred, earnestly desired through his own ingenuity and strategy to reverse the scruples of the





1See Xenophon, Hell. 6. 4. 3–4.2See Plutarch, Pelopidas, 20.101