Diodorus of Sicily
13. Ταῦτα δὲ προσαγαγόντες πρὸς τὴν ἔκβασιν
πάλιν ἐπεχείρουν τοὺς Μακεδόνας πείθειν ἀποστῆσαι
τὸν Εὐμενῆ τῆς στρατηγίας καὶ μὴ προάγειν
καθ᾿ αὑτῶν ἄνδρα ξένον καὶ πλείστους Μακεδόνας
2ἀνῃρηκότα. οὐδενὶ δὲ τρόπῳ τῶν περὶ τὸν Ἀντιγένη
πειθομένων οἱ περὶ Σέλευκον προσπλεύσαντες
πρός τινα διώρυγα παλαιὰν ἀνέρρηξαν τὴν ἀρχὴν
αὐτῆς, ὑπὸ τοῦ χρόνου συγκεχωσμένην. περικλυσθείσης
δὲ τῆς τῶν Μακεδόνων στρατοπεδίας καὶ
πάντῃ τοῦ συνεχοῦς τόπου λιμνάσαντος ἐκινδύνευσεν
ἅπαν ἀπολέσθαι τὸ στρατόπεδον ὑπὸ τῆς
3πλήμης. ἐκείνην μὲν οὖν τὴν ἡμέραν ἔμειναν ἐφ᾿
ἡσυχίας, ἀπορούμενοι πῶς χρηστέον τοῖς πράγμασι·
τῇ δ᾿ ὑστεραίᾳ παραστησάμενοι τὰ κοντωτὰ πλοῖα,
περὶ τριακόσια τὸν ἀριθμὸν ὄντα, διεβίβασαν τὸ
κράτιστον τῆς δυνάμεως οὐδενὸς παρενοχλοῦντος
κατὰ τὴν ἔκβασιν· οἱ γὰρ περὶ Σέλευκον ἱππεῖς
μόνον εἶχον καὶ τούτους πολὺ τοῖς ἀριθμοῖς λειπομένους
4τῶν ἐναντίων. νυκτὸς δὲ ἤδη καταλαμβανούσης
Εὐμενὴς μὲν ἀγωνιῶν ὑπὲρ τῆς ἀποσκευῆς
πάλιν εἰς τοὐπίσω διεβίβασε τοὺς Μακεδόνας,
εἰσηγησαμένου δέ τινος τῶν ἐγχωρίων ἐπεβάλετό
τινα τόπον ἀνακαθαίρειν, δι᾿ οὗ ῥᾴδιον ἦν ἀποστρέψαι
τὴν διώρυγα καὶ βάσιμον κατασκευάσαι
5τὴν πλησίον χώραν. ἃ δὴ συνιδόντες οἱ περὶ Σέλευκον
καὶ βουλόμενοι τὴν ταχίστην αὐτοὺς ἐκ
τῆς ἰδίας σατραπείας ἀπαλλάξαι πρέσβεις ἀπέστειλαν
ὑπὲρ ἀνοχῶν, συγχωρήσαντες τὴν διάβασιν.
εὐθὺ δὲ καὶ βυβλιαφόρους ἀπέστειλαν πρὸς Ἀντίγονον
εἰς Μεσοποταμίαν, ἀξιοῦντες ἥκειν τὴν ταχίστην
μετὰ τῆς δυνάμεως, πρὶν ἢ καταβῆναι
262Book XIX
13. Directing these craft to the landing place, 317 b.c. Seleucus and Pithon again tried to persuade the Macedonians to remove Eumenes from his command and to cease preferring against their own interests a man who was a foreigner and who had killed very-many Macedonians. But when Antigenes and his men were in no way persuaded, Seleucus sailed off to a certain ancient canal and cleared its intake, which had been filled up in the course of time. Since the Macedonian camp was surrounded by water and the neighbouring land on all sides was now inundated, there was danger that the entire encamped army would be destroyed by the flood. On that day the Macedonians remained inactive, not knowing how to deal with the situation; but on the next they brought up the punts, about three hundred in number, and carried the best part of the army across, no one hindering them at the landing; for Seleucus had cavalry only and that too far inferior in number to its opponents. But when night was overtaking them, Eumenes, since he was anxious about the baggage, got the Macedonians back across the river; and under the guidance of one of the inhabitants of the region he began to excavate a certain place through which it was easy to turn the canal and make the neighbouring land passable. Seleucus saw this, and since he wished to get them out of his satrapy as soon as possible, he sent envoys to propose a truce, conceding to Eumenes his passage across the river.1 But at the same time he also sent dispatch carriers into Mesopotamia to Antigonus, asking him to come with his army as soon as possible before the satraps should

1Eumenes was holding the citadel of Babylon, which he had captured in October, 318 (Tarn in C.A.Η. 6. 477).263