Diodorus of Sicily

ἐγχωρίων καὶ ἡ τοῦ μυθολογηθέντος ἀετοῦ κοίτη
καὶ τὰ τῶν δεσμῶν σημεῖα.
2Ὁ δ᾿ Ἀλέξανδρος καὶ ἄλλας πόλεις ἔκτισεν,
ἡμέρας ὁδὸν ἀπεχούσας1 τῆς Ἀλεξανδρείας. κατῴκισε
δ᾿ εἰς ταύτας τῶν μὲν βαρβάρων ἑπτακισχιλίους,
τῶν δ᾿ ἐκτὸς τάξεως2 συνακολουθούντων
τρισχιλίους καὶ τῶν μισθοφόρων τοὺς βουλομένους.
3αὐτὸς δὲ ἀναλαβὼν τὴν δύναμιν προῆγεν εἰς τὴν
Βακτριανήν, ἀκούων3 τὸν Βῆσσον διάδημά τε ἀνειληφέναι
καὶ δυνάμεις ἀθροίζειν.
Καὶ τὰ μὲν περὶ Ἀλέξανδρον ἐν τούτοις ἦν.
4Οἱ δ᾿ εἰς τὴν Ἀρίαν4 ἀπεσταλμένοι στρατηγοὶ
καταλαβόντες τοὺς ἀφεστηκότας δυνάμεις ἀξιολόγους
ἠθροικότας καὶ στρατηγὸν ἔχοντας Σατιβαρζάνην,
ἄνδρα στρατηγικὸν5 καὶ ἀνδρείᾳ διαφέροντα,
κατεστρατοπέδευσαν πλησίον τῶν πολεμίων. γινομένων
δὲ πολλάκις ἀκροβολισμῶν μέχρι μέν τινος
5μάχαι κατ᾿ ὀλίγους ἐγίνοντο, μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα παρατάξεως
γενομένης καὶ τῶν βαρβάρων ἰσόμαχον
ποιούντων τὸν κίνδυνον ὁ τῶν ἀποστατῶν στρατηγὸς
Σατιβαρζάνης, ἀφελὼν ταῖς χερσὶ τὸ περὶ τὴν
κεφαλὴν κράνος καὶ δείξας αὑτὸν ὃς ἦν, προεκαλέσατο
τὸν βουλόμενον τῶν στρατηγῶν μονομαχῆσαι.
6ὑπακούσαντος δὲ τοῦ Ἐριγυιοῦ καὶ γενομένης
μάχης ἡρωικῆς συνέβη νικῆσαι τὸν Ἐριγυιόν. οἱ





1F gives the singular (ἄλλην πόλιν, ἀπέχουσαν) but immediately
below we have the plural (ταύτας).2τάξεων RX, but Diodorus ordinarily uses the singular.
There was an ἡγεμὼν τῶν ἔξω τάξεων in Ptolemaic Egypt.3Βακτρίαν οὗ ἦν ἀκούων F.4Spelled Ἀρεία in chap. 78. 1.5στρατηγίᾳ F.358Book XVII

as well as the nesting place of the eagle in the story 328/7 b.c. and the marks of the chains.1
Alexander founded other cities also at the distance of a day’s march from Alexandria. Here he settled seven thousand natives, three thousand of the camp followers, and volunteers from among the mercenaries.2 Then he marched his forces into Bactria, since news came that Bessus had assumed the diadem and was enrolling an army.
Such was the state of Alexander’s affairs.
The generals who had been sent back to Areia found that the rebels had gathered substantial forces under the command of Satibarzanes, who was distinguished both for generalship and for personal bravery, and they encamped near them.3 There was constant skirmishing for a time, and numerous small engagements; then it came to a general battle. The Iranians were holding their own when their general Satibarzanes raised his hands and removed his helmet so that all could see who he was, and challenged any of the Macedonian generals who wished to fight with him alone. Erigyius accepted and a contest of heroic nature ensued, which resulted in Erigyius’s victory.



1Curtius, 7. 3. 22. The story was rejected by Eratosthenes (Strabo, 11. 5. 5; Arrian, 5. 3. 1–4).2These cities are not otherwise mentioned. They may have been outlying forts or fortified villages. It is interesting that they received no Macedonian settlers. Arrian’s descriptions (e.g., 4. 4. 1) of similar settlements show the same pattern of population. Curtius (7. 3. 23) assigns these seven thousand to Alexandria of the Caucasus.3Continued from chap. 81. 3. Curtius, also, breaks his narrative of the revolt, and describes its conclusion and the duel between the leaders after discussing Bessus’s assumption of power (7.4.33–40). Arrian, on the other hand, tells the whole story at once (3. 28. 3).359