Diodorus of Sicily

ἐλεφάντων ἤθροισε περὶ αὑτὸν τεσσαράκοντα τῶν
θηρίων τὰ μήπω τεταραγμένα καὶ τῷ βάρει τῶν
ἐλεφάντων ἐπιβαλὼν τοῖς πολεμίοις πολὺν ἐποίει
φόνον, ἅτε καὶ τῇ ῥώμῃ τοῦ σώματος πολὺ προέχων
τῶν συστρατευομένων· τὸ γὰρ μῆκος ἦν πηχῶν
πέντε, τὸ δ᾿ εὖρος ὑπῆρχεν ὁ θώραξ αὐτοῦ διπλάσιος
5τῶν ἄλλων τῶν εὐρωστίᾳ διαφερόντων. διόπερ τὰ
βαλλόμενα σαυνία τοιαύτην εἶχε δύναμιν ὥστε μὴ
πολὺ λείπεσθαι τῶν καταπελτικῶν βελῶν. τῶν δ᾿
ἀντιτεταγμένων Μακεδόνων καταπεπληγμένων τὴν
ἀνδραγαθίαν τοῦ Πώρου ὁ Ἀλέξανδρος μεταπεμψάμενος
τοὺς τοξότας καὶ τὰ ψιλικὰ τῶν ταγμάτων
6προσέταξεν ἅπαντας βάλλειν ἐπὶ τὸν Πῶρον. ταχὺ
δὲ τῶν στρατιωτῶν πραξάντων τὸ παραγγελθὲν καὶ
βελῶν ἅμα πολλῶν ἐνεχθέντων ἐπὶ τὸν Ἰνδὸν καὶ
πάντων ἐπιτυγχανόντων διὰ τὸ μέγεθος τοῦ σκοποῦ
ὁ μὲν Πῶρος ἡρωικῶς ἀγωνισάμενος καὶ διὰ τὸ
πλῆθος τῶν τραυμάτων γενόμενος ἔξαιμος ἐλιποψύχησεν
καὶ περικλασθεὶς περὶ τὸ θηρίον πρὸς τὴν γῆν
7κατηνέχθη. διαδοθείσης δὲ φήμης ὅτι τετελεύτηκεν
ὁ βασιλεύς, τὸ λοιπὸν πλῆθος τῶν Ἰνδῶν πρὸς
φυγὴν ὥρμησεν.
89. Ἐν δὲ τῇ φυγῇ πολλοῦ φόνου γενομένου ὁ
μὲν Ἀλέξανδρος ἐπιφανεῖ μάχῃ νικήσας ἀνεκαλέσατο
τῇ σάλπιγγι τοὺς στρατιώτας. ἔπεσον δὲ ἐν
τῇ μάχῃ τῶν Ἰνδῶν πλείους τῶν μυρίων καὶ δισχιλίων,
ἐν οἷς ὑπῆρχον καὶ δύο υἱοὶ τοῦ Πώρου καὶ


376Book XVII

largest of the elephants and gathered about him forty /5 b.c. others which were not yet out of hand, then attacked the enemy with their combined weight and inflicted many losses. He was himself outstanding in bodily strength beyond any of his followers, being five cubits1 in height and with a breadth of chest double that of his mightiest soldiers. His javelins were flung with such force that they were little inferior to the darts of the catapults. The Macedonians who opposed him were amazed at his fighting ability, but Alexander called up the bowmen and other light armed troops and ordered them to concentrate their fire upon Porus. This was done promptly. Many weapons flew toward the Indian at the same time and none missed its mark because of his great size. He continued to fight heroically until, fainting from loss of blood from his many wounds, he collapsed upon his elephant and fell to the ground.2 The word went about that the king was killed, and the rest of the Indians fled.
89. Many were slain in their flight, but then Alexander, satisfied with his brilliant victory, ordered the trumpets to sound the recall. Of the Indians, there fell in the battle more than twelve thousand, among whom were the two sons of Porus and his best generals


1Seven and one-half feet. The same figure is given by
Arrian, 5. 19. 1. Plutatch, Alexander, 60. 6, says four cubits and a span; Curtius, 8. 14. 13: “humanae magnitudinis prope modum excesserat.” Tarn, however (Alexander the Great, 2, p. 170), thinks that the source was using a short cubit. We may prefer to find here a perhaps only slight exaggeration of Porus’s evidently phenomenal height. Arrian (5. 4.4) says that most Indians are of this height, and Curtius (7. 4. 6) reports that the Dahae were a head taller than the Macedonians. Alexander built beds five cubits long in the camp on the Hyphasis (chap. 95. 2).2Curtius, 8. 14. 32–38; Justin, 12. 8. 5; Plutarch, Alexander, 60. 7.377