Diodorus of Sicily

μεγίστους, εἰς δὲ τὰς ἀνωτάτας ὀξυβελεῖς τε τοὺς
ἐλαχίστους καὶ πετροβόλων1 πλῆθος, ἄνδρας τε τοὺς
χρησομένους τούτοις κατὰ τρόπον πλείους τῶν
διακοσίων.
4Προσαγαγὼν δὲ τὰς μηχανὰς τῇ πόλει καὶ πυκνοῖς
χρώμενος τοῖς βέλεσι τῇ μὲν τὰς ἐπάλξεις
ἀπέσυρε τοῖς πετροβόλοις, τῇ δὲ τὰ τείχη διέσεισε
5τοῖς κριοῖς. ἀμυνομένων δὲ καὶ τῶν ἔνδον εὐρώστως
καὶ τοῖς μηχανήμασιν ἑτέρας μηχανὰς ἀντιταττόντων
ἐφ᾿ ἡμέρας μέν τινας ἀμφίδοξος ἦν ὁ
κίνδυνος, ἀμφοτέρων κακοπαθούντων καὶ κατατραυματιζομένων·
τὸ δὲ τελευταῖον τοῦ τείχους
πίπτοντος καὶ τῆς πόλεως κινδυνευούσης ἁλῶναι
κατὰ κράτος νυκτὸς ἐπιγενομένης ἔληξε τὰ τῆς
6τειχομαχίας. οἱ δὲ περὶ τὸν Μενέλαον ἀκριβῶς
εἰδότες ἁλωσομένην τὴν πόλιν, εἰ μή τι καινοτομεῖν
ἐπιχειρήσειαν, ἤθροισαν ὕλης ξηρᾶς πλῆθος, ταύτην
δὲ περὶ τὸ μεσονύκτιον ἐμβαλόντες ταῖς τῶν πολεμίων
μηχαναῖς καὶ ἅμα πάντες οἰστοὺς2 πυρσοφόρους
ἀπὸ τῶν τειχῶν ἀφέντες ἀνῆψαν τὰ
7μέγιστα τῶν ἔργων. ἄφνω δὲ τῆς φλογὸς εἰς ὕψος
ἀρθείσης οἱ περὶ τὸν Δημήτριον ἐπεχείρησαν μὲν
βοηθεῖν, τοῦ δὲ πυρὸς καταταχήσαντος συνέβη τὰς
8μηχανὰς κατακαυθῆναι καὶ πολλοὺς τῶν ἐν αὐταῖς
ὄντων διαφθαρῆναι. ὁ δὲ Δημήτριος ἀποσφαλεὶς
τῆς ἐλπίδος οὐδ᾿ ὣς ἔληγεν, ἀλλὰ προσεκαρτέρει τῇ
πολιορκίᾳ καὶ κατὰ γῆν καὶ κατὰ θάλατταν, νομίζων
τῷ χρόνῳ καταπολεμήσειν τοὺς πολεμίους.
49. Πτολεμαῖος δὲ πυθόμενος τὴν τῶν ἰδίων
ἧτταν ἐξέπλευσεν ἐκ τῆς Αἰγύπτου δύναμιν ἔχων
ἀξιόλογον πεζικήν τε καὶ ναυτικήν. κατενεχθεὶς
δὲ τῆς Κύπρου πρὸς τὴν Πάφον ἔκ τε τῶν πόλεων
1Fischer suggests the addition of ἐλαττόνων before πετροβόλων.2πάντες οἰστοὺς Fischer, cp. Arrian, 2. 21. 3; πάντας τοὺς.276Book XX

catapults, and on the highest his lightest catapults 307 b.c. and a large number of ballistae; and he also stationed on the helepolis more than two hundred men to operate these engines in the proper manner.
Bringing the engines up to the city and hurling a shower of missiles, he cleared the battlements with the ballistae and shattered the walls with the rams. Since those within resisted boldly and opposed his engines of war with other devices, for some days the battle was doubtful, both sides suffering hardships and severe wounds; and when finally the wall was falling and the city was in danger of being taken by storm, the assault was interrupted by the coming of night. Menelaüs, seeing clearly that the city would be taken unless he tried something new, gathered a large amount of dry wood, at about midnight threw this upon the siege engines of the enemy, and at the same time all shot down fire-bearing arrows from the walls and set on fire the largest of the siege engines. As the flames suddenly blazed high, Demetrius tried to come to the rescue; but the flames got the start of him, with the result that the engines were completely destroyed and many of those who manned them were lost. Demetrius, although disappointed in his expectations, did not stop but pushed the siege persistently by both land and sea, believing that he would overcome the enemy in time.
49. When Ptolemy heard of the defeat of his men,1 he sailed from Egypt with considerable land and sea forces. Reaching Cyprus at Paphos, he received




1The defeat described in chap. 47. 3.277