Diodorus of Sicily
2ὁ δ᾿ Ἀρταξέρξης προθύμως ὑπακούσας
ἔδωκεν αὐτοῖς δωρεὰν ἀργυρίου τάλαντα τριακόσια.
τοῖς δὲ Βοιωτοῖς καὶ τοῖς Φωκεῦσιν ἀκροβολισμοὶ
μὲν καὶ χώρας καταδρομαὶ συνέστησαν, πράξεις δὲ
κατὰ τοῦτον τὸν ἐνιαυτὸν ἄξιαι μνήμης οὐ συνετελέσθησαν.
3Κατὰ δὲ τὴν Ἀσίαν ὁ βασιλεὺς τῶν Περσῶν ἐν
μὲν τοῖς ἐπάνω χρόνοις στρατεύσας ἐπ᾿ Αἴγυπτον
πολλοῖς πλήθεσι στρατιωτῶν ἀπέτυχε, κατὰ δὲ
τοὺς ὑποκειμένους καιροὺς πάλιν ἐπολέμησε τοῖς
Αἰγυπτίοις καὶ πράξεις ἀξιολόγους κατεργασάμενος
διὰ τῆς ἰδίας ἐνεργείας τὴν Αἴγυπτον ἀνεκτήσατο
4καὶ Φοινίκην καὶ Κύπρον. ἵνα δὲ σαφῆ τὴν περὶ
τούτων ἱστορίαν ποιήσωμεν τὰς αἰτίας τοῦ πολέμου
προεκθησόμεθα μικρὸν ἀναλαβόντες τοὺς οἰκείους
χρόνους. τῶν γὰρ Αἰγυπτίων ἀπὸ Περσῶν ἀποστάντων
κατὰ τοὺς ἀνωτέρω χρόνους Ἀρταξέρξης
ὁ ἐπικληθεὶς Ὦχος αὐτὸς μὲν οὐκ ὢν φιλοπόλεμος
ἐφ᾿ ἡσυχίας ἔμενεν, ἀποστέλλων δὲ δυνάμεις καὶ
στρατηγοὺς πολλάκις ἀπετύγχανε διὰ τὴν κακίαν
5καὶ ἀπειρίαν τῶν ἡγεμόνων. διὸ καὶ καταφρονηθεὶς
ὑπὸ τῶν Αἰγυπτίων ἠναγκάζετο καρτερεῖν
διά τε τὴν ἀργίαν καὶ τὸ τῆς ψυχῆς εἰρηνικόν.
κατὰ δὲ τοὺς ὑποκειμένους καιροὺς τῶν Φοινίκων
καὶ τῶν ἐν Κύπρῳ βασιλέων μιμησαμένων τοὺς



348Book XVI

city with a large sum of money. Artaxerxes, readily 351/0 b.c. acceding to the request, made a gift to them of three hundred talents of silver.1 Between the Boeotians and the Phocians skirmishes and raids on each other’s territory occurred but no actions worth mentioning took place during this year.
In Asia the King of the Persians, who had in the period treated above made an expedition into Egypt with vast multitudes of soldiers and was unsuccessful, in the period with which we are now dealing again made war on the Egyptians and, after carrying out some remarkable feats by his own forceful activity, regained possession of Egypt, Phoenicia, and Cyprus.2 To make clear the history of these events I shall set forth first the causes of the war by reviewing again briefly the period to which these events properly belong. We recall that, when the Egyptians revolted from the Persians in the earlier period, Artaxerxes, known as Ochus,3 himself unwarlike, remained inactive, and though he sent out armies and generals many times, failed in his attempts because of the cowardice and inexperience of the leaders. And so, though regarded with contempt by the Egyptians, he was compelled to be patient because of his own inertia and peace-loving nature. But in the period now under discussion, when the Phoenicians and the kings in Cyprus had imitated the Egyptians and in contemptuous


1Beloch (Griechische Geschichte2, 3. 1. 483, note 1) suggests
that these gifts were not made to the Boeotians for their
“schönen Augen,” but for help in the Egyptian expedition
(cp. chap. 44. 2).2Diodorus has misplaced the conquest of Egypt by Ochus,
which occurred in the year 344 or 343. He slurs over here
a previous defeat of Ochus which probably belongs to this
year (351/0) and is attested by chaps. 44. 1, 48. 1; Demos- thenes, 15. 11 f.; Isocrates, Philip, 101. In agreement with Beloch on this point (Griechische Geschichte2, 3, 2. 284–287)
are Tarn, Cambridge Ancient History, 6. 22–23 and Hall, ibid. 152–154. See Olmstead, History of the Persian Empire, 430–441.3Possibly Diodorus has Artaxerxes II (Mnemon) in mind (cp. Book 15. 90 ff.), for both Demosthenes and Isocrates state that Ochus conducted in person the unsuccessful expedition.349