Diodorus of Sicily
2ἐξ ἑτοίμου γὰρ οἱ βάρβαροι κρατήσειν ὑπειληφότες
τῶν Ἑλλήνων παρηγγέλκεισαν ἀλλήλοις
ζωγρεῖν ὡς πλείστους καὶ δήσαντες εἰς συνεργασίαν
3ἐμβαλεῖν. ἀλλ᾿, οἶμαι, τὸ δαιμόνιον ὥσπερ ἐπίτηδες
τοῖς ὑπερηφάνως διαλογιζομένοις τὸ τέλος τῶν
κατελπισθέντων εἰς τοὐναντίον μετατίθησιν. Ἀγαθοκλῆς
μὲν οὖν Καρχηδονίους παραλόγως νικσας
τειχήρεις συνεῖχεν, ἡ τύχη δὲ ἐναλλὰξ τὰ προτερήματα
τοῖς ἐλαττώμασιν ἐπεισαγαγοῦσα τοὺς ὑπερέχοντας
4ἴσον ἐταπείνωσε τοῖς ἡττωμένοις· ἐν Σικελίᾳ
μὲν γὰρ Καρχηδόνιοι μεγάλῃ νενικηκότες παρατάξει
Ἀγαθοκλέα τὰς Συρακούσσας ἐπολιόρκουν, ἐν
Λιβύῃ δὲ Ἀγαθοκλῆς τηλικαύτῃ μάχῃ προτερήσας
εἰς πολιορκίαν ἐνέκλεισε Καρχηδονίους, καὶ τὸ
θαυμασιώτατον, ὁ δυνάστης κατὰ μὲν τὴν νῆσον
ἀκεραίους ἔχων τὰς δυνάμεις ἐλείπετο τῶν βαρβάρων,
ἐπὶ δὲ τῆς ἠπείρου τῷ μέρει τῆς προηττημένης
στρατιᾶς περιεγένετο τῶν νενικηκότων.
14. Διόπερ οἱ Καρχηδόνιοι, νομίσαντες ἐκ θεῶν
αὐτοῖς γεγονέναι τὴν συμφοράν, ἐτράπησαν πρὸς
παντοίαν ἱκεσίαν τοῦ δαιμονίου καὶ νομίσαντες
μάλιστα μηνίειν αὐτοῖς τὸν Ἡρακλέα τὸν παρὰ
τοῖς ἀποικισταῖς1 χρημάτων πλῆθος καὶ τῶν πολυτελεστάτων
ἀναθημάτων ἔπεμψαν εἰς τὴν Τύρον
2οὐκ ὀλίγα. ἀποικισθέντες γὰρ ἐκ ταύτης εἰώθεισαν



1ἀποικισταῖς Wesseling: ἀποίκοις MSS., Fischer. Perhaps
one might read παρόντα τοῖς ἀποίκοις.176Book XX

thousand pairs of manacles1; for the Carthaginians, 310 b.c. having expected to master the Greeks easily, had passed the word along among themselves to take alive as many as possible and, after shackling them, to throw them into slave pens. But, I think, the divinity of set purpose in the case of men who are arrogant in their calculations, changes the outcome of their confident expectations into its contrary. Now Agathocles, having surprisingly defeated the Carthaginians, was holding them shut up within their walls; but fortune, alternating victories with defeats, humbled the victors equally with the vanquished. For in Sicily the Carthaginians, who had defeated Agathocles in a great battle, were besieging Syracuse, but in Libya Agathocles, having gained the upper hand in a battle of such importance, had brought the Carthaginians under siege; and what was most amazing, on the island the tyrant, though his armaments were unscathed, had proved inferior to the barbarians, but on the continent with a portion of his once defeated army he got the better of those who had been victorious.
14. Therefore the Carthaginians, believing that the misfortune had come to them from the gods, betook themselves to every manner of supplication of the divine powers; and, because they believed that Heracles, who was worshipped in their mother city,2 was exceedingly angry with them, they sent a large sum of money and many of the most expensive offerings to Tyre. Since they had come as colonists from that city, it had been their custom in the earlier

1So, too, the Spartans in a campaign against Tegea
carried fetters, and with the same result (Herodotus, 1. 66).2Or, reading τὸν παρόντα τοῖς ἀποίκοις, “who aids colonists.” The Greeks regularly identified the Tyrian god Melkart with their Heracles.177