Diodorus of Sicily

ἱππεῖς δὲ ἑξακοσίους (ἐσπάνιζε γὰρ ἡ Μακεδονία
στρατιωτῶν πολιτικῶν διὰ τὸ πλῆθος τῶν ἀπεσταλμένων
εἰς τὴν Ἀσίαν ἐπὶ διαδοχὴν τῆς στρατείας)
ἀνέζευξεν ἐκ τῆς Μακεδονίας εἰς Θετταλίαν,
συμπαραπλέοντος αὐτῷ τοῦ στόλου παντός, ὃν
ἀπεσταλκὼς ἦν Ἀλέξανδρος παραπέμψοντα πλῆθος
χρημάτων ἐκ τῶν βασιλικῶν θησαυρῶν εἰς τὴν
Μακεδονίαν, οὐσῶν τῶν πασῶν1 τριήρων ἑκατὸν
3καὶ δέκα. οἱ δὲ Θετταλοὶ τὸ μὲν πρῶτον συμμαχοῦντες
τῷ Ἀντιπάτρῳ πολλοὺς καὶ ἀγαθοὺς
ἱππεῖς ἐξέπεμψαν αὐτῷ· ὕστερον δ᾿ ὑπὸ τῶν Ἀθηναίων
μεταπεισθέντες ἀφίππευσαν πρὸς Λεωσθένην
καὶ μετὰ τῶν Ἀθηναίων ταχθέντες διεπολέμουν
4ὑπὲρ τῆς τῶν Ἑλλήνων ἐλευθερίας. μεγάλης δὲ
δυνάμεως ταύτης τοῖς Ἀθηναίοις προσγεγενημένης
οἱ μὲν Ἕλληνες ἐκράτουν πολὺ τῶν Μακεδόνων
ὑπερέχοντες, ὁ δὲ Ἀντίπατρος μάχῃ λειφθεὶς καὶ
τὸ λοιπὸν οὔτε παρατάξασθαι τολμῶν οὔτ᾿ εἰς τὴν
Μακεδονίαν ἐπανελθεῖν ἀσφαλῶς δυνάμενος κατέφυγεν
εἰς πόλιν Λαμίαν. ἐν ταύτῃ δὲ τὴν δύναμιν
συνέχων καὶ τὰ τείχη κατασκευάζων, ἔτι δὲ παρασκευὰς
ὅπλων καὶ καταπελτῶν καὶ σίτου ποιούμενος
ἐκαραδόκει τοὺς ἀπὸ τῆς Ἀσίας συμμάχους.
13. Λεωσθένης δὲ μετὰ πάσης τῆς δυνάμεως
παρελθὼν πλησίον τῆς Λαμίας καὶ τὴν παρεμβολὴν
ὀχυρωσάμενος τάφρῳ βαθείᾳ καὶ χάρακι τὸ μὲν
πρῶτον ἐκτάξας τὴν δύναμιν προσῆγε τῇ πόλει
καὶ τοὺς Μακεδόνας εἰς μάχην προυκαλεῖτο. μὴ
τολμώντων δὲ αὐτῶν διαγωνίσασθαι προσβολὰς
καθ᾿ ἡμέραν τοῖς τείχεσιν ἐκ διαδοχῆς ἐποιεῖτο.
2ἀμυνομένων δὲ τῶν Μακεδόνων εὐρώστως πολλοὶ
τῶν προπετῶς βιαζομένων Ἑλλήνων ἀπώλλυντο·
1τῶν πασῶν Kallenberg: πασῶν τῶν.46Book XVIII

and six hundred horsemen (for Macedonia was 323 b.c. short of citizen soldiers because of the number of those who had been sent to Asia as replacements for the army), set out from Macedonia to Thessaly, accompanied by the entire fleet which Alexander had sent to convoy a sum of money from the royal treasury to Macedonia, being in all one hundred and ten triremes. At first the Thessalians were allies of Antipater and sent out to him many good horsemen; but later, won over by the Athenians, they rode off to Leosthenes and, arrayed with the Athenians, fought for the liberty of the Greeks. Now that this great force had been added to the Athenians, the Greeks, who far outnumbered the Macedonians, were successful. Antipater was defeated in battle, and subsequently, since he neither dared to engage in battle nor was able to return in safety to Macedonia, he took refuge in Lamia. He kept his troops in this city and strengthened its walls, besides preparing arms, engines, and food, while anxiously waiting for his allies from Asia.
13. Leosthenes, when he had come near Lamia with all his forces, fortified a camp with a deep ditch and a palisade. At first he would draw up his forces, approach the city, and challenge the Macedonians to battle; then, as the latter did not dare risk an encounter, he made daily attacks on the walls with relays of soldiers. As the Macedonians defended themselves stoutly, many of the Greeks who pushed on rashly were killed; for the besieged, since there


47