Diodorus of Sicily

συνέβαινε πρὸς τὸ χεῖρον μεταβάλλειν οὐ
μόνον τὰ κατὰ Σικελίαν, ἀλλὰ καὶ τὰ κατὰ Λιβύην
4πράγματα. Ἀρχάγαθος γὰρ ὁ καταλειφθεὶς ὑπ᾿
αὐτοῦ στρατηγὸς μετὰ τὴν ἀναγωγὴν τοῦ πατρὸς τὸ
μὲν πρῶτον ἐπλεονέκτει, πέμψας εἰς τοὺς ἄνω τόπους
μέρος τι τῆς δυνάμεως, ἧς ἦν ἡγεμὼν Εὔμαχος.
οὗτος γὰρ Τώκας πόλιν εὐμεγέθη χειρωσάμενος
πολλοὺς προσηγάγετο τῶν πλησίον κατοικούντων
5Νομάδων. εἶθ᾿ ἑτέραν ἐκπολιορκήσας, τὴν ὀνομαζομένην
Φελλίνην, ἠνάγκασε πειθαρχεῖν τοὺς τὴν
ἑξῆς χώραν νεμομένους, τοὺς καλουμένους Ἀσφοδελώδεις,
ὄντας τῷ χρώματι παραπλησίους τοῖς
6Αἰθίοψι. τρίτην δ᾿ εἷλε Μεσχέλαν, μεγίστην οὖσαν,
ᾠκισμένην δὲ τὸ παλαιὸν ὑπὸ τῶν ἐκ Τροίας ἀνακομιζομένων
Ἑλλήνων, περὶ ὧν ἐν τῇ τρίτῃ βίβλῳ
προειρήκαμεν, ἑξῆς δὲ τὴν ὀνομαζομένην ἄκραν
Ἵππου τὴν ὁμώνυμον τῇ χειρωθείσῃ κατὰ κράτος
ὑπ᾿ Ἀγαθοκλέους καὶ τελευταίαν τὴν προσαγορευομένην
Ἀκρίδα πόλιν αὐτόνομον, ἣν ἐξανδραποδισάμενος
ἐξέδωκε τοῖς στρατιώταις διαρπάσαι.
58. Ἐμπλήσας δ᾿ ὠφελείας τὸ στρατόπεδον κατέβη
πρὸς τοὺς περὶ τὸν Ἀρχάγαθον καὶ δόξας
ἀγαθὸς ἀνὴρ γεγονέναι πάλιν ἐστράτευσεν εἰς τοὺς
ἄνω τῆς Λιβύης τόπους. ὑπερβαλὼν δὲ τὰς πόλεις
ὧν πρότερον ἐγεγόνει κύριος, παρεισέπεσεν εἰς τὴν
καλουμένην Μιλτινὴν πόλιν, ἀπροσδοκήτως ἐπιφανείς·
2συστραφέντων δ᾿ ἐπ᾿ αὐτὸν τῶν βαρβάρων
καὶ κρατησάντων ἐν ταῖς ὁδοῖς ἐξεβλήθη παραλόγως
καὶ πολλοὺς τῶν στρατιωτῶν ἀπέβαλεν. ἐντεῦθεν



300Book XX

only in Sicily but also in Libya, suffered a change for 307 b.c. the worse. Archagathus, who had been left by him as general, after the departure of his father at first gained some advantage by sending into the inland regions a part of the army under the command of Eumachus. This leader, after taking the rather large city of Tocae, won over many of the Nomads who dwelt near by. Then, capturing another city called Phellinê, he forced the submission of those who used the adjacent country as pasture, men called the Asphodelodes,1 who are similar to the Ethiopians in colour. The third city that he took was Meschela, which was very large and had been founded long ago by the Greeks who were returning from Troy, about whom we have already spoken in the third Book.2 Next he took the place called Hippu Acra, which has the same name as that captured by storm by Agathocles,3 and finally the free city called Acris, which he gave to his soldiers for plundering after he had enslaved the people.4
58. After sating his army with booty, he returned to Archagathus; and since he had gained a name for good service, he again led an army into the inland regions of Libya. Passing by the cities that he had previously mastered, he gained an entrance into the city called Miltinê, having appeared before it without warning; but when the barbarians gathered together against him and overpowered him in the streets, he was, to his great surprise, driven out and lost many of his men. Departing thence, he marched through



1The name means “like the asphodel.”2There is nothing about this incident in Book 3; and chronologically it belongs in Book 7, of which only fragments are extant; cp. Vol. III. pp. 358–359.3Cp. chap. 55. 3.4None of the cities or peoples mentioned in this paragraph can be identified with certainty.301