Diodorus of Sicily

διεσώθη μόγις ἐνναταῖος εἰς τὴν οἰκουμένην τῆς
Μηδίας.
20. Τὸ δὲ στρατόπεδον διὰ τὴν συνέχειαν τῶν
κακῶν καὶ τὴν ὑπερβολὴν τῆς κακοπαθίας ἐν αἰτίαις
εἶχε τὸν Ἀντίγονον, ὥστε φωνὰς προΐεσθαι
δυσχερεῖς· ἐν ἡμέραις γὰρ τεσσαράκοντα τρισὶ μεγάλοις
ἀτυχήμασι περιεπεπτώκεισαν. οὐ μὴν ἀλλὰ
φιλανθρώπως ὁμιλήσας τοῖς στρατιώταις ὁ Ἀντίγονος
καὶ1 κατασκευασάμενος δαψιλῆ χορηγίαν
πάντων τῶν ἐπιτηδείων ἀνέλαβε τὴν δύναμιν ἐκ
2τῆς κακοπαθίας. Πίθωνα δ᾿ ἐξαπέστειλε κελεύσας
περιελθεῖν πᾶσαν τὴν Μηδίαν καὶ συνάγειν ὡς
πλείστους ἱππεῖς τε καὶ πολεμιστὰς ἵππους, ἔτι δὲ
3ὑποζυγίων πλῆθος. τῆς δὲ χώρας ταύτης ἀεὶ τετραπόδων
γεμούσης ῥᾳδίως τὸ παραγγελθὲν συντελέσας
ὁ Πίθων ἧκεν ἄγων ἱππεῖς μὲν δισχιλίους,
ἵππους δὲ σὺν ταῖς κατασκευαῖς πλείους χιλίων,
τῶν δ᾿ ὑποζυγίων τοσοῦτον ἀριθμὸν ὥστε δύνασθαι
καθοπλίσαι2 πᾶν τὸ στρατόπεδον, καὶ προσέτι τάλαντα
4πεντακόσια τῶν βασιλικῶν χρημάτων. ὁ δ᾿
Ἀντίγονος τοὺς μὲν ἱππεῖς εἰς τάξεις κατέστησε,
τοὺς δ᾿ ἵππους τοῖς ἀπολωλεκόσι διαδοὺς καὶ τὸ
πλῆθος τῶν ὑποζυγίων διαχαρισάμενος ἀνεκτήσατο
τὴν παρὰ τῶν στρατιωτῶν εὔνοιαν.
21. Οἱ δὲ περὶ τὸν Εὐμενῆ σατράπαι καὶ στρατηγοὶ
πυθόμενοι τοὺς πολεμίους ἐν τῇ Μηδίᾳ
στρατοπεδεύειν, διέστησαν πρὸς ἀλλήλους. Εὐμενὴς
μὲν γὰρ καὶ Ἀντιγένης ὁ τῶν ἀργυρασπίδων
ἡγούμενος καὶ πάντες οἱ τὴν ἀπὸ θαλάσσης ἀνάβασιν
πεποιημένοι πάλιν ᾤοντο δεῖν ἐπὶ θάλατταν
καταβαίνειν, οἱ δ᾿ ἐκ τῶν ἄνω σατραπειῶν καταβεβηκότες

1καὶ added by Dindorf.2καθοπλίσαι MSS., Fischer (doubtfully), καθιππίσαι Reiske, καταπλουτίσαι or καταπλουτῆσαι Madvig.286Book XIX

entire undertaking, he came with difficulty on the 317 b.c. ninth day safe into the settled part of Media.
20. The soldiers of Antigonus, however, because of the continuous misfortunes and their own extreme misery, became so critical of him that they let fall hostile remarks; for in forty days they had met with three great disasters. Nevertheless, by mingling with the soldiers on friendly terms and by making ready an abundant supply of all provisions, he restored the army from its miserable state. He sent Pithon out, ordering him to go through all Media and gather as many horsemen and war horses as he could, and also a quantity of baggage animals. As that land always abounds in four-footed beasts, Pithon readily accomplished his mission and returned bringing two thousand horsemen, more than a thousand horses with their trappings, a sufficient number of beasts of burden to equip the entire army, and in addition to this, five hundred talents of the royal treasure. Antigonus organized the horsemen in troops, and by giving horses to men who had lost their own and by distributing most of the pack animals as presents, he regained the goodwill of the soldiers.
21. When the satraps and generals with Eumenes learned that the enemy was encamped in Media, they disagreed among themselves; for Eumenes, Antigenes, who commanded the Silver Shields, and all those who had made the march up from the sea, believed that they should go back to the coast; but those who had come down from the satrapies, anxious


287