Diodorus of Sicily

τε προσηγάγετο καὶ τῶν ἐλεφάντων πλανωμένων
κατὰ τὴν χώραν ἐκυρίευσεν.
Αὐτὸς δὲ παρελθὼν ἐπὶ τὸν Ἰνδὸν ποταμὸν καὶ
καταλαβὼν τάς τε τριακοντόρους κατεσκευασμένας
καὶ τὸν πόρον ἐζευγμένον τριάκοντα μὲν ἡμέρας
ἀνέλαβε τὴν δύναμιν καὶ τοῖς θεοῖς μεγαλοπρεπεῖς
συντελέσας θυσίας διεβίβασε τὴν στρατιὰν καὶ
4περιέπεσε παραδόξῳ περιπετείᾳ. Ταξίλου γὰρ τοῦ
βασιλέως προτετελευτηκότος υἱὸς αὐτοῦ Μῶφις
διαδεξάμενος τὴν ἀρχὴν διεπέμψατο μὲν καὶ πρότερον
πρὸς Ἀλέξανδρον ἐν τῇ Σογδιανῇ διατρίβοντα,
ἐπαγγελλόμενος αὐτῷ συστρατεύειν ἐπὶ τοὺς
ἀντιταττομένους τῶν Ἰνδῶν καὶ τότε πρέσβεις
ἀποστείλας ἔφησεν αὐτῷ παραδιδόναι τὴν βασιλείαν.
5ἀπέχοντος1 δὲ τεσσαράκοντα σταδίους τοῦ βασιλέως
ἐκτάξας τὴν δύναμιν ὡς εἰς πόλεμον καὶ τοὺς ἐλέφαντας
κοσμήσας ἀπήντα μετὰ τῶν φίλων. ὁ δὲ
Ἀλέξανδρος ὁρῶν προσιοῦσαν μεγάλην δύναμιν
ἐκτεταγμένην πολεμικῶς καὶ δόξας τὸν Ἰνδὸν ἐπιβούλως
πεποιῆσθαι τὰς ἐπαγγελίας, ὅπως ἀπαρασκεύοις2
τοῖς Μακεδόσιν ἐπίθηται, τοῖς μὲν σαλπιγκταῖς
παρεκελεύσατο σημαίνειν τὸ πολεμικόν, τοὺς
6δὲ στρατιώτας ἐκτάξας ἀπήντα τοῖς Ἰνδοῖς. ὁ δὲ
Μῶφις ὁρῶν τὴν ταραχὴν τῶν Μακεδόνων καὶ τὸ
γεγονὸς συλλογιζόμενος τὴν μὲν δύναμιν κατέλιπεν,
αὐτὸς δὲ μετὰ ὀλίγων προϊππεύσας καὶ τὴν ἄγνοιαν
τῶν Μακεδόνων διορθωσάμενος παρέδωκεν ἑαυτόν
7τε καὶ τὴν δύναμιν τῷ βασιλεῖ. ἡσθεὶς δὲ ὁ


1ἀποσχόντος; corr. Hultzsch.2ἀπαρασκεύως; corr. Stephanus.370Book XVII

the elephants, which were wandering about the 327/6 b.c. countryside.1
Alexander now advanced to the Indus River and found his thirty-oared boats in readiness and fully equipped, and the stream spanned by a floating bridge.2 He rested his army for thirty days and offered splendid sacrifices to the gods, then moved his army across and experienced a startling fright and relief. Taxiles, the king, had died, and his son Mophis3 had succeeded to the throne. He had sent word to Alexander earlier when he was in Sogdiana, promising to join him in a campaign against his enemies among the Indians, and now he stated through his messengers that he turned his kingdom over to him. When Alexander was still forty furlongs off, Mophis deployed his force as if for war and marched forward, his elephants gaily caparisoned, surrounded by his Friends. Alexander saw a great army in warlike array approaching and concluded at once that the Indian’s promises were made in order to deceive him, so that the Macedonians might be attacked before they had time to prepare themselves. He ordered the trumpeters to sound the call to arms, and when the soldiers had found their battle stations, marched against the Indians. Mophis saw the excited activity of the Macedonians and guessed the reason. He left his army and accompanied only by a few horsemen galloped forward, corrected the misapprehension of the Macedonians, and gave himself and his army over to the king. Alexander, much relieved,



1Arrian (4. 30. 7–9) tells of rounding up elephants left at pasture, perhaps the same story.2The work was done by Hephaestion (Curtius, 8. 12. 4) or by Hephaestion and Perdiccas (Arrian, 4. 30. 9).3Called Omphis in Curtius, 8. 12. 4.371