Diodorus of Sicily

ὁδοῖς, οἱ λοιποὶ συνέφυγον εἰς τὴν ἀκρόπολιν καὶ
τὰς πύλας κλείσαντες ἐξέφυγον τὸν κίνδυνον.
5Δίων δὲ κάλλιστον τῶν προγεγενημένων ἔργων
ὑπ᾿ αὐτοῦ διαπραξάμενος τὰς μὲν καιομένας οἰκίας
διέσωσε κατασβέσας τὴν φλόγα, τὸ δὲ περιτείχισμα
καλῶς κατασκευασάμενος μιᾷ πράξει τήν τε
πόλιν ὠχύρωσε καὶ τοὺς πολεμίους ἀποτειχίσας
εἶρξε τῆς ἐπὶ τὴν γῆν ἐξόδου. καθαρὰν δὲ τῶν
νεκρῶν ποιήσας τὴν πόλιν καὶ τρόπαιον στήσας
6ἔθυσε τοῖς θεοῖς ὑπὲρ τῆς σωτηρίας. συναχθείσης
δ᾿ ἐκκλησίας ὁ μὲν δῆμος εὐχαριστῶν αὐτῷ στρατηγὸν
ἐχειροτόνησεν αὐτοκράτορα τὸν Δίωνα καὶ
τιμὰς ἀπένειμεν ἡρωικάς, ὁ δὲ Δίων ἀκολούθως
τοῖς πεπραγμένοις ἐπιεικῶς τοὺς μὲν ἐχθροὺς ἅπαντας
ἀπέλυσε τῶν ἐγκλημάτων καὶ τὸ πλῆθος παραμυθησάμενος
εἰς κοινὴν ἤγαγεν ὁμόνοιαν. οἱ δὲ
Συρακόσιοι πανδήμοις ἐπαίνοις καὶ ἀποδοχαῖς μεγάλαις
ἐτίμων τὸν εὐεργέτην ὡς μόνον σωτῆρα
γεγονότα τῆς πατρίδος.
Καὶ τὰ μὲν κατὰ τὴν Σικελίαν ἐν τούτοις ἦν.
21. Κατὰ δὲ τὴν Ἑλλάδα Χίων καὶ Ῥοδίων καὶ
Κῴων, ἔτι δὲ Βυζαντίων διαπολεμούντων πρὸς
Ἀθηναίου τὸν συμμαχικὸν πόλεμον ἀμφότεροι μεγάλας
παρασκευὰς ἐποιοῦντο, βουλόμενοι ναυμαχίᾳ
κρῖναι τὸν πόλεμον. Ἀθηναῖοι δὲ Χάρητα μὲν μετὰ
νεῶν ἑξήκοντα προσπεσταλκότες ἦσαν ἐν τοῖς ἄων
καιροῖς, τότε δὲ ἄλλας ἑξήκοντα πληρώσαντες καὶ
στρατηγοὺς ἐπιστήσαντες τοὺς ἐπιφανεστάτους τῶν
πολιτῶν, Ἰφικράτην καὶ Τιμόθεον, ἐξαπέστειλαν


294Book XVI

body to the citadel and closing the gates escaped the 356/5 b.c. danger.
Dion, having accomplished the finest of all the deeds ever performed by him, preserved the burning houses by extinguishing the flames, and, by restoring to good condition the circuit-wall, at one stroke fortified the city and by walling off the foe blocked their egress to the mainland.1 When he had cleansed the city of the dead and had erected a trophy of victory, he offered sacrifices to the gods for the deliverance of the city. An assembly was summoned, and the people, as an expression of their gratitude to him, elected Dion general with absolute power and accorded him honours suited to a hero, and Dion in harmony with his former conduct generously absolved all his personal enemies of the charges outstanding against them and having reassured the populace brought them to a state of general harmony. The Syracusans with universal praises and with elaborate testimonials of approval honoured their benefactor as the one and only saviour of their native land.2
Such was the condition of affairs in Sicily.
21. In Greece proper, where the Chians, Rhodians, Coans, and also the Byzantians were continuing the Social War against the Athenians, both sides were making great preparations, for they wished to decide the war by a naval battle. The Athenians had previously3 sent Chares forth with sixty ships, but now, manning sixty more and placing as generals in command the most distinguished of their citizens, Iphicrates and Timotheus, they dispatched this expedition


1The enemy, in th ecitadel on the Island, were prevented
by the walls from crossing to the main part of the city on
Achradina.2Compare the narrative of chaps. 18–20 with Plutarch, Dion, 41–48.3See chap. 7. 3–4.295