Diodorus of Sicily
4πρᾶξιν ἐπετελέσατο. τῶν γὰρ ἄλλων
σχεδὸν ἁπάντων τῶν μετασχόντων τῆς εἰς τὸ μαντεῖον
παρανομίας τετευχότων ὑπὸ τοῦ δαιμονίου
τῆς προσηκούσης τιμωρίας, καθάπερ μικρῷ πρότερον
ἀνεγράψαμεν, μόνος οὗτος διαλεληθὼς τὸ
θεῖον ἐπεχείρησε τοὺς μισθοφόρους παρορμᾶν πρὸς
5ἀπόστασιν. ἔφη γὰρ τὸν Τιμολέοντα παραφρονοῦντα
πρὸς ὁμολογουμένην ἀπώλειαν ἄγειν τοὺς
στρατιώτας· ἑξαπλασίους γὰρ ὄντας τοὺς Καρχηδονίους
καὶ πάσαις ταῖς παρασκευαῖς ἀνυπερβλήτους
ὑπάρχοντας ἐπαγγέλλεται νικήσειν, ἐναποκυβεύων
ταῖς τῶν μισθοφόρων ψυχαῖς, οὐδὲ τοὺς
ὀφειλομένους μισθοὺς πολλοῦ χρόνου διὰ τὴν ἀπορίαν
6ἀποδεδωκώς. συνεβούλευεν οὖν ἀνακάμπτειν
εἰς τὰς Συρακούσσας καὶ τοὺς μισθοὺς ἀπαιτεῖν,
ἐπὶ δὲ στρατείαν ἀπεγνωσμένην μὴ συνακολουθεῖν.
79. Τῶν δὲ μισθοφόρων ἀσμένως τοὺς λόγους
δεχομένων καὶ νεωτερίζειν ἐπιχειρούντων μόγις
πολλὰ δεηθεὶς αὐτῶν ὁ Τιμολέων1 καὶ δωρεὰς
ἐπαγγελλόμενος κατέπαυσε τὴν ταραχήν. ὅμως δὲ
τῷ Θρασίῳ χιλίων συνακολουθησάντων τὴν μὲν
τούτων κόλασιν εἰς ἕτερον ἀνεβάλετο καιρόν,
γράψας δὲ πρὸς τοὺς ἐν Συρακούσσαις φίλους
προσδέξασθαι τούτους φιλοφρόνως καὶ τοὺς μισθοὺς
ἀποδοῦναι τὴν μὲν ταραχὴν πᾶσαν εἰς τέλος κατέσβεσε,
τῶν δ᾿ ἀπειθησάντων ἀφείλατο τὴν ἐκ τῆς
2νίκης εὐδοξίαν. αὐτὸς δὲ τοὺς ἄλλους ταῖς φιλανθρώποις
ἐντεύξεσιν εἰς τὴν προϋπάρχουσαν εὔνοιαν
ἀποκαταστήσας προῆγεν ἐπὶ τοὺς πολεμίους οὐ
μακρὰν στρατοπεδεύοντας. συναγαγὼν δ᾿ εἰς τὴν
ἐκκλησίαν τοὺς στρατιώτας καὶ διὰ τῶν λόγων
θάρσος παραστήσας τοῖς πλήθεσι διῆλθε μὲν τὴν
1ὁ Τιμολέων added by Rhodoman.56Book XVI

his former outrages. While almost all the rest who 340/39 b.c. had participated in the sacrilege against the oracle had received from the deity their due punishment, as we reported a little earlier,1 he who alone had eluded divine vengeance attempted to incite the mercenaries to desert. He said that Timoleon was out of his mind and was leading his men to certain destruction. The Carthaginians were six times their number and were immeasurably superior in every sort of equipment, but Timoleon was nevertheless promising that they would win, gambling with the lives of the mercenaries whom for a long time because of lack of funds he had not even been able to pay. Thrasius recommended that they should return to Syracuse and demand their pay, and not follow Timoleon any further on a hopeless campaign.
79. The mercenaries received his speech with enthusiasm and were on the point of mutiny, but Timoleon with some difficulty quieted the disturbance by urgent pleading and the offer of gifts. Even so, a thousand men did go off with Thrasius,2 but he put off their punishment till a later time, and by writing to his friends in Syracuse to receive them kindly and to pay them their arrears he brought the unrest to an end, but also stripped the disobedient men of all credit for the victory. With the rest, whose loyalty he had regained by tactful handling, he marched against the enemy who were encamped not far away. Calling an assembly of the troops, he encouraged them with an address, describing the




1Chap. 58. 6.2Plutarch, Timoleon, 25. 3–4.57