Diodorus of Sicily

βασιλέως καθόδου περὶ πεντήκοντα τὸν ἀριθμόν,
5οὓς δήσας ἀπέστειλε πρὸς Κάσανδρον. τῶν δὲ περὶ
τὸν Αἰακίδην ἀθροισθέντων ἐκ τῆς φυγῆς καὶ τοῖς
Αἰτωλοῖς συμμιξάντων πάλιν ἐπελθὼν ὁ Φίλιππος
μάχῃ ἐκράτησεν καὶ πολλοὺς ἀνεῖλεν, ἐν οἷς ἦν καὶ
6Αἰακίδης ὁ βασιλεύς. ἐν ὀλίγαις δ᾿ ἡμέραις τηλικαῦτα
ποιήσας προτερήματα κατεπλήξατο πολλοὺς
τῶν Αἰτωλῶν ἐπὶ τοσοῦτον ὥστε τὰς ἀνοχύρους
πόλεις ἐκλιπεῖν, εἰς δὲ τὰ δυσβατώτατα τῶν ὀρῶν
συμφυγεῖν μετὰ τέκνων καὶ γυναικῶν.
Καὶ τὰ μὲν περὶ τὴν Ἑλλάδα πραχθέντα τοιοῦτον
ἔσχε τὸ τέλος.
75. Κατὰ δὲ τὴν Ἀσίαν Ἄσανδρος1 ὁ τῆς Καρίας
κυριεύων πιεζούμενος τῷ πολέμῳ διελύσατο πρὸς
Ἀντίγονον ἐφ᾿ ᾧ τοὺς μὲν στρατιώτας παραδώσει
πάντας Ἀντιγόνῳ, τὰς δ᾿ Ἑλληνίδας πόλεις αὐτονόμους
ἀφήσει, τὴν δὲ σατραπείαν ἣν πρότερον
εἶχε δωρεὰν καθέξει,2 βέβαιος ὢν φίλος Ἀντιγόνῳ.
2δοὺς δὲ περὶ τούτων ὅμηρον Ἀγάθωνα τὸν ἀδελφὸν
καὶ μετ᾿ ὀλίγας ἡμέρας μεταμεληθεὶς ἐπὶ ταῖς
συνθήκαις τὸν μὲν ἀδελφὸν ἐξέκλεψεν ἐκ τῆς ὁμηρίας
πρὸς δὲ Πτολεμαῖον καὶ Σέλευκον διαπρεσβευσάμενος
3ἠξίου βοηθεῖς τὴν ταχίστην. ἐφ᾿ οἷς
Ἀντίγονος δεινοπαθήσας δύναμιν ἀπέστειλεν ἐπὶ
τὴν ἐλευθέρωσιν τῶν πόλεων καὶ κατὰ γῆν καὶ
κατὰ θάλασσαν, τοῦ μὲν στόλου ναύαρχον ἀποδείξας


1Ἄσανδρος Wesseling (cp. Book 18. 3. 1): Κάσανδρος
MSS., Fischer.2τὴν δὲ σατραπείαν ἣν πρότερον εἶχε δωρεὰν καθέξει F 2d hand: τὰς δὲ σατραπείας ἃς πρότερον εἶχε δωρεὰν καθέξειν F, τὰς δὲ σατραπείας δωρεὰς ἃς πρότερον εἶχε καθέξει RX.38Book XIX

for the return of the king; these he bound and sent 313 b.c. to Cassander.1 As Aeacides and his men rallied from the fight and joined the Aetolians, Philip again advanced and overpowered them in battle, slaying many, among whom was King Aeacides2 himself. By gaining such victories in a few days Philip so terrified many of the Aetolians that they abandoned their unfortified cities and fled to the most inaccessible of their mountains with their children and their women.
Such was the outcome of the campaign in Greece.3
75. In Asia, Asander,4 the ruler of Caria, being hard pressed by the war, came to terms with Antigonus, agreeing to transfer to him all his soldiers, to relinquish the Greek cities and leave them autonomous, and to hold as a grant the satrapy that he had formerly had, remaining a steadfast friend of Antigonus. Having given his brother Agathon as a hostage for the fulfilment of these terms and then after a few days having repented of the agreement, he secretly removed his brother from custody and sent emissaries to Ptolemy and Seleucus, begging them to aid him as soon as possible. Antigonus, enraged at this, dispatched a force both by sea and by land to liberate the cities, appointing Medius






1Pausanias (1. 11. 4) tells us that this battle was fought at Oeniadae.2His son Pyrrhus, the later king of Epirus, was adopted and reared by Glaucias, king of Illyria, who seems to have been related to him in some way (Plutarch, Pyrrhus, 3; Justin, 17. 3. 16–19).3Continued in chap. 75. 6.4He had been sent to Caria in the preceding year by Cassander (chap. 68. 4–7).39