Diodorus of Sicily

γῆν ἐξεβράσθη καὶ τοῖς περὶ τὸν Πτολεμαῖον ὑποχείρια
κατέστη· αἱ δ᾿ ἄλλαι ἐκβιασαμένων τῶν
πληρωμάτων διεσώθησαν πρὸς τὴν Ἀντιγόνου
3στρατοπεδείαν. τῶν δὲ περὶ τὸν Πτολεμαῖον διειληφότων
πᾶσαν τὴν περὶ τὸν ποταμὸν ἔκβασιν
φυλακαῖς ἰσχυραῖς καὶ πολλῶν μὲν σκαφῶν ποταμίων
αὐτῷ παρεσκευασμένων, πάντων δὲ τούτων
ἐχόντων βέλη παντοῖα καὶ τοὺς χρησομένους αὐτοῖς
ἄνδρας οἱ περὶ τὸν Ἀντίγονον οὐ μετρίως ἠποροῦντο·
4ἡ γὰρ ναυτικὴ δύναμις ἄχρηστος ἦν αὐτοῖς
προκατειλημμένου τοῦ Πηλουσιακοῦ στόματος ὑπὸ
τῶν πολεμίων, τό τε πεζὸν στράτευμα τὴν ὁρμὴν
ἄπρακτον εἶχε τῷ μεγέθει τοῦ ποταμοῦ διειργόμενον,
τὸ δὲ μέγιστον, ἡμερῶν ἤδη συχνῶν διεληλυθυιῶν
ὑπολείπειν ἤδη συνέβαινε τόν τε σῖτον καὶ
5τὰ χορτάσματα τοῖς κτήνεσι. διὰ δὴ ταῦτα τῆς
δυνάμεως ἀθυμούσης παρακαλῶν1 τὸ στρατόπεδον
καὶ τοὺς ἡγεμόνας Ἀντίγονος προέθηκε βουλὴν
πότερον συμφέρει μένειν καὶ διαπολεμεῖν, ἢ νῦν
μὲν ἐπανελθεῖν εἰς Συρίαν, ὕστερον δὲ κάλλιον
παρασκευασαμένους στρατεῦσαι καθ᾿ ὃν ἂν χρόνον
6ἐλάχιστος ὁ Νεῖλος εἶναι δόξῃ. πάντων δὲ κατενεχθέντων
ἐπὶ τὸ τὴν ταχίστην ἀπιέναι παρήγγειλε
τοῖς στρατιώταις ἀναζευγνύειν καὶ ταχὺ πάλιν
ἐπανῆλθεν εἰς τὴν Συρίαν, συμπαραπλέοντος αὐτῷ
καὶ τοῦ στόλου παντός. Πτολεμαῖος δὲ μετὰ τὴν
ἀπαλλαγὴν τῶν πολεμίων περιχαρὴς γενόμενος καὶ
θύσας τοῖς θεοῖς χαριστήρια τοὺς φίλους εἱστία
7λαμπρῶς. καὶ πρὸς μὲν τοὺς περὶ Σέλευκον καὶ
Λυσίμαχον καὶ Κάσανδρον ἔγραψε περὶ τῶν εὐτυχημάτων
καὶ περὶ τοῦ πλήθους τῶν πρὸς αὐτὸν αὐτομολησάντων,
1παρακαλῶν Capps: παραλαβὼν. Fischer in apparatus suggests παραλαβὼν κατὰ σ. τοὺς ἡ.344Book XX

violently upon the land by the waves and came into 306 b.c. the possession of Ptolemy; but the other ships, whose crews had kept them from the shore by main force, reached the camp of Antigonus in safety. Since Ptolemy, however, had already occupied every landing-place along the river with strong guards, since many river boats had been made ready for him, and since all of these were equipped with ordnance of every kind and with men to use it, Antigonus was in no little difficulty; for his naval force was of no use to him since the Pelusiac mouth of the Nile had been occupied in advance by the enemy, and his land forces found their advance thwarted since they were checked by the width of the river, and what was of greatest importance, as many days had passed, food for the men and fodder for the beasts were falling short. Since, then, his forces for these reasons were disheartened, Antigonus called together the army and its leaders and laid before them the question whether it was better to remain and continue the war or to return for the present to Syria and later make a campaign with more complete preparation and at the time at which the Nile was supposed to be lowest. When all inclined toward the quickest possible withdrawal, he commanded the soldiers to break camp and speedily returned to Syria, the whole fleet coasting along beside him. After the departure of the enemy Ptolemy rejoiced greatly; and, when he had made a thank-offering to the gods, he entertained his friends lavishly. He also wrote to Seleucus, Lysimachus, and Cassander about his successes and about the large number of men who had deserted to


345