Diodorus of Sicily

αἱ δ᾿ ἄλλαι πόλεις καταπλαγεῖσαι προσεχώρησαν
τοῖς Πέρσαις.
7Βραχὺ δὲ πρὸ τούτων τῶν χρόνων Ἀρτεμισία
μὲν ἡ Καρίας δυναστεύουσα μετήλλαξεν ἄρξασα
ἔτη δύο, τὴν δὲ δυναστείαν Ἰδριεὺς ὁ ἀδελφὸς
8διεδέξατο καὶ ἦρξεν ἔτη ἑπτά. κατὰ. δὲ τὴν Ἰταλίαν
Ῥωμαῖοι πρὸς μὲν Πραινεστίνους ἀνοχάς,
πρὸς δὲ Σαμνίτας συνθήκας ἐποιήσαντο, Ταρκυνίους
δὲ ἄνδρας διακοσίους καὶ ἑξήκοντα δημοσίᾳ
9ἐθανάτωσαν ἐν τῇ ἀγορᾷ. κατὰ δὲ τὴν Σικελίαν
Λεπτίνης καὶ Κάλλιππος οἱ Συρακόσιοι δύναμιν
ἔχοντες ἐξεπολιόρκησαν1 Ῥήγιον φρουρούμενον ὑπὸ
Διονυσίου τοῦ τυράννου τοῦ νεωτέρου καὶ τὴν μὲν
φρουρὰν ἐξέβαλον, τοῖς δὲ Ῥηγίνοις τὴν αὐτονομίαν
ἀπεκατέστησαν.
46. Ἐπ᾿ ἄρχοντος δ᾿ Ἀθήνησιν Ἀπολλοδώρου
Ῥωμαῖοι κατέστησαν ὑπάτους Μάρκον Οὐαλέριον
καὶ Γάιον Σουλπίκιον. ἐπὶ δὲ τούτων κατὰ τὴν
Κύπρον Σαλαμινίων πολιορκουμένων ὑπ᾿ Εὐαγόρου
καὶ Φωκίωνος αἱ μὲν ἄλλαι πόλεις ἅπασαι τοῖς
Πέρσαις ὑπετάγησαν, τῆς δὲ Σαλαμῖνος βασιλεύων
2Πνυταγόρας2 μόνος ὑπέμεινε τὴν πολιορκίαν. ὁ δ᾿
Εὐαγόρας πατρῴαν ἀρχὴν τὴν Σαλαμινίων ἀνεκτᾶτο
καὶ διὰ τοῦ βασιλέως τῶν Περσῶν τὴν κάθοδον
εἰς τὴν βασιλείαν ἐποιεῖτο. μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα
διαβληθέντος αὐτοῦ πρὸς Ἀρταξέρξην καὶ τοῦ βασιλέως
βοηθοῦντος τῷ Πνυταγόρᾳ2 ὁ μὲν Εὐαγόρας


1So Dindorf: ἐπολιόρκησαν (cp. chap. 33. 4).2So Wesseling: πρωταγόρας (Προ- Ρ) (cp. Book 15. 4. 3,
where Vogel restores Πνυτ- (MSS. Πυθ-)). Cp. also Cur- tius, 4. 3. 11; Arrian, Alexander, 2. 20. 6; Athenaeus, 4. 167 c.364Book XVI

ending, and the rest of the cities, panic-stricken, 351/0 b.c. went over to the Persians.
Shortly before this time Artemisia, who had held despotic rule over Caria, passed away after ruling two years, and Idrieus,1 her brother, succeeded to the despotism and ruled seven years. In Italy the Romans made an armistice with the people of Praeneste,
and a treaty with the Samnites, and they put to death two hundred sixty inhabitants of Tarquinii2 at the hands of the public executioners in the Forum. In Sicily Leptines and Callippus, the Syracusans then in power, took by siege Rhegium,3 which was garrisoned by the tyrant Dionysius the younger, ejected the garrison, and restored to the people of Rhegium their independence.
46. When Apollodorus was archon in Athens, the 350/49 b.c. Romans elected as consuls Marcus Valerius and Gaius Sulpicius. During their term of office, in Cyprus, while the people of Salamis were being besieged by Evagoras4
and Phocion, the rest of the cities all became subject to the Persians, and Pnytagoras,5 the king of Salamis, alone continued to endure the siege. Now Evagoras was endeavouring to recover his ancestral rule over the Salaminians and through the help of the King of the Persians to be restored to his kingship. But later, when he had been falsely accused to Artaxerxes and the King was backing Pnytagoras.







1See chap. 42. 6–7.2Cp. Livy, 7. 19. 2–3, who gives 358 as the number executed.3Demolished by the Elder Dionysius but restored by the Younger according to Strabo, 6. 1. 6.4See chap. 42. 7–9.5Grandson of Evagoras I and son of Pnytagoras.365