Diodorus of Sicily

Ἱκέτας ἔχων περὶ ἑαυτὸν ἀξιόλογον δύναμιν
ἐστράτευσεν ἐπὶ τὰς Συρακούσσας καὶ τὸ μὲν
πρῶτον χάρακα βαλόμενος περὶ τὸ Ὀλυμπιεῖον1
διεπολέμει τῷ κρατοῦντι τῆς πόλεως τυράννῳ,2
2χρονιζούσης δὲ τῆς πολιορκίας καὶ τῶν ἐπιτηδείων
ἐκλιπόντων ὁ μὲν Ἱκέτας ἀνέζευξεν εἰς Λεοντίνους
(ἐκ ταύτης γὰρ ὡρμᾶτο3 τῆς πόλεως)· ὁ δὲ Διονύσιος
ἐπακολουθήσας αὐτοῖς καὶ καταλαβὼν τὴν
3οὐραγίαν συνεστήσατο μάχην. ὁ δ᾿ Ἱκέτας ἐπιστρέψας
ἐπὶ τὸν Διονύσιον συνῆψε μάχην καὶ
πλείους τῶν τρισχιλίων4 μισθοφόρων ἀνελὼν τοὺς
λοιποὺς φυγεῖν ἠνάγκασεν. ὀξεῖ δὲ τῷ διωγμῷ
χρησάμενος καὶ συνεισπεσὼν τοῖς φεύγουσιν εἰς τὴν
πόλιν ἐκράτησε τῶν Συρακουσσῶν πλὴν τῆς Νήσου.
Καὶ τὰ μὲν περὶ τὸν Ἱκέταν καὶ Διονύσιον ἐν
τούτοις ἦν.
4Τιμολέων δὲ μετὰ τὴν κατάληψιν τῶν Συρακουσσῶν
τρισὶν ἡμέραις ὕστερον κατέπλευσεν εἰς τὸ
5Ῥήγιον καὶ καθωρμίσθη πλησίον τῆς πόλεως. ἐπικαταπλευσάντων
δὲ καὶ τῶν Καρχηδονίων εἴκοσι
τριήρεσι καὶ τῶν Ῥηγίνων συνεργούντων τῷ
Τιμολέοντι καὶ κοινὴν ἐκκλησίαν ἐν τῇ πόλει συναγαγόντων
καὶ περὶ συλλύσεως δημηγορούντων οἱ
μὲν Καρχηδόνιοι διαλαβόντες τὸν Τιμολέοντα πεισθήσεσθαι
τὸν εἰς Κόρινθον ἀπόπλουν ποιήσασθαι
ῥᾳθύμως εἶχον τὰ κατὰ τὰς φυλακάς, ὁ δὲ Τιμολέων
οὐδεμίαν ἔμφασιν διδοὺς τοῦ δρασμοῦ αὐτὸς μὲν
πλησίον τοῦ βήματος ἔμεινε, λάθρᾳ δὲ παρήγγειλε
6τὰς ἐννέα ναῦς ἀποπλεῦσαι τὴν ταχίστην. περισπωμένων
δὲ τῶν Καρχηδονίων ταῖς ψυχαῖς περὶ
τοὺς ἐγκαθέτως δημηγοροῦντας μακρῶς τῶν Ῥηγίνων

1Ὀλυμπιεῖον PX: Ὀλύμπιον cet. (cp. chap. 83. 2).2τυρ. τῷ Δ. X: τ. καὶ Λ. P; τ. Δ. R; Δ. τῷ τ. F.3ὡρμᾶτο] ὁρμᾶτο P; ὥρμητο Dindorf.4Hertlein suggested reading τρισχιλίων τῶν.28Book XVI

of Syracuse, Hicetas had taken the field against 345/4 b.c. it with a large force,1 and at first constructing a stockaded camp at the Olympieium carried on war against the tyrant in the city, but as the siege dragged on and provisions ran out, he started back to Leontini, for that was the city which served as his base. Dionysius set out in hot pursuit and overtook his rear, attacking it at once, but Hicetas wheeled upon him, joined battle, and having slain more than three thousand of the mercenaries, put the rest to flight. Pursuing sharply and bursting into the city with the fugitives, he got possession of all Syracuse except the Island.2
Such was the situation as regards Hicetas and Dionysius.
Three days after the capture of Syracuse, Timoleon put in at Rhegium and anchored off the city.3 The Carthaginians promptly turned up with twenty triremes, but the people of Rhegium helped Timoleon to escape the trap. They called a general assembly in the city and staged a formal debate on the subject of a settlement. The Carthaginians expected that Timoleon would be prevailed upon to sail back to Corinth and kept a careless watch. He, however, giving no hint of an intention to slip away, remained close to the tribunal, but secretly ordered nine of his ships to put to sea immediately. Then, while the Carthaginians concentrated their attention on the intentionally long-winded Rhegians, Timoleon stole







1Plutarch, Timoleon, 1. 3.2Plutarch, Timoleon, 9. 2.3The same story is told by Plutarch, Timoleon, 9. 2–10. 5.29