Diodorus of Sicily

πυλίδα καὶ παρεισπεσὼν εἰς τὴν πόλιν πολλοὺς
μὲν κατέβαλε, τοὺς δὲ λοιποὺς τρεψάμενος
συνεδίωξεν εἰς τὴν ἀκρόπολιν.
5Τῶν δὲ Μακεδόνων περὶ τὴν τειχομαχίαν ἔτι διατριβόντων
ἁρπάσας κλίμακα καὶ τοῖς τῆς ἄκρας
τείχεσι προσερείσας καὶ τὴν πέλτην ὑπὲρ τῆς κεφαλῆς
ἔχων προσανέβαινε. τῆς δὲ κατὰ τὴν ἐνέργειαν
ὀξύτητος φθανούσης τοὺς προμαχομένους
6τῶν βαρβάρων ταχέως ἐπέβη τῷ τείχει. τῶν δ᾿
Ἰνδῶν εἰς χεῖρας μὲν ἐλθεῖν οὐ τολμώντων, ἐκ διαστήματος
δὲ ἀκοντιζόντων καὶ τοξευόντων ὁ μὲν
βασιλεὺς ὑπὸ τοῦ πλήθους τῶν βελῶν κατεπονεῖτο,
οἱ δὲ Μακεδόνες δύο κλίμακας προσθέντες διὰ τούτων
προσανέβαινον ἀθρόοι καὶ συντριβεισῶν ἀμφοτέρων
ἐπὶ τὴν γῆν κατηνέχθησαν.
99. Ὁ δὲ βασιλεὺς ἐρημωθεὶς πάσης βοηθείας
ἐτόλμησεν ἐπιτελέσαι πρᾶξιν παράδοξον καὶ μνήμης
ἀξίαν. τὸ γὰρ ἀπὸ τοῦ τείχους ἀπελθεῖν ἄπρακτον
πρὸς τοὺς ἰδίους ἀνάξιον κρίνας ὑπάρχειν τῆς ἰδίας
εὐπραξίας καθήλατο μετὰ τῶν ὅπλων μόνος εἰς τὴν
2πόλιν. συνδραμόντων δ᾿ ἐπ᾿ αὐτὸν τῶν Ἰνδῶν
ὑπέστη τεθαρρηκότως τὴν τῶν βαρβάρων ἐπιφοράν·
προβαλλόμενος δ᾿ ἐκ τῶν δεξιῶν δένδρον τι παρ᾿
αὐτὸ1 τὸ τεῖχος ἐρριζωμένον, ἐκ δὲ τῶν εὐωνύμων
αὐτὸ τὸ τεῖχος, ἠμύνετο τοὺς Ἰνδούς,2 οὕτω3 τῷ
θυμῷ παραστὰς ὡς ἄν τις βασιλεὺς τηλικούτων ἤδη
ἀπειργασμένων ἀνδραγαθήσειε, τὴν ἐσχάτην τοῦ
βίου καταστροφὴν εὐκλεεστάτην γενέσθαι φιλοτιμούμενος.
3πολλὰς μὲν γὰρ εἰς τὸ κράνος ἐλάμβανε
πληγάς, οὐκ ὀλίγας δὲ εἰς τὴν πέλτην ἐδέχετο·


1δένδρον ὃ ἦν παρὰ F.2τοὺς δ᾿ Ἰνδοὺς κατέπληξε F.3τούτῳ codd.; corrected by Fischer.402Book XVII

a postern gate and was the first to burst into the city.1 326/5 b.c. He struck down many defenders and, driving the others before him, pursued them to the citadel.
The Macedonians were still busy fighting along the wall. Alexander seized a ladder, leaned it against the walls of the citadel, and clambered up holding a light shield above his head. So quick was he to act that he reached the top of the wall before the defenders could forestall him. The Indians did not dare to come within his reach, but flung javelins and shot arrows at him from a distance. He was staggering under the weight of their blows when the Macedonians raised two ladders and swarmed up in a mass, but both broke and the soldiers tumbled back upon the ground.
99. Thus the king was left alone, and boldly took a step which was as little expected as it is worthy of mention. It seemed to him out of keeping with his tradition of success to descend from the wall to his troops without accomplishing anything. In stead, he leapt down with his armour alone inside the city. As the Indians thronged about him, he withstood their attack undismayed. He protected himself on the right by a tree2 which grew close by the wall and on the left by the wall itself and kept the Indians off, displaying such courage as you would expect from a king who had his record of achievement. He was eager to make this, if it were the last feat of his life, a supremely glorious one. He took many blows upon the helmet, not a few upon the shield. At length he




1Curtius, 9. 4. 30–5. 20; Justin, 12. 9. 5–13; Plutarch, Alexander, 63; Arrian, 6. 9. 1–11. 8.2Curtius, 9. 5. 4; Justin, 12. 9. 9.403