Diodorus of Sicily

μάχη τοιοῦτον ἔσχε τὸ τέλος· αἱ δὲ πεζαὶ1 δυνάμεις
ὡς συνῆλθον εἰς χεῖρας τοῖς πολεμίοις, μεγάλους
καὶ θαυμαστοὺς ἀγῶνας συνεστήσαντο. οὐδέποτε
γὰρ Ἑλλήνων πρὸς Ἕλληνας ἀγωνιζομένων οὔτε
πλῆθος ἀνδρῶν τοσοῦτο παρετάξατο οὔθ᾿ ἡγεμόνες
ἀξιολογώτεροι τοῖς ἀξιώμασιν οὔτε ἄνδρες δυνατώτεροι
τὰς ἐν τοῖς κινδύνοις ἀνδραγαθίας2 ἐπεδείξαντο.
2οἱ γὰρ πεζομαχεῖν ἄριστα δυνάμενοι κατὰ
τοὺς ὑποκειμένους καιρούς, Βοιωτοὶ καὶ Λακεδαιμόνιοι,
πρὸς ἀλλήλους κατὰ τὴν τάξιν ἀνθεστηκότες
πρῶτον μάχη συνῆψαν, οὐδεμίαν φειδὼ ποιούμενοι
τοῦ ζῆν. καὶ τὸ μὲν πρῶτον τύπτοντες ἀλλήλους
τοῖς δόρασι, καὶ διὰ τὴν πυκνότητα τῶν πληγῶν
τὰ πλεῖστα συντρίψαντες, εἰς τὸν ἀπὸ τῆς μαχαίρας
3ἀγῶνα κατήντησαν. συμπλεκόμενοι δὲ τοῖς σώμασι
καὶ παντοίας διαθέσεις τραυμάτων ἀπεργαζόμενοι
τοῖς θυμοῖς οὐκ ἔληγον· ἐπὶ πολὺν δὲ χρόνον τοῖς
δεινοῖς ἐγκαρτερούντων διὰ τὴν ὑπερβολὴν τῆς παρ᾿
ἑκατέροις ἀνδραγαθίας οὐδεμίαν ῥοπὴν ἐλάμβανεν3
ἡ μάχη. ἕκαστος γὰρ τοῦ παθεῖν τι δεινὸν καταφρονῶν,
τοῦ δὲ δρᾶσαί τι λαμπρὸν ἐφιέμενος, εὐγενῶς
ἀνεδέχετο τὸν ὑπὲρ τῆς δόξης θάνατον.
4ἰσχυρᾶς δὲ μάχης ἐπὶ πολύν τε χρόνον γινομένης
καὶ τοῦ κινδύνου μηδεμίαν ῥοπὴν λαμβάνοντος, ὁ
μὲν Ἐπαμεινώνδας ὑπολαβὼν τῆς ἰδίας ἀρετῆς
προσδεῖσθαι τὴν νίκην, ἔγνω δι᾿ ἑαυτοῦ κρῖναι τὸν
κίνδυνον. εὐθὺς οὖν ἀναλαβὼν τοὺς ἀρίστους καὶ
μετὰ τούτων συμφράξας, εἰσέβαλεν εἰς μέσους τοὺς
πολεμίους· καθηγούμενος δὲ τοῦ συντάγματος, καὶ
πρῶτος ἀκοντίσας, ἔβαλε τὸν ἡγούμενον τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων.
5εὐθὺς δὲ καὶ τῶν ἄλλων εἰς χεῖρας
ἐρχομένων, οὓς μὲν ἀνελών, οὓς δὲ καταπληξάμενος,
1So Dindorf: πεζικαὶ.2τὰς . . . ἀνδραγαθίας Wesseling (cp. chap. 65. 3): ταῖς . . . ἀνδραγαθίαις3So Wesseling: ἀνελάμβανεν192Book XV

But when the infantry forces closed with the enemy in 363/2 b.c. hand-to-hand combat, a mighty, stupendous struggle ensued. For never at any other time when Greeks fought Greeks was such a multitude of men arrayed, nor did generals of greater repute or men more competent ever display such gallantry in battle. For the most capable foot-soldiers of that time, Boeotians and Lacedaemonians, whose lines were drawn up facing one another, began the contest, exposing their lives to every risk. After the first exchange of spears in which most were shattered by the very density of the missiles, they engaged with swords. And although their bodies were all locked with one another and they were inflicting all manner of wounds, yet they did not leave off; and for a long time as they persisted in their terrible work, because of the superlative courage displayed on each side, the battle hung poised. For each man, disregarding the risk of personal hurt, but desirous rather of performing some brilliant deed, would nobly accept death as the price of glory. As the battle raged severely for a long time and the conflict took no turn in favour of either side, Epameinondas, conceiving that victory called for the display of his own valour also, decided to be himself the instrument to decide the issue. So he immediately took his best men, grouped them in close formation and charged into the midst of the enemy; he led his battalion in the charge and was the first to hurl his javelin, and hit the commander of the Lacedaemonians. Then, as the rest of his men also came immediately into close quarters with the foe, he slew some, threw others into




193