Diodorus of Sicily
6Λευκάδα. ταῦτα δὲ πάντα ταχέως καὶ ῥᾳδίως
ἐπετέλεσε, πείθων μὲν διὰ τῆς τοῦ λόγου δυνάμεως,
νικῶν δὲ δι᾿ ἀνδρείαν καὶ στρατηγίαν. διόπερ οὐ
μόνον παρὰ τοῖς πολίταις, ἀλλὰ καὶ παρὰ τοῖς
ἄλλοις Ἕλλησι μεγάλης ἐτύγχανεν ἀποδοχῆς. καὶ
τὰ μὲν περὶ Τιμόθεον ἐν τούτοις ἦν.
37. Ἅμα δὲ τούτοις πραττομένοις Θηβαῖοι μὲν
ἐστράτευσαν ἐπ᾿ Ὀρχομενὸν ἐπιλέκτοις ἀνδράσι
πεντακοσίοις καὶ συνετέλεσαν πρᾶξιν ἀξίαν μνήμης·
φρουρούντων γὰρ τὸν Ὀρχομενὸν Λακεδαιμονίων
πολλοῖς στρατιώταις, καὶ τοῖς Θηβαίοις ἀντιταξαμένων,
ἐγενήθη μάχη καρτερά, καθ᾿ ἣν οἱ Θηβαῖοι
πρὸς διπλασίους συμβαλόντες ἐνίκησαν τοὺς Λακεδαιμονίους.
οὐδέποτε γὰρ τοῦτο συνέβη γενέσθαι
κατὰ τοὺς ἐπάνω χρόνους, ἀλλ᾿ ἀγαπητὸν ὑπάρχειν
2ἐδόκει τὸ πολλοὺς ὀλίγους νικῆσαι. διὸ καὶ φρονήματος
ἐπίμπλαντο Θηβαῖοι, καὶ τὴν ἀνδρείαν εἶχον
μᾶλλον περιβόητον, καὶ φανεροὶ καθειστήκεισαν
ἀμφισβητήσοντες τῆς τῶν Ἑλλήνων ἡγεμονίας.
3Τῶν δὲ συγγραφέων Ἑρμείας ὁ Μεθυμναῖος τὴν
τῶν Σικελικῶν σύνταξιν εἰς τοῦτον τὸν ἐνιαυτὸν
κατέστροφε, γράψας βύβλους δέκα, ὡς δέ τινες
διαιροῦσι, δώδεκα.
38. Ἐπ᾿ ἄρχοντος δ᾿ Ἀθήνησιν Ἱπποδάμου
Ῥωμαῖοι χιλιάρχους ἀντὶ τῶν ὑπάτων κατέστησαν
τέτταρας, Λεύκιον Οὐαλέριον, Λεύκιον1 Μάλλιον,2
1Λεύκιον P: Κρίσπον (Aulum Livy, 6. 21. 1).2Μάλλιον PA: Μάλλιον Φάβιον.50Book XV

in a naval battle off Leucas.1 All this he 376/5 b.c. accomplished quickly and easily, not only persuading men by his eloquence, but also winning battles by courage and good generalship. Consequently he won great acclaim, not only among his own fellow citizens but also among the Greeks at large. Thus stood the fortunes of Timotheüs.
37. While these things were going on, the Thebans made an expedition against Orchomenus with five hundred picked men and performed a memorable action. For as the Lacedaemonians maintained a garrison of many soldiers in Orchomenus and had drawn up their forces against the Thebans, a stiff battle took place in which the Thebans, attacking twice their number, defeated the Lacedaemonians.2 Never indeed had such a thing occurred before; it had seemed enough if they won with many against few. The result was that the Thebans swelled with pride, became more and more renowned for their valour, and had manifestly put themselves in a position to compete for the supremacy of Greece.
Of the historians, Hermeias of Methymnê3 brought to a close with this year his narrative of Sicilian affairs, having composed ten books, or, as some divide the work, twelve.
38. When Hippodamas was archon at Athens, the 375/4 b.c. Romans elected four military tribunes with consular power, Lucius Valerius, Lucius Manlius, Servius


1Xenophon, Hell. 5. 4. 62–66 gives a fuller account of
Timotheüs’ activities. See also Isocrates, Antidosis, 109;
Neros, Timotheüs, 2. 1; Polyaenus, 3. 10. 4–17 (passim):
Frontinus, Strat. 2. 5. 47. The year is 375.2Properly in the year 375/4 (Beloch, Griechische Geschichte2,
3. 1. 155). See Plutarch, Pelopidas, 16 f.3One fragment of the Sicilian history of Hermeias remains (Athenaeus, 10. 438 c; also FHG, 2. 80. 1). The history seems to have dealt mainly with the Elder Dionysius with perhaps a brief introduction on earlier Sicilian affairs. (See Beloch, Griechische Geschichte2, 3. 2. 42–43.)51