Diodorus of Sicily

καταλαβὼν δὲ Φάλαικον πάλιν τῆς στρατηγίας
ἠξιωμένον καὶ τὸ τῶν1 μισθοφόρων ἔχοντα
πλῆθος παρεσκευάζετο παρατάξει κρῖναι τὸν πόλεμον·
ὁ δὲ Φάλαικος ἐν τῇ Νικαίᾳ διατρίβων καὶ
θεωρῶν αὑτὸν οὐκ ἀξιόμαχον ἄντα διεπρεσβεύσατο
3πρὸς τὸν βασιλέα περὶ διαλύσεων. γενομένης δ᾿
ὁμολογίας ὥστε τὸν Φάλαικον μετὰ τῶν στρατιωτῶν
ἀπελθεῖν ὅποι2 βούλοιτο, οὗτος μὲν ὑπόσπονδος
εἰς τὴν Πελοπόννησον ἀπεχώρησε3 μετὰ τῶν μισθοφόρων,
ὄντων ὀκτακισχιλίων, οἱ δὲ Φωκεῖς συντριβέντες
ταῖς ἐλπίσι παρέδωκαν ἑαυτοὺς τῷ Φιλίππῳ.
4ὁ δὲ βασιλεὺς ἄνευ μάχης ἀνελπίστως καταλύσας
τὸν ἱερὸν πόλεμον συνήδρευε μετὰ Βοιωτῶν καὶ
Θετταλῶν. ἔκρινεν οὖν συναγαγεῖν4 τὸ τῶν Ἀμφικτυόνων
συνέδριον καὶ τούτῳ τὴν περὶ τῶν ὅλων
διάγνωσιν ἐπιτρέψαι.
60. Ἔδοξεν οὖν τοῖς συνέδροις μεταδοῦναι τῷ Φιλίππῳ
καὶ τοῖς ἀπογόνοις αὐτοῦ τῆς Ἀμφικτυονίας
καὶ δύο ψήφους ἔχειν, ἃς πρότερον οἱ καταπολεμηθέντες
Φωκεῖς εἶχον· τῶν δ᾿ ἐπὶ Φωκεῦσι5
1τὸ τῶν deleted by Dindorf; Fischer suggests ἱκανὸν.2So Schäfer: ὅπου RF, ὁπότε PX.3So Hertlein: ἀνεχώρησε.4So Hertlein and Madvig (cp. Book 17. 4. 2): συνκατάγειν
P, συγκατάγειν cett.5So Sherman; ὑπὸ Φωκεῦσι Weiske; τῶν ἐν Βοιωτοῖς
Schäfer: τῶν δ᾿ ἐν Φωκεῦσι. Beloch, Griechische Geschichte2,
3. 1. 512, note 1 would read τῶν ἐν Φωκεῦσι τριῶν [καὶ εἴκοσι].404Book XVI

with a large army. And when he had overtaken 346/5 b.c. Phalaecus, who had again been granted the generalship and had the main body of the mercenaries, Philip prepared to decide the war by a pitched battle. But Phalaecus, who was tarrying in Nicaea1 and saw that he was no match for Philip, sent ambassadors to the king to treat for an armistice. An agreement was reached whereby Phalaecus with his men should depart whithersoever he wished, and he then, under terms of the truce, withdrew to the Peloponnese with his mercenaries to the number of eight thousand,2 but the Phocians, whose hopes were now completely crushed, surrendered to Philip. The king, having without a battle unexpectedly terminated the Sacred War, sat in council with the Boeotians and the Thessalians.
As a result he decided to call a meeting of the Amphictyonic Council and leave to it the final decision on all the issues at stake.
60. The members of the Council then passed a decree admitting Philip and his descendants to the Amphictyonic Council and according him two votes which formerly had been held by the Phocians,3 now defeated in war. They also voted that the three cities4
1This town commanded the pass of Thermopylae.2Cp. Demosthenes, 19. 230, who gives the figure 10,000
foot and 1000 horse. Diodorus omits all the details of the
Peace of Philocrates and the embassy leading up to it. For an account of this see Pickard-Cambridge, Cambridge Ancient History, 6. 233 ff.3For the reorganization of the votes in the Amphictyonic League see P.-W. Realencyclopädie, 4. 2681 ff., and Beloch, Griechische Geschichte2, 3. 1. 512, note 4; and Pickard-Cambridge,
Cambridge Ancient History, 6. 241.4These seem to be the three Boeotian cities in the hands of the Phocians (cp. chaps. 56. 2 and 58. 1). The MSS. read “in the land of the Phocians” which is inconsistent with section 2 below and other accounts (e.g. Demosthenes, 19. 325, where two of the towns mentioned, Orchomenus and Coroneia, are said to have been enslaved). (Cp. also Pausanias,
10. 3.)405