Diodorus of Sicily

εἰ συμβουλεύει Ῥοδίοις Πτολεμαῖον ὡς θεὸν τιμῆσαι.
4συγκατατιθεμένου δὲ τοῦ χρηστηρίου τέμενος
ἀνῆκαν ἐν τῇ πόλει τετράγωνον, οἰκοδομήσαντες
παρ᾿ ἑκάστην πλευρὰν στοὰν1 σταδιαίαν, ὃ προσηγόρευσαν
Πτολεμαῖον. ἀνῳκοδόμησαν δὲ καὶ τὸ
θέατρον καὶ τὰ πεπτωκότα τῶν τειχῶν καὶ τῶν
ἄλλων τόπων τοὺς καθῃρημένους πολλῷ κάλλιον
ἢ προϋπῆρχον.
5Δημήτριος δὲ κατὰ τὰς ἐντολὰς τοῦ πατρὸς
διαλυσάμενος πρὸς Ῥοδίους ἐξέπλευσε μετὰ πάσης
τῆς δυνάμεως καὶ κομισθεὶς διὰ νήσων κατέπλευσε
6τῆς Βοιωτίας εἰς Αὖλιν. σπεύδων δ᾿ ἐλευθερῶσαι
τοὺς Ἕλληνας (οἱ γὰρ περὶ Κάσανδρον καὶ Πολυπέρχοντα
τὸν ἔμπροσθεν χρόνον ἄδειαν ἐσχηκότες
ἐπόρθουν τὰ πλεῖστα μέρη τῆς Ἑλλάδος) πρῶτον
μὲν τὴν Χαλκιδέων πόλιν ἠλευθέρωσε, φρουρουμένην
ὑπὸ Βοιωτῶν, καὶ τοὺς κατὰ τὴν Βοιωτίαν
καταπληξάμενος ἠνάγκασεν ἀποστῆναι τῆς Κασάνδρου
φιλίας, μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα πρὸς μὲν Αἰτωλοὺς
συμμαχίαν ἐποιήσατο, πρὸς δὲ τοὺς περὶ Πολυπέρχοντα
καὶ Κάσανδρον διαπολεμεῖν παρεσκευάζετο.
7Ἅμα δὲ τούτοις πραττομένοις Εὔμηλος μὲν ὁ
Βοσπόρου βασιλεὺς βασιλεύων ἕκτον ἔτος ἐτελεύτησε,
τὴν δὲ βασιλείαν διαδεξάμενος Σπάρτακος
ὁ υἱὸς ἦρξεν ἔτη εἴκοσιν.
101. Ἡμεῖς δὲ τὰ περὶ τὴν Ἑλλάδα καὶ τὴν
Ἀσίαν διευκρινηκότες μεταβιβάσομεν τὸν λόγον ἐπὶ
θάτερα μέρη τῆς οἰκουμένης.
1πλευρὰν στοὰν Rhodoman: στοὰν πλευρὰν.408Book XX

Ammon if it advised the Rhodians to honour Ptolemy 304 b.c. as a god. Since the oracle approved, they dedicated in the city a square precinct, building on each of its sides a portico a stade1 long, and this they called the Ptolemaeum. They also rebuilt the theatre, the fallen portions of the walls, and the buildings that had been destroyed in the other quarters in a manner more beautiful than before.
Now that Demetrius, in accordance with injunctions of his father, had made peace with the Rhodians, he sailed out with his whole force; and after passing through the islands, he put in at Aulis in Boeotia, Since he was intent on freeing the Greeks (for Cassander and Polyperchon having up to this time enjoyed impunity were engaged in plundering the greater part of Greece), he first freed the city of the Chalcidians, which was garrisoned by Boeotians, and by striking fear into the Boeotians, he forced them to renounce their friendship with Cassander; and after this he made an alliance with the Aetolians and began his preparations for carrying on war against Polyperchon and Cassander.2
While these events were taking place, Eumelus, the king of Bosporus, died in the sixth year of his reign,3 and his son Spartacus4 succeeded to the throne and reigned for twenty years.
101. Now that we have carefully passed in review the happenings in Greece and Asia, we shall turn our narrative toward the other parts of the inhabited world.
1600.feet.2Continued in chap. 102. 1.3For the reign of Eumelus cp. chaps. 22. 1—26. 2.4The name is spelled (??) on coins and inscriptions, e.g. the Athenian inscription of 289/8 honouring this king for a gift of grain to the city (IG, 22. 653 = Dittenberger, Syll.3 370).409