Diodorus of Sicily

ἅμα μὲν φύσει μεγαλόψυχος ὤν, ἅμα δὲ τῇ
διώξει τοῦ Δαρείου πολλῶν χρημάτων κεκυριευκώς·
5παρὰ μὲν γὰρ τῶν γαζοφυλακούντων παρέλαβεν
ὀκτακισχιλίων ταλάντων ἀριθμόν, χωρὶς δὲ τούτων
τὰ νεμηθέντα τοῖς στρατιώταις σὺν τῷ κόσμῳ καὶ
τοῖς ἐκπώμασιν ὑπῆρχε μύρια καὶ τρισχίλια τάλαντα,
τὰ δὲ διακλαπέντα καὶ ἁρπαχθέντα πλείω τῶν
εἰρημένων ὑπενοεῖτο.
75. Ὁ δὲ Ἀλέξανδρος ἀναζεύξας ἐπὶ τὴν Ὑρκανίαν
τριταῖος κατεστρατοπέδευσε πλησίον πόλεως
τῆς ὀνομαζομένης Ἑκατονταπύλου. εὐδαίμονος
δ᾿ αὐτῆς οὔσης καὶ πάντων τῶν πρὸς ἀπόλαυσιν
ἀνηκόντων πολλῆς ἀφθονίας ὑπαρχούσης ἐνταῦθα
2τὴν δύναμιν ἀνέλαβεν ἐπί τινας ἡμέρας. διελθὼν
δὲ σταδίους ἑκατὸν καὶ πεντήκοντα κατεστρατοπέδευσε
πλησίον πέτρας μεγάλης· ὑπὸ δὲ τὴν ῥίζαν
αὐτῆς ἄντρον ὑπῆρχε θεοπρεπές, ἐξ οὗ μέγας ποταμὸς
ἐξέπιπτεν ὁ καλούμενος Στιβοίτης. οὗτος
δὲ λάβρῳ τῷ ῥεύματι φερόμενος ἐπὶ τρεῖς σταδίους
σχίζεται διπλοῦς περί τινα πέτραν μαστοειδῆ,
ἔχουσαν1 ὑφ᾿ αὑτὴν χάσμα γῆς παμμέγεθες· εἰς δὲ
τοῦτο καταράττων μετὰ πολλοῦ ψόφου καὶ γινόμενος
ἀφρώδης διὰ τῆς πρὸς τὴν πέτραν πληγῆς φέρεται
ὑπὸ γῆν σταδίους τριακοσίους, ἔπειτα πάλιν
ἀνοίγει τὰς ἐκβολάς.
3Ὁ δ᾿ Ἀλέξανδρος μετὰ τῆς δυνάμεως ἐμβαλὼν
εἰς τὴν τῶν Ὑρκανῶν χώραν πάσας τὰς ἐν αὐτῇ
πόλεις ἐχειρώσατο μέχρι τῆς Κασπίας καλουμένης
θαλάττης, ἣν Ὑρκανίαν τινὲς ὀνομάζουσιν. ἐν
ταύτῃ δέ φασι πολλοὺς μὲν καὶ μεγάλους ὄφεις

1τινι πέτρᾳ μαστοειδεῖ ἐχούσῃ F.332Book XVII

native generosity and in part because he had come 329/8 b.c. into possession of very much money in the course of his pursuit of Dareius. He had received from the royal treasurers the sum of eight thousand talents. Apart from this, what was distributed to the soldiers, including clothing and goblets, came to thirteen thousand talents,1 while what was stolen or taken as plunder was thought to be even more still.
75. Alexander started out for Hyrcania and on the third day encamped near a city called Hecatontapylus.2 This was a wealthy city with a profusion of everything contributing to pleasure, so he rested his army there for some days. Then, advancing one hundred and fifty furlongs, he encamped near a huge rock3; under its base there was a marvellous cave from which flowed a great river known as the Stiboeites.4 This tumbles out with a rapid current for a distance of three furlongs, and then divides into two courses on either side of a breast-shaped “rock,” beneath which there is a vast cavern. Into this the river plunges with a great roar, foaming from its clash against the rock. After flowing underground a distance of three hundred furlongs, it again breaks its way to the surface.5
Alexander entered Hyrcania with his army and took possession of all the cities there as far as the so-called Caspian Sea, which some name the Hyrcanian. In this they say are spawned many large serpents and





1Curtius (6. 2, 10) gives 12,000 talents.2Usually called Hecatompylus; Curtius, 6. 2. 15.3Cp. on chap. 28, above, p. 195, note 5.4Curtius, 6. 4. 3–7. The spring is identified as the modern Chesmeh-i-Ali about fifteen miles north-west of Hecatompylus; cp. P. Pédech, Revue des Études Anciennes, 60 (1958), 67–81.5Curtius (6. 4. 4–5) gives the same figures.333