Diodorus of Sicily

Ὀλυμπιάδος ἀξίωμα καὶ τῶν εὐεργεσιῶν ἀναμιμνησκόμενοι
3τῶν Ἀλεξάνδρου μετεβάλοντο. Φίλιππος
μὲν οὖν ὁ βασιλεὺς εὐθὺς ἥλω μετὰ τῆς
θεραπείας, ἡ δ᾿ Εὐρυδίκη μετὰ Πολυκλέους, ἑνὸς
τῶν συμβούλων, εἰς Ἀμφίπολιν ἀποχωροῦσα συνελήφθη.
4τοῦτον δὲ τὸν τρόπον Ὀλυμπιὰς τῶν
βασιλικῶν σωμάτων κυριεύσασα καὶ χωρὶς κινδύνων
τὴν βασιλείαν παραλαβοῦσα τὴν εὐτυχίαν οὐκ
ἤνεγκεν ἀνθρωπίνως, ἀλλὰ τήν τ᾿ Εὐρυδίκην καὶ
τὸν ἄνδρα Φίλιππον τὸ μὲν πρῶτον εἰς φυλακὴν
καταθεμένη κακουχεῖν ἐπεχείρησε· περιοικοδομήσασα
γὰρ αὐτῶν ἐν βραχεῖ τόπῳ τὰ σώματα διὰ
5μιᾶς στενῆς ὑποδοχῆς ἐχορήγει τὰ ἀναγκαῖα· ἐπὶ
πολλὰς δ᾿ ἡμέρας παρανομήσασα τοὺς ἠτυχηκότας,
ἐπειδὴ παρὰ τοῖς Μακεδόσιν ἠδόξει διὰ τὸν πρὸς
τοὺς πάσχοντας ἔλεον, τὸν μὲν Φίλιππον προσέταξε
Θρᾳξί τισιν ἐκκεντῆσαι, βασιλέα γεγενημένον ἓξ
ἔτη καὶ μῆνας τέσσαρας, τὴν δ᾿ Εὐρυδίκην παρρησιαζομένην
καὶ βοῶσαν αὑτῇ1 μᾶλλον προσήκειν
ἤπερ Ὀλυμπιάδι τὴν βασιλείαν ἔκρινε μείζονος
6ἀξιῶσαι τιμωρίας. εἰσέπεμψεν οὖν αὐτῇ ξίφος καὶ
βρόχον καὶ κώνειον καὶ συνέταξε τούτων ᾧ βούλοιτο
καταχρήσασθαι πρὸς τὸν θάνατον, οὔτε τὸ
προγεγενημένον ἀξίωμα τῆς παρανομουμένης ἐντραπεῖσα
τὸ παράπαν οὔτε τῆς κοινῆς τύχης εἰς
7οἶκτον ἐλθοῦσα. τοιγαροῦν τῆς ὁμοίας μεταβολῆς
τυχοῦσα τῆς ὠμότητος ἀξίαν ἔσχε τὴν τοῦ βίου
καταστροφήν. Εὐρυδίκη μὲν γὰρ κατευξαμένη
παρόντος τοῦ κομίσαντος τῶν ὁμοίων δωρεῶν
Ὀλυμπιάδα τυχεῖν τὸν μὲν ἄνδρα περιέστειλεν,
ἐπιμεληθεῖσα τῶν τραυμάτων ὥς ποθ᾿ ὁ καιρὸς

1αὑτῇ Dindorf: αὐτῇ.256Book XIX

out of respect for the position of Olympias and remembering 317 b.c. the benefits that they had received from Alexander, changed their allegiance. King Philip with his court was captured at once, while Eurydicê was taken as she was making her way to Amphipolis with Polycles, one of her counsellors. But after Olympias had thus captured the royal persons and had seized the kingdom without a fight, she did not carry her good fortune as a human being should, but first she placed Eurydice and her husband Philip under guard and began to maltreat them. Indeed she walled them up in a small space and supplied them with what was necessary through a single narrow opening. But after she had for many days unlawfully treated the unfortunate captives, since she was thereby losing favour with the Macedonians because of their pity for the sufferers, she ordered certain Thracians to stab Philip to death, who had been king for six years and four months; but she judged that Eurydice, who was expressing herself without restraint and declaring that the kingdom belonged to herself rather than to Olympias, was worthy of greater punishment. She therefore sent to her a sword, a noose, and some hemlock, and ordered her to employ whichever of these she pleased as a means of death, neither displaying any respect whatever for the former dignity of the victim whom she was unlawfully treating, nor moved to pity for the fate that is common to all. Accordingly, when she herself met with a similar reversal, she experienced a death that was worthy of her cruelty. Eurydice, indeed, in the presence of the attendant prayed that like gifts might fall to the lot of Olympias. She next laid out the body of her husband, cleansing its wounds
257