Diodorus of Sicily
4ἐν Ἰσσῷ τῆς Κιλικίας πεπτωκέναι. ἀναπλεύσας
δ᾿ εἰς Μέμφιν τὸ μὲν πρῶτον πρὸ τῆς πόλεως
παραταξάμενος τοῖς ἐγχωρίοις ἐνίκησε· μετὰ δὲ
ταῦτα πρὸς ἁρπαγὴν τῶν στρατιωτῶν τραπέντων
ἐπεξελθόντες ἐκ τῆς πόλεως ἐπέθεντο τοῖς ἀτάκτως
διαρπάζουσι τὰς ἐπὶ τῆς χώρας κτήσεις καὶ τόν τε
Ἀμύνταν ἀπέκτειναν καὶ τοὺς μετ᾿ αὐτοῦ πάντας
5ἄρδην ἀνεῖλον. Ἀμύντας μὲν οὖν μεγάλαις ἐπιβολαῖς
ἐγχειρήσας καὶ παρ᾿ ἐλπίδα σφαλεὶς τοιοῦτον
ἔσχε τοῦ βίου τὸ τέλος.
Ὁμοίως δὲ τούτῳ καὶ τῶν ἄλλων ἡγεμόνων
καὶ στρατηγῶν τινες ἐκ τῆς ἐν Ἰσσῷ μάχης μετὰ
στρατιωτῶν διασωθέντες ἀντείχοντο τῶν Περσικῶν
6ἐλπίδων. οἱ μὲν γὰρ πόλεις ἐπικαίρους καταλαμβανόμενοι
διεφύλαττον ταύτας τῷ Δαρείῳ, οἱ
δ᾿ ἔθνη προσαγόμενοι καὶ δυνάμεις περὶ αὑτοὺς
παρασκευαζόμενοι1 τὰς ἁρμοζούσας χρείας τοῖς ὑποκειμένοις
καιροῖς παρείχοντο.
Οἱ δὲ σύνεδροι τῶν Ἑλλήνων ἐψηφίσαντο πέμψαι
πρέσβεις πεντεκαίδεκα στέφανον φέροντας χρυσοῦν
παρὰ τῆς Ἑλλάδος ἀριστεῖον2 Ἀλεξάνδρῳ καὶ
7συνησθησομένους τῇ κατὰ Κιλικίαν νίκῃ. Ἀλέξανδρος
δὲ στρατεύσας ἐπὶ Γάζαν φρουρουμένην ὑπὸ
Περσῶν καὶ δίμηνον προσεδρεύσας εἷλε κατὰ κράτος
τὴν πόλιν.
49. Ἐπ᾿ ἄρχοντος δ᾿ Ἀθήνησιν Ἀριστοφάνους ἐν
Ῥώμῃ κατεστάθησαν ὕπατοι Σπούριος Ποστόμιος
καὶ Τῖτος Οὐετούριος. ἐπὶ δὲ τούτων Ἀλέξανδρος





1παρασκευαζόμενοι F; κατασκευαζόμενοι cett.2ἀριστεῖον F; ἀρίστιον Fischer and codd.256Book XVII

at Issus in Cilicia.1 He sailed up the river to Memphis 332/1 b.c. and defeated the local forces in a battle before the city, but then, as his soldiers turned to plunder, the Egyptians issued out of the city, attacked his men as they were scattered looting estates located in the countryside, and killed Amyntas and all who came with him to the last man. And that was the end of Amyntas, who had set his hand to great undertakings and failed when he had every prospect of success.
His experience was paralleled by those of the other officers and troop leaders who escaped at the head of their military units from the battle at Issus and attempted to maintain the Persian cause. Some got to important cities and held them for Dareius, others raised tribes2 and furnishing themselves with troops from them performed appropriate duties in the time under review.
The delegates of the League of Corinth voted to send fifteen envoys with a golden wreath as a prize of valour from Greece to Alexander,3 instructing them to congratulate him on his victory in Cilicia. Alexander, in the meantime, marched down to Gaza, which was garrisoned by the Persians, and took the city by storm after a siege of two months.4
49. In the archonship of Aristophanes at Athens, 331/0 b.c. the consuls at Rome were Spurius Postumius and Titus Veturius.5 In this year King Alexander set in order




1His name was Sabaces or Tasiaces (chap. 34. 5).2Tarn (Alexander the Great, 2, p. 73) sees here very plau- sibly a reference to the revolt of Cappadocia (Curtius, 4. 1. 34–35; 5. 13).3Curtius, 4. 5. 11–12.4Full accounts of the siege of Gaza are given by Curtius (4. 6. 7–30) and Arrian (2. 25. 4–27). Cp. Plutarch, Alexander, 25. 3–4.5Aristophanes was archon at Athens from July 331 to June 330 b.c. The Roman consuls of 334 b.c. were Sp. Postumius Albinus and T. Veturius Calvinus (Broughton, 1, p. 140).257