Diodorus of Sicily
5Ὁ δὲ τὸν μὲν Κεβαλῖνον εἰς τὴν ὁπλοθήκην εἰσαγαγὼν
ἀπέκρυψεν, αὐτὸς δὲ τῷ βασιλεῖ μεταξὺ
λουομένῳ προσελθὼν ἀπήγγειλε τὰ ῥηθέντα καὶ
διότι τὸν Κεβαλῖνον παρ᾿ ἑαυτῷ φυλάττει. ὁ δὲ
βασιλεὺς καταπλαγεὶς εὐθὺς τόν τε Δίμνον συνέλαβε
καὶ μαθὼν ἅπαντα μετεπέμψατο τόν τε Κεβαλῖνον
6καὶ τὸν Φιλώταν. ἀνακρινομένων δ᾿ ἁπάντων καὶ
τῆς πράξεως ἐξεταζομένης ὁ μὲν Δίμνος ἑαυτὸν
κατέσφαξε, τοῦ δὲ Φιλώτου ῥᾳθυμίαν μὲν ἑαυτοῦ
προσομολογήσαντος, τὴν δ᾿ ἐπιβουλὴν ἀπαρνουμένου
τὴν κρίσιν ὑπὲρ τούτου τοῖς Μακεδόσιν
ἐτέτρεψεν.
80. Πολλῶν δὲ ῥηθέντων λόγων οἱ Μακεδόνες
κατέγνωσαν τοῦ Φιλώτου καὶ τῶν καταιτιαθέντων
θάνατον· ἐν οἷς ὑπῆρχε Παρμενίων ὁ πρῶτος εἶναι
δοκῶν τῶν Ἀλεξάνδρου φίλων, τότε δὲ οὐ παρών,
ἀλλὰ δόξας διὰ τοῦ ἰδίου υἱοῦ Φιλώτου πεποιῆσθαι
2τὴν ἐπιβουλήν. ὁ μὲν οὖν Φιλώτας, βασανισθεὶς
πρότερον καὶ ὁμολογήσας τὴν ἐπιβουλήν, κατὰ τὸ
τῶν Μακεδόνων ἔθος μετὰ τῶν συγκαταγνωσθέντων
ἐθανατώθη.
Ὁμοίως δὲ τούτῳ καὶ ὁ Λυγκιστὴς Ἀλέξανδρος,
αἰτίαν ἔχων ἐπιβεβουλευκέναι τῷ βασιλεῖ, τριετῆ
μὲν χρόνον ἐν φυλακῇ τηρούμενος διετέλεσε, διὰ
τὴν πρὸς Ἀντίγονον οἰκειότητα τετευχὼς ἀναβολῆς,
τότε δ᾿ εἰς τὴν τῶν Μακεδόνων κρίσιν παραχθεὶς
348Book XVII
The page brought Cebalinus into the armoury and 329/8 b.c. hid him there,1 went on in to the king as he was bathing and told him the story, adding that he had Cebalinus concealed in the vicinity. The king’s reaction was sharp. He arrested Dimnus at once and learned everything from him; then he sent for Cebalinus and Philotas. The whole story was investigated and the fact established. Dimnus stabbed himself on the spot,2 but Philotas, while acknowledging his carelessness, nevertheless denied that he had had any part in the plot and agreed to leave judgement concerning him to the Macedonians.
80. After many arguments had been heard, the Macedonians condemned Philotas and the other accused persons to death. Among these was Parmenion, he who seemed to be the first of Alexander’s Friends; he was not with the army, but it was thought that he had contrived the conspiracy by means of his son Philotas. Philotas, then, was first tortured and confessed to the plot, and then was killed in the Macedonian manner with the other condemned persons.3
This was the occasion for bringing up the case of Alexander the Lyncestian. He was charged with the crime of plotting against the king and had been kept for three years under guard. He had been delayed a hearing because of his relationship to Antigonus, but now he was brought before the court of the



1The page, whose name is given by Curtius as Metron, happened to be in charge of Alexander’s weapons.2Others report that Dimnus killed himself (Curtius, 6. 7. 29–30) or was killed resisting capture (Plutarch, Alexander, 49. 4).3Either by being stoned (Curtius, 6. 11. 10, 38) or by being pierced with javelins (Arrian, 3. 26. 3).349