Diodorus of Sicily

τε καὶ πλήμας παραδόξους γίνεσθαι κατὰ τὸν
Ὠκεανὸν καὶ κατὰ μὲν τὰς ἀμπώτεις παραδόξους
νήσους τε ὁρᾶσθαι πολλὰς καὶ μεγάλας ἐπ᾿ ἄκρας
τῆς παραθαλαττίου χώρας, κατὰ δὲ τὰς πλήμας
ἅπαντας τοὺς προειρημένους τόπους κατακλύζεσθαι,
πολλοῦ καὶ βιαίου ῥεύματος1 φερομένου πρὸς
τὴν χέρσον, τῆς δ᾿ ἐπιφανείας ἀφρῷ πολλῷ λευκαινομένης.
τὸ δὲ παραδοξότατον, κήτεσι πολλοῖς καὶ
7τὸ μέγεθος ἀπίστοις συγκεκυρηκέναι· ταῦτα δὲ
φοβηθέντας αὐτοὺς τὸ μὲν πρῶτον ἀπελπίσαι τὸ
ζῆν ὡς αὐτίκα μάλα μετὰ τῶν σκαφῶν διαφθαρησομένους,
μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα ἐξ ἁπάντων μιᾶς φωνῆς
γινομένης καὶ διὰ τῶν ὅπλων πολλοῦ συντελουμένου
ψόφου, πρὸς δὲ τούτοις τῶν σαλπίγγων
ἐνιεμένων τῷ παραδόξῳ πτοηθῆναι τὰ θηρία καὶ
δῦναι πρὸς βυθόν.
107. Ὁ δὲ βασιλεὺς περὶ τούτων διακούσας τοῖς
μὲν ἡγουμένοις τοῦ στόλου παρήγγειλεν ἐπὶ τὸν
Εὐφράτην καταπλεῦσαι, αὐτὸς δὲ μετὰ τῆς δυνάμεως
πολλὴν χώραν διελθὼν συνῆψε τοῖς Σουσιανοῖς
ὅροις. περὶ δὲ τοὺς καιροὺς τούτους Κάρανος
ὁ Ἰνδός, ἐν φιλοσοφίᾳ μεγάλην ἔχων προκοπὴν καὶ
τιμώμενος ὑπ᾿ Ἀλεξάνδρου, παράδοξον ἐποιήσατο
2τὴν τοῦ βίου καταστροφήν. βεβιωκὼς γὰρ ἔτη τρία
πρὸς τοῖς ἑβδομήκοντα καὶ πάντα τὸν χρόνον
ἀπείρατος γεγονὼς ἀρρωστίας ἔκρινεν ἑαυτὸν ἐκ
τοῦ ζῆν μεταστῆσαι ὡς τὸ τέλειον τῆς εὐδαιμονίας

1The manuscripts have πνεύματος, which may be right.
The current may have given the impression that it was caused
by an on-shore wind. We could perhaps translate: “as if
a strong wind was blowing toward the shore.” The reading
in the text is that of Fischer.430Book XVII

ebbings and flowings in the Ocean.1 In 326/5 b.c. the former case, many large and unsuspected islands appeared along the coast, but in the latter all such places were flooded over as a copious and strong current bore in towards the land, while the surface of the water was white with much foam. But their most remarkable experience was an encounter with a large school of incredibly big whales.2 The sailors had been terrified and despaired of their lives, thinking that they would be dashed to pieces immediately ships and all. But when they all shouted in unison, beating upon their shields to make a great din, and the trumpets were blown loudly in addition, the beasts were alarmed by the strange noise and plunged into the depths of the sea.
107. After this recital, the king ordered the officers of the fleet to sail on to the Euphrates,3 while he continued on a great distance with the army, and came to the frontier of Susianê. Here the Indian Caranus,4 who had advanced far in philosophy and was highly regarded by Alexander, put a remarkable end to his life. He had lived for seventy-three years without ever having experienced an illness, and now decided to remove himself from life, since he had received the utmost limit of happiness both from



 

1Others described the ocean tides at the mouth of the Indus (Curtius, 9. 9. 9–25; Arrian, 6. 19. 1).2Curtius, 10. 1. 11–12. The description is from Nearchus (Arrian, Indica, 30. 4–5).3This order to Nearchus would have been better given in Carmania than at Susa. Cp. Arrian, 6. 28. 6, At all events, in the narrative of Diodorus Alexander is not yet in Susa.4Plutarch, Alexander, 69. 3–4; Arrian, 7. 2. 4–3. 6. The name is usually given as Calanus (as Strabo, 15. 1. 64. 715; 68. 717). For the vogue of the story in antiquity cp. M. Hadas, Hellenistic Culture (1959), 178 f.431