Diodorus of Sicily

εἰς τοὺς Νομάδας τοὺς καλουμένους
Ζούφωνας, πολλοὺς τῶν ἐγχωρίων προσηγάγοντο
καὶ τῶν ἀφεστηκότων ἐνίους εἰς τὴν προϋπάρχουσαν
ἀποκατέστησαν συμμαχίαν· ἐπεὶ δ᾿ ἤκουσαν πλησίον
εἶναι τοὺς, πολεμίους, κατεστρατοπέδευσαν ἐπί
τινος γεωλόφου περιεχομένου ῥείθροις βαθέσι καὶ
3δυσπεράτοις. καὶ πρὸς μὲν τὰς ἀπροσδοκήτους
ἐπιθέσεις τῶν ἐναντίων ταῦτα προεβάλοντο, τῶν
δὲ Νομάδων τοὺς μάλιστ᾿ εὐθέτους προσέταξαν
ἐπακολουθεῖν τοῖς Ἕλλησιν καὶ παρενοχλοῦντας
κωλύειν αὐτῶν τὴν εἰς τοὔμπροσθεν πορείαν. ὧν
ποιησάντων τὸ προσταχθὲν Ἀγαθοκλῆς ἐπὶ μὲν
τούτους ἀπέστειλε τούς τε σφενδονήτας καὶ τοξότας,
αὐτὸς δὲ μετὰ τῆς ἄλλης δυνάμεως ὥρμησεν ἐπὶ
4τὴν στρατοπεδείαν1 τῶν πολεμίων. οἱ δὲ Καρχηδόνιοι
τὴν ἐπίνοιαν αὐτοῦ κατανοήσαντες ἐξήγαγον
τὴν στρατιὰν ἐκ τῆς παρεμβολῆς καὶ παρατάξαντες
ἕτοιμοι πρὸς μάχην καθειστήκεισαν. ἐπεὶ δ᾿ ἑώρων
τοὺς περὶ τὸν Ἀγαθοκλέα διαβαίνοντας ἤδη τὸν
ποταμόν, συντεταγμένοι ἐνέβαλον καὶ περὶ τὸ
ῥεῖθρον δυσπέρατον ὑπάρχον πολλοὺς τῶν ἐναντίων
5ἀνῄρουν. προσβιαζομένων δὲ τῶν μετ᾿ Ἀγαθοκλέους
οἱ μὲν Ἕλληνες ταῖς ἀρεταῖς ὑπερεῖχον,
οἱ δὲ βάρβαροι τοῖς πλήθεσι περιεγίνοντο. ἔνθα
δὴ τῶν στρατοπέδων ἐπὶ πολὺν χρόνον φιλοτίμως
ἀγωνιζομένων οἱ παρ᾿ ἀμφοτέροις Νομάδες τῆς
μὲν μάχης ἀφειστήκεισαν, ἐπετήρουν δὲ τὸ τέλος
τοῦ κινδύνου, διεγνωκότες τῶν ἡττημένων τὰς
6ἀποσκευὰς διαρπάσαι. Ἀγαθοκλῆς δὲ τοὺς ἀρίστους
ἔχων περὶ αὐτὸν πρῶτος ἐβιάσατο τοὺς
ἀνθεστηκότας καὶ τῇ τούτων τροπῇ τοὺς λοιποὺς
βαρβάρους φυγεῖν ἐποίησεν· μόνοι δὲ τῶν ἱππέων
1ἄλλην before στρατοπεδείαν omitted by Dindorf.244Book XX

come to the tribe of Nomads called the Zuphones, 308 b.c. they won over many of the inhabitants and brought back some of the deserters to their former alliance, but on learning that the enemy were at hand, they camped on a certain hill, which was surrounded by streams that were deep and difficult to cross. These they used as protection against the unexpected attacks of their opponents, but they directed the fittest of the Nomads to follow the Greeks closely and by harassing them to prevent them from advancing. When these did as they had been directed, Agathocles sent against them his slingers and bowmen, but he himself with the rest of his army advanced against the camp of the enemy. The Carthaginians on discovering his intention led their army out from their camp, drew it up, and took their positions ready for battle. But when they saw that Agathocles was already crossing the river, they attacked in formation, and at the stream, which was difficult to ford, they slew many of their opponents. However, as Agathocles pressed forward, the Greeks were superior in valour, but the barbarians had the advantage of numbers. Then when the armies had been fighting gallantly for some time, the Nomads on both sides withdrew from the battle and awaited the outcome of the struggle, intending to plunder the baggage train of those who were defeated. But Agathocles, who had his best men about him, first forced back those opposite to him, and by their rout he caused the rest of the barbarians to flee. Of the cavalry only


245