Diodorus of Sicily
45. Τοῦ δ᾿ ἐνιαυσίου χρόνου διεληλυθότος Ἀθήνησι
μὲν ἦρχεν Ἀναξικράτης, ἐν Ῥώμῃ δὲ ὕπατοι
κατέστησαν Ἄππιος Κλαύδιος καὶ Λεύκιος Οὐολόμνιος.
ἐπὶ δὲ τούτων Δημήτριος μὲν ὁ Ἀντιγόνου
παραλαβὼν παρὰ τοῦ πατρὸς δύναμιν ἁδρὰν
πεζικήν τε καὶ ναυτικήν, ἔτι δὲ βελῶν καὶ τῶν
ἄλλων τῶν εἰς πολιορκίαν χρησίμων τὴν ἁρμόζουσαν
παρασκευὴν ἐξέπλευσεν ἐκ τῆς Ἐφέσου·
παράγγελμα δ᾿ εἶχεν ἐλευθεροῦν πάσας μὲν τὰς
κατὰ τὴν Ἑλλάδα πόλεις, πρώτην δὲ τὴν Ἀθηναίων,
2φρουρουμένην ὑπὸ Κασάνδρου. καταπλεύσαντος
δ᾿ αὐτοῦ μετὰ τῆς δυνάμεως εἰς τὸν Πειραιᾶ
καὶ πανταχόθεν προσβαλόντος ἐξ ἐφόδου καὶ κήρυγμα
ποιησαμένου,1 Διονύσιος ὁ καθεσταμένος ἐπὶ
τῆς Μουνυχίας φρούραρχος καὶ Δημήτριος ὁ
Φαληρεὺς ἐπιμελητὴς τῆς πόλεως γεγενημένος ὑπὸ
Κασάνδρου, πολλοὺς ἔχοντες στρατιώτας, ἀπὸ τῶν
3τειχῶν ἠμύνοντο. τῶν δ᾿ Ἀντιγόνου στρατιωτῶν
τινες βιασάμενοι καὶ κατὰ τὴν ἀκτὴν ὑπερβάντες
ἐντὸς τοῦ τείχους παρεδέξαντο πλείους τῶν συναγωνιζομένων.
τὸν μὲν οὖν Πειραιᾶ τοῦτον τὸν
τρόπον ἁλῶναι συνέβη, τῶν δ᾿ ἔνδον Διονύσιος μὲν
ὁ φρούραρχος εἰς τὴν Μουνυχίαν συνέφυγε, Δημήτριος
4δ᾿ ὁ Φαληρεὺς ἀπεχώρησεν εἰς ἄστυ. τῇ
δ᾿ ὑστεραίᾳ πεμφθεὶς μεθ᾿ ἑτέρων πρεσβευτὴς ὑπὸ
τοῦ δήμου πρὸς Δημήτριον καὶ περὶ τῆς αὐτονομίας
διαλεχθεὶς καὶ τῆς ἰδίας ἀσφαλείας ἔτυχε παραπομπῆς

1After ποιησαμένου Fischer in apparatus suggests the
addition of ὅτι Δημήτριος τὰς Ἀθήνας ἐλευθεροῖ, cp. Plutarch,
Demetrius, 8.264Book XX
45. When that year had come to an end, Anaxicrates 307 b.c. was archon in Athens and in Rome Appius Claudius and Lucius Volumnius became consuls.1 While these held office, Demetrius, the son of Antigonus, having received from his father strong land and sea forces, also a suitable supply of missiles and of the other things requisite for carrying on a siege, set sail from Ephesus. He had instructions to free all the cities throughout Greece, but first of all Athens, which was held by a garrison of Cassander.2 Sailing into the Peiraeus with his forces, he at once made an attack on all sides and issued a proclamation.3 Dionysius, who had been placed in command of the garrison on Munychia, and Demetrius of Phalerum, who had been made military governor of the city4 by Cassander, resisted him from the walls with many soldiers. Some of Antigonus’ men, attacking with violence and effecting an entrance along the coast, admitted many of their fellow soldiers within the wall. The result was that in this way the Peiraeus was taken; and, of those within it, Dionysius the commander fled to Munychia and Demetrius of Phalerum withdrew into the city. On the next day, when he had been sent with others as envoys by the people to Demetrius and had discussed the independence of the city and his own security, he obtained a safe-conduct for himself and, giving




1Anaxicrates was archon in 307/6 b.c. In the Fasti the consuls for 307 b.c. are Ap. Claudius Caecus and L. Volumnius Flamma Violens; cp. Livy, 9. 42. 2. The narrative is continued from chap. 37. 6.2For this campaign cp. Plutarch, Demetrius, 8–9.3If we accept Fischer’s suggested supplement, we should add “that Demetrius was freeing Athens.”4i.e. of Athens.265