Diodorus of Sicily

μετὰ τῆς λοιπῆς δυνάμεως τὴν ἐπὶ θάλασσαν
κατάβασιν ἐποιεῖτο.
101. Ἄμα δὲ τούτοις πραττομένοις κατὰ μὲν τὴν
Ἰταλίαν Ῥωμαίων διαπολεμούντων τὸν πρὸς Σαμνίτας
πόλεμον συνεχεῖς ἐγίνοντο προνομαὶ τῆς
χώρας καὶ πολιορκίαι πόλεων καὶ δυνάμεων ἐν
ὑπαίθρῳ στρατοπεδεῖαι· τὰ γὰρ μαχιμώτατα τῶν
κατὰ τὴν Ἰταλίαν ἐθνῶν περὶ ἡγεμονίας φιλοτιμούμενα
2παντοίους συνίσταντο κινδύνους. οἱ μὲν οὖν
τῶν Ῥωμαίων ὕπατοι μέρος τῆς δυνάμεως ἀναλαβόντες
ἀντεστρατοπέδευσαν1 ταῖς τῶν πολεμίων2
παρεμβολαῖς καὶ πρὸς μὲν μάχην καιρὸν ἐπετήρουν
οἰκεῖον, ταῖς δὲ συμμαχίσι πόλεσι παρείχοντο τὴν
3ἀσφάλειαν. τὸ δὲ λοιπὸν στρατόπεδον ἀναλαβὼν
Κόιντος Φάβιος, ὃς ἦν αὐτοκράτωρ ᾑρημένος, τήν
τε Φρεγελλανῶν3 πόλιν εἷλε καὶ τῶν ἀλλοτρίως
διακειμένων πρὸς τὴν Ῥώμην τοὺς ἐπιφανεστάτους
ἐζώγρησεν. τούτους δὲ τὸν ἀριθμὸν ὄντας
πλείους τῶν διακοσίων ἀπήγαγεν εἰς Ῥώμην καὶ
προαγαγὼν εἰς τὴν ἀγορὰν ῥαβδίσας ἐπελέκησε
κατὰ τὸ πάτριον ἔθος. μετ᾿ ὀλίγον δὲ ἐμβαλὼν εἰς
τὴν τῶν πολεμίων χώραν Καλατίαν4 καὶ τὴν
Νωλάνων ἀκρόπολιν ἐξεπολιόρκησεν καὶ λαφύρων
μὲν πλῆθος ἀπέδοτο, τοῖς δὲ στρατιώταις πολλὴν
τῆς χώρας κατεκληρούχησεν. ὁ δὲ δῆμος, κατὰ νοῦν



1ἀντεστρατοπέδευσαν Dindorf: κατεστρατοπέδευσαν RX,
κατεστρατοπέδευον F.2τῶν πολεμίων Rhodoman: τῶν Ῥωμαίων.3Φρεγελλανῶν Scaliger, Φρέγελλαν <ἀνεκτήσατο καὶ τὴν
Σωρ>ανῶν Burger: Φρετομανῶν RX, Φρετεμανῶν F.4Καλατίαν Cluverius (cp. Livy, 9. 28. 6): καὶ λείαν RX, κελίαν F.108Book XIX

made the march down to the sea with the rest of his 312 b.c. army.1
101. While this was taking place, in Italy2 the Romans were carrying on their war with the Samnites,
and there were repeated raids through the country, sieges of cities, and encampments of armies in the field, for the two most war-like of the peoples of Italy were struggling as rivals for the supremacy and meeting in conflicts of every sort. Now the Roman consuls with part of the army had taken a position in the face of the encampments of the enemy and were awaiting an opportune time for battle while at the same time furnishing protection to the allied cities. With the rest of the army Quintus Fabius,3 who had been chosen dictator, captured the city of the Fregellani and made prisoners the chief men among those who were hostile to the Romans. These to the number of more than two hundred he took to Rome; and, bringing them into the Forum, he beat them with rods and beheaded them according to the ancestral custom.4 Soon afterwards, entering the hostile territory, he took by siege Calatia and the citadel of Nola; and he sold a large amount of spoil but allotted much of the land to his soldiers. The






1Continued in chap. 105.2Continued from chap. 76. 5. Cp. Livy, 9. 28.3In Livy (9. 28. 1–6) it is a dictator named C. Poetilius who captured Fregellae, and either the same dictator or C. Junius Bubulcus, one of the consuls, who took Nola. For the dictatorship of Fabius two years earlier cp. chap. 72. 6–7, and Livy, 9. 24. 1.4For punishment more maiorum cp. Suetonius, Nero, 49. 2.109