Diodorus of Sicily

οἱ δ᾿ εἰς τὴν Σπάρτην φυγόντες ἔπεισαν τοὺς Λακεδαιμονίους
4εἰς τὴν Ἀρκαδίαν στρατεῦσαι. διόπερ
Ἀγησίλαος ὁ βασιλεὺς μετὰ δυνάμεως καὶ τῶν φυγάδων
ἐνέβαλεν εἰς τὴν τῶν Τεγεατῶν χώραν διὰ
τὸ δοκεῖν τούτους τῆς στάσεως καὶ τῆς φυγῆς
αἰτίους γεγονέναι. πορθήσας δὲ τὴν χώραν καὶ τῇ
πόλει προσβολὰς ποιησάμενος κατεπλήξατο τῶν
Ἀρκάδων τοὺς ἐναντιοπραγοῦντας.
60. Ἅμα δὲ τούτοις πραττομένοις Ἰάσων ὁ
Φερῶν τύραννος, συνέσει τε στρατηγικῇ διαφέρων
καὶ πολλοὺς τῶν περιοίκων εἰς συμμαχίαν προηγμένος,1
ἔπεισε τοὺς Θετταλοὺς ἀντιποιεῖσθαι τῆς
τῶν Ἑλλήνων ἡγεμονίας· ταύτην γὰρ ὥσπερ ἔπαθλον
ἀρετῆς προκεῖσθαι τοῖς δυναμένοις αὐτῆς
2ἀμφισβητῆσαι. Λακεδαιμονίους γὰρ συνέβαινε περὶ
Λεῦκτρα μεγάλῃ συμφορᾷ περιπεπτωκέναι, Ἀθηναίους
δὲ μόνον τῆς κατὰ θάλατταν ἀρχῆς ἀντέχεσθαι,
Θηβαίους δὲ τῶν πρωτείων ἀξίους μὴ
εἶναι, Ἀργείους δὲ διὰ στάσεις καὶ φόνους ἐμφυλίους
τεταπεινῶσθαι. διόπερ οἱ Θετταλοὶ προστησάμενοι
τῶν ὅλων ἡγεμόνα Ἰάσονα τούτῳ τὰ κατὰ
τὸν πόλεμον ἐπέτρεψαν. ὁ δὲ Ἰάσων παραλαβὼν
τὴν ἡγεμονίαν τῶν τε πλησίον ἐθνῶν τινα προσηγάγετο
καὶ πρὸς Ἀμύνταν τὸν τῶν Μακεδόνων
βασιλέα συμμαχίαν ἐποιήσατο.
3Ἴδιον δέ τι συνέβη κατὰ τοῦτον τὸν ἐνιαυτόν·
τῶν γὰρ ἐν δυναστείαις ὄντων τρεῖς ἐτελεύτησαν
περὶ τὸν αὐτὸν καιρόν. Ἀμύντας μὲν ὁ Ἀρριδαίου2
1προηγμένος Vogel (cp. Book 16. 84. 1), προσαγαγόμενος
Schäfer followed by Dindorf, Bekker: προηγούμενος PAF,
προσαγόμενος cet.2ὁ Ἀρριδαίου Dindorf: Θαρραλέου.116Book XV

in Sparta prevailed upon the Lacedaemonians to invade 370/69 b.c. Arcadia.1 Accordingly King Agesilaüs with an army and the band of fugitives invaded the territory of the Tegeans, who were believed to have been the cause of the insurrection and the expulsions. By devastation of the countryside and assaults upon the city, he cowed the Arcadians of the opposing party.
60. While these things were going on, Jason,2 tyrant of Pherae, because of his superior shrewdness as a general and his success in attracting many of his neighbours into an alliance, prevailed upon the Thessalians to lay claim to the supremacy in Greece; for this was a sort of prize for valour open to those strong enough to contend for it. Now it happened that the Lacedaemonians had sustained a great disaster at Leuctra; that the Athenians laid claim to the mastery of the sea only; that the Thebans were unworthy of first rank; and that the Argives had been brought low by civil wars and internecine slaughter. So the Thessalians put Jason forward as leader3 of the whole country, and as such gave him supreme command in war. Jason accepted the command, won over some of the tribes near by, and entered into alliance with Amyntas king of the Macedonians.
A peculiar coincidence befell in this year, for three of those in positions of power died about the same time. Amyntas,4 son of Arrhidaeus, king of Macedonia,




1See Xenophon, Hell. 6. 5. 10–18.2See chap. 54. 5.3Jason was made Tagus of the Thessalians, Xenophon, Hell. 6. 1. 18. Beloch, Griechische Geschichte2, 3. 2. 237, prefers Diodorus’ date 371 to Xenophon’s 375/4. For Jason’s ambitions see Cary, Cambridge Ancient History, 6. 83. Jason’s death (§ 5) caused the sudden collapse of unification in Thessaly and opened the door to Theban aggressions.4See Book 14. 89, 92. 3; chap. 19. 2 and Beloch, Griechische Geschichte2, 3. 2. 56–58.117