Diodorus of Sicily

διεπρεσβεύσαντο, ἵνα μὴ δόξωσιν ἐκχωρεῖν τοῦ
πρωτείου· μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων
πρώτων ἐπικηρυκευσαμένων περὶ τῆς τῶν νεκρῶν
5ἀναιρέσεως ἀμφότεροι τοὺς ἰδίους ἔθαψαν. Ἐπαμεινώνδας
δ᾿ ἔτι ζῶν εἰς τὴν παρεμβολὴν ἀπηνέχθη,
καὶ τῶν συγκληθέντων ἰατρῶν ἀποφηναμένων, ὅτι
πάντως, ὅταν ἐκ τοῦ θώρακος ἐξαιρεθῇ τὸ δόρυ,
συμβήσεται καὶ τὸν θάνατον ἐπακολουθῆσαι, εὐψυχότατα
τὴν1 τοῦ βίου καταστροφὴν ἐποιήσατο.
6πρῶτον μὲν γὰρ τὸν ὑπασπιστὴν προσκαλεσάμενος
ἐπηρώτησεν εἰ διασέσωκε τὴν ἀσπίδα. τοῦ δὲ
φήσαντος καὶ θέντος αὐτὴν πρὸ τῆς ὁράσεως, πάλιν
ἐπηρώτησε πότεροι νενικήκασιν. ἀποφαινομένου
δὲ τοῦ παιδὸς ὅτι Βοιωτοὶ νενικήκασιν, Ὥρα,
φησίν, ἐστὶ τελευτᾶν, καὶ προσέταξεν ἐκσπάσαι
τὸ δόρυ. ἀναβοησάντων δὲ τῶν παρόντων φίλων,
καί τινος εἰπόντος ὅτι Τελευτᾷς ἄτεκνος, Ἐπαμεινώνδα,
καὶ δακρύσαντος, Μὰ Δία μέν, φησίν, ἀλλὰ
καταλείπω δύο θυγατέρας, τήν τε ἐν Λεύκτροις
νίκην καὶ τὴν ἐν Μαντινείᾳ. καὶ τοῦ δόρατος
ἐξαιρεθέντος ἄνευ πάσης ταραχῆς ἐξέπνευσεν.
88. Ἡμεῖς δ᾿ εἰωθότες ταῖς τῶν ἀγαθῶν ἀνδρῶν
τελευταῖς ἐπιλέγειν τὸν ἴδιον ἔπαινον, οὐδαμῶς
ἁρμόττον ἡγούμεθα παραδραμεῖν ἀνδρὸς τηλικούτου
τὴν τελευτὴν ἀνεπισήμαντον. δοκεῖ γάρ μοι
μὴ μόνον τοὺς καθ᾿ ἑαυτὸν ὑπερβάλλειν ἐν τῇ
στρατηγικῇ συνέσει καὶ ἐμπειρίᾳ, πρὸς δὲ τούτοις
2ἐπιεικείᾳ τε καὶ μεγαλοψυχίᾳ. κατὰ μὲν γὰρ τὴν
ἡλικίαν τὴν τούτου γεγόνασιν ἄνδρες ἐπιφανεῖς
Πελοπίδας τε Θηβαῖος2 καὶ Τιμόθεος καὶ Κόνων,


1εὐψυχότατα τὴν Cobet: εὐψυχοτάτην.2So PAL: Θηβαῖος ἔτι δὲ cet.196Book XV

in order that it should not appear to yield the primacy; 368/2 b.c. but later, when the Lacedaemonians were the first to have sent a herald to ask for the recovery of their dead, each side buried its own. Epameinondas, however, was carried back to camp still living, and the physicians were summoned, but when they declared that undoubtedly as soon as the spear-point should be drawn from his chest, death would ensue, with supreme courage he met his end. For first summoning his armour-bearer he asked him if he had saved his shield. On his replying yes and placing it before his eyes, he again asked, which side was victorious. At the boy’s answer that the Boeotians were victorious, he said, “It is time to die,” and directed them to withdraw the spear point. His friends present cried out in protest, and one of them said: “You die childless, Epameinondas,” and burst into tears. To this he replied, “No, by Zeus, on the contrary I leave behind two daughters, Leuctra and Mantineia, my victories.”1 Then when the spear point was withdrawn, without any commotion he breathed his last.
88. For us who are wont to accord to the demise of great men the appropriate meed of praise, it would be most unfitting, so we think, to pass by the death of a man of such stature with no word of note. For it seems to me that he surpassed his contemporaries not only in skill and experience in the art of war, but in reasonableness and magnanimity as well. For among the generation of Epameinondas were famous men: Pelopidas the Theban, Timotheüs and Conon,

1Had Λεῦκτρα not been a neuter plural, the Greek would have permitted the more effective turn of phrase available in English. Cp. Philip of Macedon’s daughter, Thessalonikê, “Victory in Thessaly.”197