Diodorus of Sicily

τοῦ πολέμου. εἰ δὲ μηδὲν τούτων
ποιήσει, συστάντες ἅπαντες ἔφασαν πολεμήσειν
2αὐτῷ. τοῦ δ᾿ Ἀντιγόνου τραχύτερον ἀποκριναμένου
καὶ τὰ πρὸς πόλεμον1 εἰπόντος παρασκευάζεσθαι
συνέβη τοὺς πρέσβεις ἀπράκτους ἐπανελθεῖν.
μετὰ δὲ ταῦθ᾿ οἱ μὲν περὶ Πτολεμαῖον καὶ Λυσίμαχον,
ἔτι δὲ Κάσανδρον συμμαχίαν πρὸς ἀλλήλους
ποιησάμενοι δυνάμεις τε συνῆγον καὶ παρασκευὰς
ὅπλων τε καὶ βελῶν καὶ τῶν ἄλλων τῶν χρησίμων
3ἐποίουν· Ἀντίγονος δὲ ὁρῶν ἐφ᾿ ἑαυτὸν συνεστηκότας
πολλοὺς καὶ μεγάλους τοῖς ἀξιώμασιν ἄνδρας
καὶ συλλογιζόμενος τὸ μέγεθος τοῦ φυομένου πολέμου
τά τ᾿ ἔθνη καὶ πόλεις καὶ δυνάστας προσεκαλεῖτο
4εἰς συμμαχίαν. Ἀγησίλαον μὲν οὖν πρὸς
τοὺς ἐν Κύπρῳ βασιλεῖς, εἰς δὲ Ῥόδον Ἰδομενέα
καὶ Μοσχίωνα, Πτολεμαῖον2 δὲ τὸν ἀδελφιδοῦν
μετὰ δυνάμεως εἰς Καππαδοκίαν ἀπέστειλεν, ἵνα
λύσῃ μὲν Ἀμισσοῦ τὴν πολιορκίαν καὶ τοὺς ὑπὸ
Κασάνδρου πεμφθέντας εἰς Καππαδοκίαν ἐκβάλῃ
πάντας, πρὸς δὲ τούτοις ὅπως παραγενόμενος εἰς
Ἑλλήσποντον ἐφεδρεύῃ τοῖς περὶ Κάσανδρον, ἂν
5ἐπιχειρῇ διαβαίνειν ἐκ τῆς Εὐρώπης. Ἀριστόδημον
δὲ τὸν Μιλήσιον εἰς Πελοπόννησον ἐξέπεμψεν
ἔχοντα χίλια τάλαντα· τούτῳ δὲ συνετέτακτο
συνθέσθαι φιλίαν πρὸς Ἀλέξανδρον καὶ Πολυπέρχοντα
καὶ ξενολογήσαντα τοὺς ἱκανοὺς διαπολεμεῖν
Κασάνδρῳ. αὐτὸς δὲ πᾶσαν τὴν Ἀσίαν




1πόλεμον Dindorf: Πτολεμαῖον.2Fischer in apparatus suggests Πολεμαῖον, cp. IG, 22. 1. 469,
Beloch, Griechische Geschichte2, 4. 1. 124, note 3.388Book XIX

Eumenes, since they too had had a share in the war. 315 b.c. They said that if he did none of these things, they would all join in waging war on him. Antigonus answered rather harshly and bade them make ready for war, with the result that the envoys went away with their mission unaccomplished. At this Ptolemy, Lysimachus, and Cassander, after making a mutual alliance, gathered their forces and prepared stocks of arms, missiles, and the other needful things.1 But now that Antigonus saw that many men of great repute had combined against him, and computed the extent of the war that was springing up, he summoned the nations, cities, and rulers to join his alliance. He sent Agesilaus to the kings in Cyprus, Idomeneus and Moschion to Rhodes, and his own nephew Ptolemy with an army to Cappadocia to raise the siege of Amisus, to drive out all who had been sent by Cassander into Cappadocia, and finally to take a position on the Hellespont and lie in wait for Cassander if he should try to cross over from Europe. He sent Aristodemus of Miletus to the Peloponnesus with a thousand talents, instructing him to establish friendship with Alexander and Polyperchon and, after raising an adequate force of mercenaries, to carry on the war against Cassander. He himself established at intervals throughout all that part of
1Cp. Appian, Syrian History, 53; Justin, 15. 1.389