Diodorus of Sicily

γῆν, διὰ δὲ τὸν φυρμὸν καὶ τὴν πυκνότητα τῶν
ἐφιππευόντων1 ἀγνοηθεὶς ὃς ἦν συνεπατήθη καὶ
6τὸν βίον ἀλόγως κατέστρεψεν. τῇ δὲ τούτου
τελευτῇ τῶν πολεμίων ἐπαρθέντων καὶ τῷ πλήθει
πανταχόθεν περιχεομένων2 πολὺς ἐγίνετο φόνος.
καὶ τὸ μὲν δεξιὸν κέρας τοῦτον τὸν τρόπον θλιβόμενον
ἠναγκάσθη καταφυγεῖν πρὸς τὴν τῶν πεζῶν
φάλαγγα, κατὰ κράτος ἡττημένον.
31. Κατὰ δὲ τὸ εὐώνυμον Νεοπτολέμου κατ᾿
αὐτὸν τὸν Εὐμενῆ τεταγμένου συνέστη φιλοτιμία
μεγάλη τῶν ἡγεμόνων ἐπ᾿ ἀλλήλους ὁρμησάντων.
2γνωρισθέντες γὰρ ἀπό τε τῶν ἵππων καὶ τῶν
ἄλλων ἐπισήμων συνεπλάκησαν ἀλλήλοις καὶ τῇ
καθ᾿ αὑτοὺς μονομαχίᾳ τὴν νίκην ἐποίησαν ἀκολουθῆσαι.
τὸ μὲν οὖν πρῶτον τοῖς ξίφεσιν ἀλλήλων
καθικόμενοι παράδοξον καὶ παντελῶς ἐξηλλαγμένην
μονομαχίαν συνεστήσαντο· ἐκφερόμενοι γὰρ
τῷ θυμῷ καὶ τῇ πρὸς ἀλλήλους δυσμενείᾳ ταῖς
ἀριστεραῖς χερσὶν ἀφέντες τὰς ἡνίας ἀλλήλων
ἐδράξαντο. οὗ συμβάντος οἱ μὲν ἵπποι κατὰ
τὴν ὁρμὴν ὑπεξέδραμον,3 αὐτοὶ δ᾿ ἔπεσον ἐπὶ τὴν
3γῆν. τῆς δ᾿ ἐπαναστάσεως διὰ τὴν ὀξύτητα καὶ
βίαν τοῦ πτώματος χαλεπῶς γινομένης4 ἀμφοτέροις,
ἅτε καὶ τῶν ὅπλων ἐμποδιζόντων τὰ σώματα, ὁ
μὲν Εὐμενὴς ἔφθασε, πρότερος διαναστάς, τοῦ Νεοπτολέμου
4τὴν ἰγνὺν πατάξαι. μεγάλης δὲ γενομένης
διαιρέσεως καὶ σφαλείσης τῆς βάσεως ὁ μὲν
πληγεὶς παραλελυμένος ἔκειτο, κωλυόμενος ὑπὸ
τοῦ τραύματος διαναστῆναι· ὅμως δὲ τῆς εὐψυχίας
ὑπεραγούσης τὴν τοῦ σώματος ἐλάττωσιν ἐν γόνασι


1ἐφιππευόντων Wesseling: ἀφιππευόντων.2περιχεομένων Wesseling: περιεχομένων.3ὑπεξέδραμον Fischer: ἐξέδραμον.4γινομένης Dindort: γενομένης.100Book XVIII

ground, where he was trampled under foot and 321 b.c. ended his life ingloriously, unrecognized in the confusion and dense array of the charge. By his death the enemy were so encouraged that they rushed upon the mass from every side, and great slaughter ensued. The right wing, crushed in this way, was compelled to flee to the phalanx of the foot soldiers, overwhelmingly defeated.
31. On the left wing, however, where Neoptolemus was arrayed against Eumenes himself, there occurred a great display of ambitious rivalry as the leaders rushed full at each other. For as soon as they recognized one another by their horses and other insignia, they engaged each other in close combat; and they made the victory depend upon the duel between themselves. After the opening exchange of sword strokes they engaged in a strange and most extraordinary duel; for, carried away by their anger and their mutual hatred, they let the reins fall from their left hands and grappled each other. As a result of this, their horses were carried out from under them by their own momentum, and the men themselves fell to the ground. Although it was difficult for either of them to get up because of the suddenness and force of the fall, especially as their armour hampered their bodies, Eumenes rose up first and forestalled Neoptolemus by striking him in the back of the knee. Since the gash proved to be severe and his legs gave way, the stricken man lay disabled, prevented by his wound from rising to his feet. Yet his courage overcame the weakness of his body, and, resting on his knees, he wounded his


101