Diodorus of Sicily

ὁ μὲν Ἄγις μαχόμενος ἔπεσεν, οἱ δὲ Λακεδαιμόνιοι
πολὺν μὲν ἐκθύμως χρόνον ἀγωνιζόμενοι
διεκαρτέρουν, τῶν δὲ συμμάχων βιασθέντων καὶ
αὐτοὶ τὴν ἀναχώρησιν εἰς τὴν Σπάρτην ἐποιήσαντο.
3ἀνῃρέθησαν δ᾿ ἐν τῇ μάχῃ τῶν μὲν Λακεδαιμονίων
καὶ τῶν συμμάχων πλείους τῶν πεντακισχιλίων
καὶ τριακοσίων, τῶν δὲ μετ᾿ Ἀντιπάτρου
τρισχίλιοι καὶ πεντακόσιοι.
4Ἴδιον δέ τι συνέβη καὶ περὶ τὴν τοῦ Ἄγιδος
τελευτὴν γενέσθαι· ἀγωνισάμενος γὰρ λαμπρῶς καὶ
πολλοῖς τραύμασιν ἐναντίοις περιπεσὼν ὑπὸ τῶν
στρατιωτῶν εἰς τὴν Σπάρτην ἀπεκομίζετο1· περικατάληπτος
δὲ γενόμενος καὶ τὰ καθ᾿ ἑαυτὸν
ἀπογνοὺς τοῖς μὲν ἄλλοις στρατιώταις προσέταξεν
ἀπιέναι τὴν ταχίστην καὶ διασώζειν αὑτοὺς εἰς τὴν
τῆς πατρίδος χρείαν, αὐτὸς δὲ καθοπλισθεὶς καὶ
εἰς γόνυ διαναστὰς ἠμύνατο τοὺς πολεμίους κα
τινας καταβαλὼν καὶ συνακοντισθεὶς κατέστρεψε
τὸν βίον, ἄρξας ἔτη ἐννέα.2
5Ἡμεῖς δὲ διεληλυθότες τὰ πραχθέντα κατὰ τὴν
Εὐρώμην ἐν μέρει τὰ κατὰ τὴν Ἀσίαν συντελεσθέντα
διέξιμεν.
64. Δαρεῖος μὲν γὰρ ἡττηθεὶς ἐν τῇ περὶ Ἄρβηλα
παρατάξει τὴν φυγὴν ἐπὶ τὰς ἄνω σατραπείας
ἐποιήσατο, σπεύδων τῷ διαστήματι τῶν τόπων
λαβεῖν ἀναστροφὴν καὶ χρόνον ἱκανὸν εἰς παρασκευὴν
δυνάμεως. τὸ μὲν οὖν πρῶτον εἰς Ἐκβάτανα
τῆς Μηδείας διανύσας ἐνταῦθα διέτριβεν
καὶ τοὺς μὲν ἐκ τῆς φυγῆς ἀνασωζομένους ἀνεδέχετο,

1ἀπεκομίζετο only in a late hand in R; ἀπεκομίσθη codd.2At this point the following notations appear in the manuscripts: τέλος τοῦ α’ βιβλίου τῆς 

 RX; τῆς ἑπτακαιδεκάτης τῶν Διοδώρου βίβλων εἰς δύο διῃρημένης τὸ τέλος τῆς α’ F.298Book XVII

down fighting, but the Lacedaemonians fought furiously 330/29 b.c. and maintained their position for a long time; when their Greek allies were forced out of position they themselves fell back on Sparta. More than five thousand three hundred of the Lacedaemonians and their allies were killed in the battle, and three thousand five hundred of Antipater’s troops.
An interesting event occurred in connection with Agis’s death. He had fought gloriously and fell with many frontal wounds. As he was being carried by his soldiers back to Sparta, he found himself surrounded by the enemy. Despairing of his own life, he ordered the rest to make their escape with all speed and to save themselves for the service of their country, but he himself armed and rising to his knees defended himself, killed some of the enemy and was himself slain by a javelin cast; he had reigned nine years.1 (This is the end of the first half of the seventeenth book.)2
Now that we have run through the events in Europe, we may in turn pass on to what occurred in Asia.
64. After his defeat in the battle near Arbela, Dareius directed his course to the upper satrapies, seeking by putting distance between himself and Alexander to gain a respite and time enough to organize an army. He made his way first to Ecbatana in Media and paused there, picking up the stragglers




1The battle took place near Megalopolis, probably rather before than after Gaugamela (Curtius, 6. 1. 21).2See the division of the book into two parts in the Table of Contents (p. 106) and note 2 below.299