Diodorus of Sicily

Μηδίας, ὁ δ᾿ ἕτερος τῆς Βαβυλωνίας σατράπης
ἀπεδέδεικτο, καθ᾿ ὃν καιρὸν ἡ δευτέρα διαίρεσις
ἐγενήθη τῶν σατραπειῶν ἐν Τριπαραδείσῳ. οἱ δὲ
περὶ Σέλευκον τοῖς μὲν βασιλεῦσιν ἔφασαν βούλεσθαι
παρέχεσθαι χρείας, Εὐμενεῖ μέντοι γε μηδέποθ᾿
ὑπομενεῖν ποιοῦντας τὸ προσταττόμενον, οὗ
Μακεδόνες συνελθόντες κατέγνωσαν θάνατον. πολλὰ
δὲ πρὸς ταύτην τὴν προαίρεσιν διαλεχθέντες
συνεξέπεμψαν παρ᾿ αὑτῶν πρεσβευτὴν πρὸς Ἀντιγένην
καὶ τοὺς ἀργυράσπιδας, ἀξιοῦντες ἀφιστάναι
3τῆς ἡγεμονίας Εὐμενῆ. τῶν δὲ Μακεδόνων οὐ
προσεχόντων τοῖς λόγοις Εὐμενὴς ἐπαινέσας αὐτῶν
τὴν προθυμίαν ἀνέζευξε μετὰ τῆς δυνάμεως καὶ
παραγενηθεὶς ἐπὶ τὸν Τίγριν ποταμὸν κατεστρατοπέδευσε,
τῆς Βαβυλῶνος ἀπέχων σταδίους τριακοσίους.
καὶ πρόθεσιν μὲν εἶχεν εἰς Σοῦσα ποιεῖσθαι
τὴν πορείαν, διανοούμενος τὰς ἐκ τῶν ἄνω σατραπειῶν
δυνάμεις μεταπέμπεσθαι καὶ τοῖς βασιλικοῖς
θησαυροῖς χρήσασθαι πρὸς τὰς κατεπειγούσας
4χρείας. ἠναγκάζετο δὲ τὸν ποταμὸν διαβαίνειν διὰ
τὸ τὴν μὲν κατόπιν χώραν προνενομεῦσθαι τὴν δὲ
πέραν ἀκέραιον εἶναι καὶ δαψιλεῖς δύνασθαι παρέχεσθαι
5τροφὰς τῷ στρατοπέδῳ. συναγαγόντος οὖν
αὐτοῦ πλοῖα πανταχόθεν πρὸς τὴν διάβασιν οἱ περὶ
Σέλευκον καὶ Πίθωνα κατέπλευσαν δυσὶ μὲν τριήρεσι,
κοντωτοῖς δὲ πλείοσιν· ἔτι γὰρ τὰ σκάφη
ταῦτα περιῆν1 ἐκ τῶν ὑπ᾿ Ἀλεξάνδρου ναυπηγηθέντων
περὶ Βαβυλῶνα.
1περιῆν Stephanus: περὶ γῆν ἦν.260Book XIX

had been appointed satrap of Media and the other 317 b.c. had been named satrap of Babylonia at the time when the second distribution of satrapies was made at Triparadeisus.1 Seleucus said that he was willing to be of service to the kings, but that nevertheless he would never consent to carrying out the orders of Eumenes, whom the Macedonians in assembly had condemned to death.2 After much discussion in respect to this policy, they sent an ambassador from themselves to Antigenes and the Silver Shields, asking them to remove Eumenes from his command. Since the Macedonians paid no heed to this message, Eumenes, after praising their loyalty, set out with the army and pitched camp on reaching the Tigris River at a distance of three hundred stades3 from Babylon. It was his purpose to direct his course to Susa, where he intended to summon the armies from the upper satrapies and to make use of the royal treasure for his urgent needs. He was forced, however, to cross the river because the country behind him had been plundered, whereas that on the other side was untouched and able to furnish abundant food for his army. When he, accordingly, had gathered boats from all sides for the crossing,4 Seleucus and Pithon sailed down with two triremes and a good many punts, for these craft still survived from those that had been built by Alexander near Babylon.5
1Cp. Book 18. 39. 6.2Cp. Book 18. 37. 2.3About 34½ miles. He crossed Mesopotamia below
Babylon.4Alexander had forded the Tigris, but only with great difficulty and at a point much higher up the stream (Book 17. 55. 3–6).5Arrian (Anabasis, 7. 19. 4) speaks of the construction of triremes and other large boats at Babylon after Alexander’s return to that city just before his death, but no punts are mentioned.261