Diodorus of Sicily

ὁ βασιλεὺς τὰ περὶ τὴν Γάζαν διοικήσας
Ἀμύνταν μὲν μετὰ δέκα νεῶν εἰς Μακεδονίαν ἐξέπεμψε,
προστάξας τῶν νέων τοὺς εὐθέτους ἐπιλέξαι
πρὸς στρατείαν, αὐτὸς δὲ μετὰ πάσης τῆς δυνάμεως
παρῆλθεν εἰς Αἴγυπτον καὶ παρέλαβε πάσας τὰς ἐν
2αὐτῇ πόλεις χωρὶς κινδύνων· οἱ γὰρ Αἰγύπτιοι τῶν
Περσῶν ἠσεβηκότων εἰς τὰ ἱερὰ καὶ βιαίως ἀρχόντων
ἄσμενοι προσεδέξαντο τοὺς Μακεδόνας.
Καταστήσας δὲ τὰ κατὰ τὴν Αἴγυπτον προῆλθεν
εἰς Ἄμμωνος, βουλόμενος χρήσασθαι τῷ θεῷ.
κατὰ μέσην δὲ τὴν ὁδὸν ἀπήντησαν αὐτῷ πρέσβεις
παρὰ Κυρηναίων στέφανον κομίζοντες καὶ μεγαλοπρεπῆ
δῶρα, ἐν οἷς ἦγον ἵππους τε πολεμιστὰς
3τριακοσίους καὶ πέντε τέθριππα τὰ κράτιστα. ὁ δὲ
τούτους μὲν ἀποδεξάμενος φιλίαν καὶ συμμαχίαν
συνέθετο πρὸς αὐτούς, αὐτὸς δὲ μετὰ τῶν συναποδημούντων
προῆγεν ἐπὶ τὸ ἱερόν· καὶ διανύσας ἐπὶ
τὴν ἔρημον καὶ ἄνυδρον, ὑδρευσάμενος διῄει τὴν
χώραν ἔχουσαν ἄμμου μέγεθος ἀέριον. ἐν ἡμέραις
δὲ τέσσαρσιν ἐξαναλωθέντων τῶν κομιζομένων
4ὑδάτων εἰς δεινὴν σπάνιν παρεγένοντο. εἰς ἀθυμίαν
οὖν πάντων ἐμπεσόντων ἄφνω πολὺς ὄμβρος ἐξ οὐρανοῦ
κατερράγη, τὴν ὑπάρχουσαν τῶν ὑγρῶν ἔνδειαν
παραδόξως διωρθούμενος· διὸ καὶ τὸ συμβὰν
ἔδοξεν ἀνελπίστως σωθεῖσι θεῶν προνοίᾳ γεγονέναι.
5ὑδρευσάμενοι δ᾿ ἔκ τινος κοιλάδος, ἐπὶ τέσσαρας



258Book XVII

the affairs of Gaza and sent off Amyntas with ten ships 331/0 b.c. to Macedonia,1 with orders to enlist the young men who were fit for military service. He himself with all his army marched on to Egypt and secured the adhesion of all its cities without striking a blow. For since the Persians had committed impieties against the temples and had governed harshly, the Egyptians welcomed the Macedonians.2
Having settled the affairs of Egypt, Alexander went off to the Temple of Ammon, where he wished to consult the oracle of the god. When he had advanced half way along the coast, he was met by envoys from the people of Cyrenê,3 who brought him a crown and magnificent gifts, among which were three hundred chargers and five handsome four-horse chariots. He received the envoys cordially and made a treaty of friendship and alliance with them; then he continued with his travelling companions on to the temple. When he came to the desert and waterless part, he took on water and began to cross a country covered with an infinite expanse of sand. In four days their water had given out and they suffered from fearful thirst. All fell into despair, when suddenly a great storm of rain burst from the heavens,4 ending their shortage of water in a way which had not been foreseen, and which, therefore, seemed to those so unexpectedly rescued to have been due to the action of divine Providence. They refilled their containers from a hollow in the ground, and again with a four


1This was Amyntas the son of Andromenes (chap. 45. 7).
Curtius (4. 6. 30) mentions the same incident. His brother
Simmias took over his battalion of the phalanx in his absence.
He rejoined Alexander in 331 (chap. 65. 1; cp. Arrian, 3.
16. 10).2Curtius, 4. 7. 1. Arrian (3. 1. 2) limits this friendliness
to Mazaces, the Persian satrap.3Curtius, 4. 7. 9. This incident is omitted by Arrian. For the Siwah visit in general see Curtius, 4. 7. 6–32; Justin, 11. 11. 2–12; Plutarch, Alexander, 26. 6–27; Arrian, 3. 3–4.4Curtius, 4. 7. 14; Plutarch, Alexander, 27. 1; Arrian, 3. 3. 4.259