Diodorus of Sicily
4τοὺς Συρακοσίους1 ταῖς ἀρεταῖς ὑπερεβάλλοντο. ὁ
δὲ Δίων ἀξιούμενος ὑπὸ τῶν μισθοφόρων συναποστῆναι
καὶ παρὰ τῶν Συρακοσίων ὡς κοινῶν
ἐχθρῶν λαβεῖν τιμωρίαν τὸ μὲν πρῶτον ἀντεῖπεν,
μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα συναναγκαζόμενος ὑπὸ τῆς περιστάσεως
προσεδέξατο τὴν ἡγεμονίαν τῶν ξένων
καὶ μετ᾿ ἐκείνων ταχθεὶς ἀνέζευξεν ἐπὶ τοὺς Λεοντίνους.
5οἱ δὲ Συρακόσιοι συστραφέντες ἐδίωκον
τοὺς μισθοφόρους καὶ κατὰ τὴν ὁδοιπορίαν συνάψαντες
μάχην καὶ πολλοὺς ἀποβαλόντες ἀπεχώρησαν.
ὁ δὲ Δίων λαμπρᾷ μάχῃ νικήσας οὐδὲν
ἐμνησικάκησε τοῖς Συρακοσίοις· ἀποστειλάντων γὰρ
πρὸς αὐτὸν κήρυκα περὶ τῆς τῶν νεκρῶν ἀναιρέσεως
τήν τε τῶν νεκρῶν ἀναίρεσιν ἔδωκε καὶ τοὺς ἁλόντας
πολλοὺς ὄντας ἀπέλυσεν ἄνευ λύτρων. πολλοὶ
γὰρ ἐν τῇ φυγῇ μέλλοντες φονεύεσθαι διηγόρευον
ἑαυτοὺς εἶναι τῶν τὰ Δίωνος φρονούντων καὶ πάντες
διὰ ταύτην τὴν αἰτίαν ἐξέφυγον τὸν θάνατον.
18. Μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα Διονύσιος μὲν στρατηγὸν
ἀπέστειλεν εἰς τὰς Συρακούσσας Νύψιον τὸν Νεαπολίτην,
ἀνδρείᾳ καὶ συνέσει στρατηγικῇ διαφέροντα·
συνεξέπεμψε δ᾿ αὐτῷ καὶ φορτηγὰ πλοῖα
σίτου καὶ τῆς ἄλλης ἀγορᾶς γέμοντα. οὗτος μὲν
οὖν ἐκ Λοκρῶν ἀναχθεὶς ἐτέλει τὸν εἰς Συρακούσσας
2πλοῦν. οἱ δὲ κατὰ τὴν ἀκρόπολιν μισθοφόροι τοῦ
τυράννου, κατὰ τοῦτον τὸν καιρὸν ἐπιλιπόντος τοῦ
σίτου, καὶ τῇ σπάνει τῶν ἀναγκαίων δεινῶς πιεζούμενοι,
μέχρι μέν τινος ὑπέμενον εὐψύχως τὴν
ἔνδειαν, τῆς δὲ φύσεως ὑπὸ τῆς ἀνάγκης ἡττωμένης

1So Wesseling (cp. Book 1. 66. 3): τῶν Συρακοσίων.
Fischer suggests τῶν Συρακοσίων τὰς ἀρετὰς (cp. Isocrates,
Panegyricus, 82).286Book XVI

more than a match for the Syracusans in valour. As 356/5 b.c. for Dion, when he was asked by the mercenaries to join their revolt and to take vengeance upon the Syracusans as a common enemy, he at first refused, but later, under compulsion of the critical circumstances, he accepted the command of the mercenaries, and with them marched off to Leontini. The Syracusans in a body set out to pursue the mercenaries, and, having engaged them on the way and lost many men,1 retreated. Dion, who had defeated them in a brilliant battle, harboured no grudge toward the Syracusans, for when they sent him a herald to arrange for the removal of the dead he granted them permission and set free without ransom the captives, who were numerous. For many who were on the point of being slain in their flight declared that they were on Dion’s side and all for this reason escaped death.2
18. After this Dionysius dispatched to Syracuse as general Nypsius3 the Neapolitan, a man who excelled in valour and in sagacity of generalship; and with him he sent merchantmen laden with grain and other supplies. Nypsius then set sail from Locri and completed the voyage to Syracuse. The tyrant’s mercenaries, stationed on the acropolis, as their supply of grain failed at this time, were in dire distress for want of supplies, but for a time endured in good spirits their lack of food; then, when human nature succumbed to



1Cp. Plutarch, Dion, 39. 3: “with the loss of a few men.”2Compare the narrative of chaps. 16–17 with Plutarch, Dion, 32–39.3That Nypsius was from Campanian Neapolis is proved by his Oscan name (properly written Νύμψιος as on the inscription from Lacco on Ischia, IG, 14. 894). See Beloch, Griechische Geschichte2, 3. 1. 260, note 1.287