Diodorus of Sicily
2ἐκβοηθοῦντας διηγωνίζοντο. ὁ δὲ Δίων ἀνελπίστως
παρεσπονδημένος μετὰ τῶν ἀρίστων στρατιωτῶν
ἀπήντα τοῖς πολεμίοις καὶ συνάψας μάχην πολὺν
ἐποίει φόνον. ἐν σταδίῳ γὰρ ὥσπερ,1 τῷ ὀλίγῳ
δὴ2 διαστήματι τῆς διατειχίσεως,3 μάχης οὔσης
συνέδραμε πλῆθος στρατιωτῶν εἰς στενὸν τόπον.
3διὸ καὶ παρ᾿ ἀμφοτέροις οἱ ταῖς ἀνδραγαθίαις πρωτεύοντες
συγκατέβησαν εἰς τὸν κίνδυνον· καὶ τῶν
μὲν τοῦ Διονυσίου μισθοφόρων διὰ τὸ μέγεθος τῶν
ἐπαγγελιῶν, τῶν δὲ Συρακοσίων διὰ τὴν ἐλπίδα τῆς
ἐλευθερίας εἰς ὑπερβάλλουσαν φιλοτιμίαν ἐκτραπέντων
τὸ μὲν πρῶτον ἰσόρροπος ἦν ἡ μάχη, τῆς παρ᾿
ἀμφοτέροις ἀρετῆς οὔσης ἰσομάχου, καὶ πολλοὶ μὲν
ἔπιπτον, οὐκ ὀλίγοι δὲ κατετιτρώσκοντο πάσας τὰς
πληγὰς ἐναντίας λαμβάνοντες· οἱ μὲν γὰρ πρωτοστάται
τὸν ὑπὲρ τῶν ἄλλων θάνατον ὑπέμενον εὐψύχως,
οἱ δ᾿ ἐπιτεταγμένοι τοὺς πίπτοντας ὑπερασπίζοντες
καὶ τοῖς δεινοῖς ἐγκαρτεροῦντες τοὺς ἐσχάτους
4κινδύνους ὑπὲρ τῆς νίκης ἀνεδέχοντο. μετὰ δὲ
ταῦτα Δίων μὲν ἀριστεῦσαι βουλόμενος ἐν τῇ μάχῃ
καὶ σπεύδων δι᾿ ἑαυτοῦ περιποιήσασθαι τὴν νίκην εἰς
μέσους ἐβιάσατο τοὺς πολεμίους· ἡρωικῶς δ᾿ ἀγωνιζόμενος
πολλοὺς μὲν ἐφόνευσε, τὴν δ᾿ ὅλην σύνταξιν
τῶν μισθοφόρων διακόψας ἐναπελήφθη4 μόνος
τῷ πλήθει· πολλῶν δ᾿ ἐπ᾿ αὐτὸν ῥιφέντων βελῶν
εἴς τε τὴν ἀσπίδα καὶ τὸ κράνος ταῦτα μὲν
ἐξέφυγε διὰ τὴν τῶν ὅπλων κατασκευήν, εἰς δὲ τὸν
δεξιὸν βραχίονα τρωθεὶς συγκατηνέχθη τῷ βάρει
τῆς πληγῆς καὶ τοῖς πολεμίοις παρ᾿ ὀλίγον ὑποχείριος
5ἐγένετο. οἱ δὲ Συρακόσιοι δείσαντες ὑπὲρ


1γὰρ ὥσπερ, τῷ added by Post.2δὴ Post: δὲ.3So Post: διατειχίοἔυ σω.4Stephanus: ἐναπελείφθη.272Book XVI

the wall, engaged in a struggle with those who were 357/6 b.c. coming out to the rescue. Dion, being unexpectedly tricked by the violation of the truce, came to meet the enemy with his best soldiers and joining battle wrought extensive slaughter. For when fighting took place, as if in a stadium, within the narrow interval afforded by the crosswall, a multitude of soldiers collected in a contracted space. For this reason on both sides men outstanding in gallantry met in the action and since Dionysius’ mercenaries, by the size of the promised rewards, and the Syracusans, by the hope of freedom, were wrought up to a high pitch of rivalry, at first the battle stood equally poised, as the valour of both sides in the fight was equal. Many fell, and not a few were wounded, receiving all the blows in front; for on the one hand those in the front rank courageously met death defending the rest, and those arrayed behind them covering them with their shields as they fell and holding firm in the desperate peril took the most dangerous risks to win the victory. After this engagement Dion, wishing to display his valour in the battle and eager to win the victory by his own deeds, forced his way into the midst of the enemy and there in an heroic encounter slew many and having disrupted the whole battle line of the mercenaries was suddenly cut off and isolated in the crowd. Many missiles hurled at him fell upon his shield and helmet, but he escaped these owing to the protection of his armour, but receiving a wound on his right arm he was borne down by the weight of the blow and barely escaped capture by the enemy. The Syracusans, fearing for their general’s safety, dashed



273