Diodorus of Sicily
10ἐπίθεσιν. οἱ δὲ Καρχηδόνιοι τὰ μὲν διὰ τὴν τῶν
ἰδίων ταραχήν, τὰ δὲ διὰ τὴν τῶν πολεμίων ἐπιφάνειαν
ἐλαττούμενοι, μάλιστα δὲ διὰ τὴν ἀπειρίαν
τῶν τόπων καὶ στενοχωρίαν ἀπορούμενοι πρὸς
φυγὴν ἐτράπησαν. οὐκ ἐχόντων δὲ τῶν τόπων
εὐρυχωρῆ διέξοδον οἱ μὲν ὑπὸ τῶν ἰδίων ἱππέων
συνεπατοῦντο πολλῶν ὄντων, οἱ δὲ πρὸς ἀλλήλους
ὡς πολέμιοι διεμάχοντο, τῆς ἀγνοίας ἐπισχούσης
11διὰ τὴν νύκτα. Ἀμίλκας δὲ τὸ μὲν πρῶτον ὑπέστη
τοὺς πολεμίους εὐρώστως καὶ τοὺς περὶ αὑτὸν
τεταγμένους ἠξίου συγκινδυνεύειν· μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα
διὰ τὴν ταραχὴν καὶ τὸν φόβον ἐγκαταλιπόντων
αὐτὸν τῶν στρατιωτῶν μονωθεὶς1 ὑπὸ τῶν Συρακοσίων
συνηρπάγη.
30. Εἰκότως δ᾿ ἄν τις παρασημήναιτο τὴν ἀνωμαλίαν
τῆς τύχης καὶ τὸ παράλογον τῶν παρὰ τὰς
ὑπολήψεις συντελουμένων παρ᾿ ἀνθρώποις. Ἀγαθοκλῆς
μὲν γὰρ ἀνδρείᾳ διαφέρων καὶ πολλὴν
δύναμιν ἐσχηκὼς τὴν συναγωνισαμένην περὶ τὸν
Ἱμέραν οὐ μόνον ὑπὸ τῶν βαρβάρων ἡττήθη κατὰ
κράτος, ἀλλὰ καὶ τῆς στρατιᾶς τὴν κρατίστην καὶ
πλείστην ἀπέβαλεν· οἱ δὲ τειχήρεις ἀποληφθέντες
ἐν ταῖς Συρακούσσαις μικρῷ μέρει τῶν προηττηθέντων
οὐ μόνον τὴν πολιορκήσασαν δύναμιν ἐχειρώσαντο
τῶν Καρχηδονίων, ἀλλὰ καὶ τὸν στρατηγὸν
Ἀμίλκαν, ἐπιφανέστατον ὄντα τῶν πολιτῶν, ἐζώγρησαν·
καὶ τὸ θαυμασιώτατον, δώδεκα μυριάδας
πεζῶν καὶ πεντακισχιλίους ἱππεῖς ὀλίγος ἀριθμὸς
1μονωθεὶς Sintenis: μόγις σωθεὶς.220Book XX

attack. The Carthaginians, being at a disadvantage 309 b.c. partly because of the confusion in their own ranks and partly because of the sudden appearance of the enemy, and in particular at a loss because of their ignorance of the locality and their cramped position, were driven into flight. But since there was no broad passage through the place, some of them were trodden down by their own horsemen, who were numerous, and others fought among themselves as if enemies, ignorance prevailing because of the darkness. Hamilcar at first withstood the enemy stoutly and exhorted those drawn up near him to join with him in the fighting; but afterwards the soldiers abandoned him on account of the confusion and panic, and he, left alone, was pounced upon by the
Syracusrans.
30. One might with reason note the inconsistency of Fortune and the strange manner in which human events turn out contrary to expectation. For Agathocles, who was outstanding in courage and who had had a large army fighting in his support, not only was defeated decisively by the barbarians at the Himeras River, but he even lost the strongest and largest part of his army1; whereas the garrison troops left behind in Syracuse, with only a small part of those who had previously been defeated, not only got the better of the Carthaginian army that had besieged them, but even captured alive Hamilcar, the most famous of their citizens. And what was most amazing, one hundred and twenty thousand foot-soldiers and five thousand horsemen were defeated



1Cp. Book 19. 108–109.221