Diodorus of Sicily

εὐγνωμόνως τοῖς πλήθεσι προσεφέρετο καὶ πολλοὺς
μὲν εὐεργετῶν, οὐκ ὀλίγους δ᾿ ἐπαγγελίαις
μετεωρίζων, πάντας δὲ λόγοις φιλανθρώποις δημαγωγῶν
7οὐ μετρίας ἀποδοχῆς ἐτύγχανεν. ἔχων
δὲ τηλικαύτην δυναστείαν οὔτε διάδημα ἀνέλαβεν
οὔτε δορυφόρους εἶχεν οὔτε δυσεντευξίαν ἐζήλωσεν,
ἅπερ εἰώθασι ποιεῖν σχεδὸν ἅπαντες οἱ τύραννοι.
ἐπεμελήθη δὲ καὶ τῶν προσόδων καὶ τῆς τῶν
ὅπλων καὶ βελῶν παρασκευῆς, ἔτι δὲ πρὸς ταῖς
ὑπαρχούσαις μακραῖς ναυσὶν ἑτέρας ἐναυπηγήσατο.
προσελάβετο δὲ καὶ τῶν ἐν τῇ μεσογείῳ χωρίων
καὶ πόλεων τὰς πλείστας.
Καὶ τὰ μὲν κατὰ Σικελίαν ἐν τούτοις ἦν.
10. Κατὰ δὲ τὴν Ἰταλίαν Ῥωμαῖοι μὲν ἔννατον
ἔτος ἤδη διεπολέμουν πρὸς Σαυνίτας καὶ κατὰ μὲν
τοὺς ἔμπροσθεν χρόνους μεγάλαις δυνάμεσιν ἦσαν
διηγωνισμένοι, τότε δὲ εἰς τὴν πολεμίαν εἰσβολὰς
ποιούμενοι μέγα μὲν οὐδὲν οὐδὲ μνήμης ἄξιον
διεπράξαντο, διετέλουν δὲ τοῖς τε φρουρίοις προσβολὰς
ποιούμενοι καὶ τὴν χώραν λεηλατοῦντες.
2ἐπόρθησαν δὲ καὶ τῆς Ἀπουλίας τὴν Δαυνίαν πᾶσαν
καὶ προσαγαγόμενοι Κανυσίους ὁμήρους παρ᾿ αὐτῶν
ἔλαβον. προσέθηκαν δὲ καὶ δύο φυλὰς ταῖς
προϋπαρχούσαις, τὴν τε Φαλέρναν καὶ τὴν Ὠφεντῖναν.
3ἅμα δὲ τούτοις πραττομένοις Κροτωνιᾶται
πρὸς μὲν Βρεττίους διελύσαντο, πρὸς δὲ τοὺς ἐκπεπτωκότας
τῶν πολιτῶν ὑπὸ τῆς δημοκρατίας διὰ
τὴν πρὸς Ἡρακλείδην καὶ Σώστρατον1 κοινωνίαν,
περὶ ἧς ἐν τῇ προτέρᾳ βύβλῳ τὰ κατὰ μέρος διήλθομεν,

1Here all MSS. read Σωσίστρατον; cp. critical note on
chap. 3. 3.252Book XIX

people and won no slight popularity by aiding many, 317 b.c. by encouraging no small number with promises, and by currying favour from all by philanthropic words. Although he possessed such power, he neither assumed a diadem, nor employed a bodyguard, nor affected a haughty demeanour, as is the custom of almost all tyrants. He kept a careful watch over the public revenues and over the preparation of armour and weapons, and he had warships constructed in addition to those already at hand. He also gained control of most of the regions and cities of the interior.
This, then, was the situation in Sicily.1
10. In Italy2 the Romans were now in the ninth year of their war with the Samnites. Although in the previous period they had fought with large forces, at this time they accomplished nothing great or worthy of mention by the incursions that they were making upon the hostile territory; yet they did not cease attacking the strongholds and plundering the country. In Apulia also they plundered all Daunia and won back the Canusians, from whom they took hostages. They added two new tribes to those already existing: Falerna and Oufentina. While this was going on, the people of Croton made peace with the Bruttii, but they were still waging war against those of their own citizens who had been exiled by the democracy because of their alliance with Heracleides and Sostratus, about which we have told in detail in the preceding Book.3 This war was now in



1Continued in chap. 65. Sicilian affairs are not mentioned in the account of the year 316/15 (chaps. 17–54).2Cp. Livy, 9. 20 for the events of this year.3Cp. chaps. 3. 3 and 4. 1. There is no mention of this in Book 18.253