Diodorus of Sicily

αἱρέσεως Ἀθηναῖοι καὶ Λακεδαιμόνιοι συμμαχήσαντες
τοῖς Φωκεῦσι καὶ οὐ κατὰ τὸ πλῆθος τῶν
ἐκπεμπομένων στρατιωτῶν τοὺς μισθοὺς λαβόντες.
2οὕτω δὲ τοῖς Ἀθηναίοις ὁ χρόνος οὗτος ἤνεγκεν ἐξαμαρτάνειν
εἰς τὸ δαιμόνιον ὥστε μικρὸν ἀνώτερον
τῶν Δελφικῶν καιρῶν Ἰφικράτους διατρίβοντος
περὶ Κόρκυραν μετὰ ναυτικῆς δυνάμεως καὶ Διονυσίου
τοῦ Συρακοσίων δυνάστου πέμψαντος εἰς
Ὀλυμπίαν καὶ Δελφοὺς ἀγάλματα ἐκ χρυσοῦ καὶ
ἐλέφαντος δεδημιουργημένα περιτυχὼν ταῖς κομιζούσαις
αὐτὰ ναυσὶν ὁ Ἰφικράτης καὶ κρατήσας
αὐτῶν διεπέμψατο πρὸς τὸν δῆμον ἐπερωτῶν Τί
χρὴ πράττειν; οἱ δ᾿ Ἀθηναῖοι προσέταξαν αὐτῷ
μὴ τὰ τῶν θεῶν ἐξετάζειν, ἀλλὰ σκοπεῖν ὅπως τοὺς
3στρατιώτας διαθρέψει.1 Ἰφικράτης μὲν οὖν ὑπακούσας
τῷ δόγματι τῆς πατρίδος ἐλαφυροπώλησε
τὸν τῶν θεῶν κόσμον· ὁ δὲ τύραννος ὀργισθεὶς τοῖς
Ἀθηναίοις ἔγραψε πρὸς αὐτοὺς ἐπιστολὴν
τοιαύτην.
“Διονύσιος Ἀθηναίων τῇ βουλῇ καὶ τῷ δήμῳ εὖ
μὲν πράττειν οὐκ ἐπιτήδειόν ἐστι γράφειν, ἐπεὶ
τοὺς θεοὺς καὶ κατὰ γῆν καὶ κατὰ θάλατταν ἱεροσυλεῖτε
καὶ τὰ ἀγάλματα τὰ εἰς ἀνάθεσιν ὑφ᾿ ἡμῶν
τοῖς θεοῖς ἀπεσταλμένα παρελόμενοι κατεκόψατε
καὶ περὶ τοὺς μεγίστους τῶν θεῶν ἠσεβήκατε, περὶ
τὸν Ἀπόλλωνα τὸν ἐν Δελφοῖς καὶ τὸν Δία τὸν
Ὀλύμπιον.”
4Ἀθηναῖοι μὲν οὖν περὶ τὸ θεῖον τοιαῦτ᾿ ἔπραξαν,

1So Dindorf: διαθρέψῃ.398Book XVI

the Lacedaemonians, who were fighting on the side 347/6 b.c. of the Phocians and received pay out of all proportion to the number of soldiers they sent out, shared in the seizure. This period brought it to pass for the Athenians that they sinned against the divine powers to such an extent that, shortly before the Delphian affair,1 as Iphicrates was tarrying near Corcyra with a naval force and Dionysius the tyrant of Syracuse had shipped to Olympia and to Delphi statues cunningly wrought in gold and ivory, Iphicrates, chancing to fall in with the ships that were conveying these statues, seized them and sent word to the Athenian people inquiring what he should do with them; whereat the Athenians instructed him not to raise questions about what concerned the gods but to give his attention to seeing that his soldiers were well fed. Now Iphicrates, obeying the decision of his country, sold as booty the works of art belonging to the gods. The tyrant, filled with rage at the Athenians, wrote them a letter of the following tenor:
“Dionysius to the Senate and Assembly of the Athenians: It is inappropriate to wish you to do well since you are committing sacrilege2 against the gods both on land and on sea, and, having made off with the statues which had been sent by us to be dedicated to the gods, you have turned them into coin and have committed impiety toward the greatest of the gods, Apollo, whose abode is Delphi, and Olympian Zeus.”
Such now was the conduct of the Athenians toward


1Perhaps on the occasion mentioned in Book 15. 47. 7.2An interesting complaint in view of Aelian, Var. Hist. 1. 20: Διονύσιος (the Elder?) ἐξ ἁπάντων τῶν ἐν Συρακούσαις ἱερῶν ἐσύλησε τὰ χρήματα. For the probable occasion of this letter see Book 15. 47. 7.399