Diodorus of Sicily

Γάιον Πόπλιον.1 ἐπὶ δὲ τούτων Δίων ὁ Ἱππαρίνου
κατέπλευσεν εἰς τὴν Σικελίαν καταλύσων τὴν Διονυσίου
τυραννίδα, ἐλαχίσταις δὲ τῶν πρὸ αὐτοῦ
πάντων χρησάμενος ἀφορμαῖς μεγίστην δυναστείαν
τῶν κατὰ τὴν Εὐρώπην κατέλυσεν ἀνελπίστως.
2τίς γὰρ ἂν πιστεύσειεν ὅτι δυσὶ φορτηγοῖς ναυσὶ
καταπλεύσας περιεγένετο δυνάστου ναῦς μὲν μακρὰς
ἔχοντος τετρακοσίας, στρατιώτας δὲ πεζοὺς
μὲν εἰς δέκα μυριάδας, ἱππεῖς δὲ μυρίους, ὅπλων
δὲ καὶ σίτου καὶ χρημάτων τοσαύτην παρασκευὴν
ὅσην εἰκός ἐστι2 κεκτῆσθαι τὸν μέλλοντα χορηγήσειν
δαψιλῶς ταῖς προειρημέναις δυνάμεσι, χωρὶς δὲ
τῶν εἰρημένων πόλιν μὲν ἔχοντα μεγίστην τῶν
Ἑλληνίδων, λιμένας δὲ καὶ νεώρια καὶ κατεσκευασμένας
ἀκροπόλεις ἀναλώτους, ἔτι δὲ συμμάχων
3δυνατῶν ἔχοντα πλῆθος; αἰτία δ᾿ ὑπῆρχε τῷ
Δίωνι τῶν προτερημάτων μάλιστα μὲν ἡ ἰδία λαμπρότης
τῆς ψυχῆς καὶ ἀνδρεία καὶ ἡ τῶν ἐλευθεροῦσθαι
μελλόντων εὔνοια, τὸ δὲ τούτων ἁπάντων
μεῖζον ἥ τε ἀνανδρία τοῦ τυράννου καὶ τὸ τῶν
ἀρχομένων πρὸς αὐτὸν μῖσος· πάντα γὰρ ταῦτα
πρὸς ἕνα καιρὸν συνδραμόντα παραδόξως τὰς ἀπιστουμένας
πράξεις πρὸς τέλος ἤγαγεν.
4Ἡμεῖς δ᾿ ἀφέμενοι τούτων τῶν λόγων ἐπὶ τὴν
ἀναγραφὴν τῶν κατὰ μέρος πεπραγμένων τρεψόμεθα.
Δίων γὰρ ἐκ Ζακύνθου τῆς πρὸς Κεφαλληνίαν




1So MSS. (Πετίλιον Stephanus marg.); Ποιτήλιον Rhodoman
(cp. Livy, 7. 11; Fasti Consulares).2ἦν RF, followed by Dindorf.262Book XVI

Poplius. During their term of office, Dion son of 357/6 b.c. Hipparinus sailed to Sicily intending to overthrow the tyranny of Dionysius, and with slenderer resources than those of any conqueror before his time he succeeded contrary to all expectation in overthrowing the greatest realm in all Europe. Who, indeed, would have believed that, putting ashore with two1 merchantmen, he could actually have overcome the despot who had at his disposal four hundred ships2 of war, infantry numbering nearly one hundred thousand, ten thousand horse, and as great a store of arms, food, and money as one in all probability possessed who had to maintain lavishly the aforesaid forces; and, apart from all we have mentioned, had a city which was the largest of the cities of Hellas, and harbours and docks and fortified citadels3 that were impregnable, and, besides, a great number of powerful allies? The cause for Dion’s successes was, above all others, his own nobility of spirit, his courage, and the willing support of those who were to be liberated, but still more important than all these were the pusillanimity of the tyrant and his subjects’ hatred of him; for when all these characteristics merged at a single critical moment, they unexpectedly brought to a successful close deeds which were considered impossible.
But we must forgo these reflections and turn to the detailed narrative of the events as they severally occurred. Dion, having sailed from Zacynthos, which


1Confirmed by Plutarch, Dion, 25. 1. The port was
Heracleia Minoa, halfway between Acragas and Selinus (see
infra, § 4).2Confirmed by chap. 70. 3; Plutarch, Dion, 14. 2; Aelian, Varia Historia 6. 12. Nepos, Dion, 5. 3 gives “quingentis longis navibus.”3Of Ortygia and Epipolae, the work of Dionysius I. See Book 14. 7. 1–3, 5; and Book 14. 18 for these and other constructions.263