Diodorus of Sicily

αἰχμάλωτοι δ᾿ ἐλήφθησαν οὐκ ἐλάττους τῶν
μυρίων καὶ πεντακισχιλίων. τῶν δὲ ἁρμάτων τὰ
μὲν πολλὰ συνετρίβη κατὰ τὸν ἀγῶνα, διακόσια δ᾿
ἥλω· τὰ δὲ σκευοφόρα καὶ τὰ ζεύγη καὶ τὰ πλήθη
τῶν ἁμαξῶν ὑποχείρια τοῖς Ἕλλησιν ἐγένετο.
6τῶν δ᾿ ὅπλων τὰ πολλὰ μὲν ὑπὸ τοῦ ποταμοῦ διεφθάρη,
ἐπὶ δὲ τὴν τοῦ Τιμολέοντος σκηνὴν χίλιοι
μὲν θώρακες ἀσπίδες δὲ πλείους τῶν μυρίων ἀπηνέχθησαν.
τούτων δ᾿ ὕστερον τὰ μὲν ἐν τοῖς ἐν
Συρακούσσαις ναοῖς ἀνετέθη, τὰ δὲ τοῖς συμμάχοις
διεμερίσθη, τινὰ δ᾿ εἰς Κόρινθον Τιμολέων ἀπέστειλε
προστάξας εἰς τὸ τοῦ Ποσειδῶνος ἱερὸν
ἀναθεῖναι.
81. Πολλῶν δὲ καὶ1 χρημάτων καταληφθέντων
διὰ τὸ τοὺς Καρχηδονίους ἐσχηκέναι πλῆθος ἐκπωμάτων
ἀργυρῶν τε καὶ χρυσῶν, ἔτι δὲ τὸν ἄλλον
κόσμον ὑπερβάλλοντα διὰ τὸ μέγεθος τῆς παρ᾿
αὐτοῖς εὐπορίας ἅπαντα συνεχώρησε τοῖς στρατιώταις
2ἔχειν ἔπαθλα τῆς ἀνδραγαθίας. τῶν δὲ Καρχηδονίων
οἱ διαφυγόντες τὸν ἐν τῇ μάχῃ κίνδυνον
μόγις εἰς τὸ Λιλύβαιον διεσώθησαν. τοσαύτη δ᾿
αὐτοὺς κατάπληξις καὶ δέος κατεῖχεν ὥστε μὴ
τολμᾶν εἰς τὰς ναῦς ἐμβαίνειν μηδ᾿ ἀποπλεῖν εἰς τὴν
Λιβύην, ὡς διὰ τὴν τῶν θεῶν ἀλλοτριότητα πρὸς
αὐτοὺς ὑπὸ τοῦ Λιβυκοῦ πελάγους καταποθησομένους.
3Οἱ δ᾿ ἐν τῇ Καρχηδόνι τὸ μέγεθος πυθόμενοι τῆς
συμφορᾶς συνετρίβησαν ταῖς ψυχαῖς καὶ συντόμως
ὑπελάμβανον ἥξειν ἐπ᾿ αὐτοὺς τὸν Τιμολέοντα μετὰ

1So Fischer: καὶ in MSS. before τοὺς Καρχ.62Book XVI

thousand soldiers were killed and no less than fifteen 40/39 b.c. thousand were taken captive.1 Most of the chariots were destroyed in the battle but two hundred were taken. The baggage train, with the draught animals and most of the wagons, fell into the hands of the Greeks. Most of the armour was lost in the river, but a thousand breastplates and more than ten thousand shields were brought to the tent of Timoleon. Of these, some were dedicated later in the temples at Syracuse, some were distributed among the allies, and some were sent home by Timoleon to Corinth with instructions to dedicate them in the temple of Poseidon.2
81. The battle yielded a great store of wealth also, because the Carthaginians had with them an abundance of silver and gold drinking vessels; these, as well as the rest of the personal property which was very numerous because of the wealth of the Carthaginians, Timoleon allowed the soldiers to keep as rewards for their gallantry.3 For their part, the Carthaginians who escaped from the battle made their way with difficulty to safety at Lilybaeum. Such consternation and terror possessed them that they did not dare embark in their ships and sail to Libya, persuaded that they would be swallowed up by the Libyan Sea because their gods had forsaken them.
In Carthage itself, when news of the extent of the disaster had come, all were crushed in spirit and took it for granted that Timoleon would come against



1Plutarch, Timoleon, 28. 5–6, gives the number of dead as 10,000, including 3000 Carthaginians.2Plutarch, Timoleon, 29.3Plutarch, Timoleon, 30. 1, states only that Timoleon allowed his mercenaries to plunder the territory of the Carthaginians (cp. chap. 73.1).63