Diodorus of Sicily

καὶ Ἀλέξανδρον, ἔτι δὲ Πολυπέρχοντα,
Μυρμιδόνα δὲ καὶ τοὺς ξένους εἰς Καρίαν βοηθήσοντας
τοῖς περὶ τὸν Ἄσανδρον1 πολεμουμένοις
ὑπὸ Πτολεμαίου2 τοῦ στρατηγοῦ, τοὺς δὲ περὶ τὸν
Σέλευκον καὶ Μενέλαον ὑπολειφθέντας ἐν Κύπρῳ
μετὰ Νικοκρέοντος τοῦ βασιλέως καὶ τῶν ἄλλων
τῶν συμμαχούντων διαπολεμεῖν τοῖς ἐναντιουμένοις.
6τοῦτον δὲ τὸν τρόπον τῆς δυνάμεως διαμερισθείσης
οἱ περὶ Σέλευκον Κερύνειαν3 μὲν καὶ Λάπιθον ἐξεπολιόρκησαν,
Στασίοικον δὲ τὸν βασιλέα τῶν
Μαριέων4 προσαγαγόμενοι τὸν Ἀμαθουσίων δυνάστην
ἠνάγκασαν ὅμηρα δοῦναι, τὴν δὲ τῶν Κιτίων
πόλιν, οὐ δυνάμενοι προσαγαγέσθαι, συνεχῶς ἐπολιόρκουν
7πάσῃ τῇ δυνάμει. κατὰ τοῦτον δὲ τὸν
καιρὸν πρὸς Ἀντίγονον κατέπλευσαν ἐξ Ἑλλησπόντου
ναῦς τεσσαράκοντα Θεμίσωνος ναυαρχοῦντος·
ὁμοίως δὲ ἐξ Ἑλλησπόντου καὶ Ῥόδου
8κατήγαγε σκάφη Διοσκουρίδης ὀγδοήκοντα. προϋπῆρχον
δ᾿ αὐτῷ κατηρτισμέναι ναῦς τῶν ἐν Φοινίκῃ
ναυπηγηθεισῶν αἱ πρῶται συντελεσθεῖσαι·
αὗται δ᾿ ἦσαν σὺν ταῖς ἐν Τύρῳ καταληφθείσαις
ἑκατὸν καὶ εἴκοσιν, ὥστε τὰς πάσας περὶ αὐτὸν
ἠθροῖσθαι ναῦς μακρὰς ἐξηρτυμένας διακοσίας τεσσαράκοντα·
τούτων δ᾿ ἦσαν τετρήρεις μὲν ἐννενήκοντα
πεντήρεις δὲ δέκα, ἐννήρεις δὲ τρεῖς, δεκήρεις
9δὲ δέκα,5 ἄφρακτοι δὲ τριάκοντα. διελόμενος δὲ
τὸν στόλον πεντήκοντα μὲν ναῦς ἐξέπεμψεν εἰς
Πελοπόννησον, τῶν δ᾿ ἄλλων ναύαρχον καταστήσας



1Ἄσανδρον Wesseling, cp. § 2 above: Κασάνδρον.2Cp. chap. 57. 4.3Κερύνειαν Dindorf: Κερυνίαν RX, Κυρηνίαν F.4Μαριέων Rhodoman, cp. chaps. 59. 1, 79. 4: (??) R, Μανέων X.5Tarn (Journal of Hellenic Studies, 49 (1939), 127) suggests ἑπτήρεις δὲ τρεῖς, ἑξήρεις δὲ δέκα; but more drastic changes are needed.402Book XIX

Aristodemus,1 Alexander, and Polyperchon; that 315 b.c. Myrmidon and the mercenaries should go to Caria to aid Asander, who was being attacked by Ptolemy the general; and that Seleucus and Menelaüs, left in Cyprus with King Nicocreon and the other allies, should carry on the war against those who opposed them.2 After the forces had been divided in this way, Seleucus took Ceryneia and Lapithus, secured the support of Stasioecus, king of the Marienses, forced the ruler of the Amathusii to give a guaranty, and laid unremitting siege with all his forces to the city of the Citienses, which he had not been able to induce to join him. At about this time forty ships under the command of Themison came to Antigonus from the Hellespont, and likewise Dioscorides put in with eighty vessels from the Hellespont and Rhodes. The first to be finished of the ships that had been made in Phoenicia were also at hand fully equipped; including those captured at Tyre, they were one hundred and twenty, so that in all there were gathered together about Antigonus two hundred and forty fully equipped ships of war. Of these there were ninety with four orders of oarsmen, ten with five, three with nine, ten with ten, and thirty undecked boats.3 Dividing this naval force, he sent fifty ships to the Peloponnesus, and ordered his nephew, Dioscorides,






1He had been sent to the Peloponnesus by Antigonus (chap. 57. 5).2Cp. chap, 59. 1.3A total of only 143 ships. Perhaps the triremes have been omitted.403