Diodorus of Sicily
3ἀνελπίστως. ἔνιοι δὲ τῶν φυσικῶν τὴν γένεσιν τῆς
λαμπάδος εἰς φυσικὰς αἰτίας ἀνέφερον, ἀποφαινόμενοι
τὰ τοιαῦτα φαντάσματα κατηναγκασμένως
γίνεσθαι χρόνοις ὡρισμένοις, καὶ περὶ τῶν τοιούτων
τούς τε ἐν Βαβυλῶνι Χαλδαίους καὶ τοὺς
ἄλλους ἀστρολόγους ποιουμένους προρρήσεις ἐναργεῖς
ἐπιτυγχάνειν· τοὺς δὲ μὴ θαυμάζειν ὅταν
γένηταί τι τοιοῦτον, ἀλλ᾿ ἐὰν μὴ γένηται, κατὰ τὰς
ἰδίας ἑκάστων περιόδους αἰωνίοις κινήσεσι καὶ
φοραῖς ὡρισμέναις συντελουμένων.1 τὴν δ᾿ οὖν
λαμπάδα τοσαύτην ἐσχηκέναι λαμπρότητα καὶ δύναμιν
τοῦ φωτός, ὥστ᾿ ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς σκιὰς ποιεῖν
παραπλησίας τῇ σελήνῃ.
4Κατὰ δὲ τούτους τοὺς χρόνους Ἀρταξέρξης ὁ
βασιλεὺς ὁρῶν πάλιν ταραττομένην τὴν Ἑλλάδα
πρέσβεις ἀπέστειλε, παρακαλῶν συλλύσασθαι τοὺς
ἐμφυλίους πολέμους καὶ συνθέσθαι κοινὴν εἰρήνην
κατὰ τὰς ὁμολογίας, ἃς πρότερον ἦσαν πεποιημένοι.
τῶν δὲ Ἑλλήνων πάντων ἀσμένως προσδεξαμένων
τοὺς λόγους, συνέθεντο κοινὴν εἰρήνην αἱ πόλεις
πᾶσαι πλὴν Θηβαίων· Θηβαῖοι γὰρ μόνοι, τὴν
Βοιωτίαν ὑπὸ μίαν ἄγοντες συντέλειαν, οὐ προσεδέχθησαν
ὑπὸ τῶν Ἑλλήνων διὰ τὸ πᾶσιν ἀρέσκειν





1συντελουμένων Vogel, ἁπάντων συν. Rhodoman, τούτων συν.
Wurm, συντελουμένας Reiske: τῶν συντελουμένων.90Book XV

and irretrievably lost their supremacy. Some of the 372/1 b.c. students of nature ascribed the origin of the torch to natural causes, voicing the opinion that such apparitions occur of necessity at appointed times, and that in these matters the Chaldeans in Babylon and the other astrologers succeed in making accurate prophecies. These men, they say, are not surprised when such a phenomenon occurs, but rather if it does not, since each particular constellation has its own peculiar cycle and they complete these cycles through age-long movements in appointed courses. At any rate this torch had such brilliancy, they report, and its light such strength that it cast shadows on the earth similar to those cast by the moon.
At this time Artaxerxes the Persian King, seeing that the Greek world was again in a turmoil, sent ambassadors,1 calling upon the Greeks to settle their internecine wars and establish a common peace in accordance with the covenants2 they had formerly made. All the Greeks gladly received his proposal, and all the cities agreed to a general peace except Thebes3; for the Thebans alone, being engaged in bringing Boeotia under a single confederacy,4 were not admitted by the Greeks because of the general determination

1For the participation of the King see Dionysius Hal.
De Lysia Iudicium, 12; Xenophon, Hell. 6. 3. 12, 5. 1 f.2See chap. 38, which in many details is an anticipation of
this chapter.3See Xenophon, op. cit. 6. 3. 1–19 and for date Plutarch,
Agesilaüs, 28.4The Boeotian League such as it had been before the Peace of Antalcidas (for its constitution see Oxyr. Pap. 842 [vol. v], xi. 38–xii. 31) was set up anew, only much more strongly centralized and on a democratic basis. The executive was the college of boeotarchs no longer representative of separate states but elected from all Boeotian citizens and reduced in number from eleven to seven (chap. 52). The deciding power lay with the assembly of the Boeotian folk which met at Thebes but in which every citizen of a Boeotian state had a voice (cp. Book 16. 25. 1). Unlike Attica, each city had autonomy and the League army was composed of contingents from the separate states.91