Diodorus of Sicily

καὶ τῶν χωρίων οὐκ ὀλίγα τῶν ὑπὸ τοὺς πολεμίους
ὄντων ἀνεκτήσαντο. Ἀγαθοκλῆς δέ, βιβλιαφόρων
αὐτῷ παραγεγενημένων ἀπὸ τοῦ Τύνητος καὶ τὰ
πεπραγμένα τοῖς Φοίνιξι διασαφούντων, εὐθὺς ἀνέστρεψεν.
2ὡς δ᾿ ἀπέσχε τῶν πολεμίων σταδίους
διακοσίους, κατεστρατοπέδευσε καὶ τοῖς στρατιώταις
πυρὰ κάειν ἀπηγόρευσεν. χρησάμενος δὲ
νυκτοπορίᾳ προσέπεσεν ἅμ᾿ ἡμέρᾳ τοῖς τε προνομεύουσι
τὴν χώραν καὶ τοῖς ἐκτὸς τῆς παρεμβολῆς
ἄνευ τάξεως πλανωμένοις καὶ φονεύσας μὲν ὑπὲρ
δισχιλίους, ζωγρήσας δ᾿ οὐκ ὀλίγους πολλὰ πρὸς
3τὸ μέλλον ἐπλεονέκτησεν. οἱ γὰρ Καρχηδόνιοι τῆς
ἐκ Σικελίας προσγενομένης βοηθείας καὶ τῶν κατὰ
Λιβύην συμμάχων συναγωνιζομένων ἐδόκουν ὑπερέχειν
τῶν περὶ τὸν Ἀγαθοκλέα· τούτου δὲ τοῦ1
προτερήματος γενομένου πάλιν συνεστάλη τὰ φρονήματα
τῶν βαρβάρων. καὶ γὰρ Αἰλύμαν τὸν
βασιλέα τῶν Λιβύων ἀποστάτην γενόμενον ἐνίκησεν2
μάχῃ καὶ τόν τε δυνάστην καὶ πολλοὺς τῶν
βαρβάρων ἀνεῖλεν.3
Καὶ τὰ μὲν περὶ Σικελίαν καὶ Λιβύην ἐν τούτοις
ἦν.
19. Κατὰ δὲ τὴν Μακεδονίαν Κάσανδρος μὲν
βοηθήσας Αὐδολέοντι τῷ Παιόνων βασιλεῖ διαπολεμοῦντι
πρὸς Αὐταριάτας, τοῦτον μὲν ἐκ τῶν
κινδύνων ἐρρύσατο, τοὺς δὲ Αὐταριάτας σὺν τοῖς
ἀκολουθοῦσι παισὶ καὶ γυναιξὶν ὄντας εἰς δισμυρίους
κατῴκισεν παρὰ τὸ καλούμενον Ὀρβηλὸν4
1Fischer adds ἐπὶ before τοῦ προτερήματος, cp. Books 15.
35. 1; 16. 5. 2.2ἐνίκησεν editors: ἐνίκησαν.3ἀνεῖλεν editors: ἀνεῖλον.4Ὀρβηλὸν Wesseling: Ὀρβηδὸν RX, Ὀρβίταον F.190Book XX

of Tunis; and they recaptured many of the positions 310 b.c. that were in the hands of the enemy. But Agathocles, since dispatch bearers had come to him from Tunis and disclosed what the Phoenicians had done, at once turned back. When he was at a distance of about two hundred stades1 from the enemy, he pitched camp and forbade his soldiers to light fires. Then, making a night march, he fell at dawn upon those who were foraging in the country and those who were wandering outside their camp in disorder, and by killing over two thousand and taking captive no small number he greatly strengthened himself for the future. For the Carthaginians, now that their reinforcements from Sicily had arrived and that their Libyan allies were fighting along with them, seemed to be superior to Agathocles; but as soon as he gained this success, the confidence of the barbarians again waned. In fact, he defeated in battle Aelymas, the king of the Libyans, who had deserted him, and slew the king and many of the barbarians.
This was the situation of affairs in Sicily and Libya.2
19. In Macedonia,3 Cassander, going to the aid of Audoleon,4 king of the Paeonians, who was fighting against the Autariatae,5 freed the king from danger, but the Autariatae with the children and women who were following them, numbering in all twenty thousand, he settled beside the mountain called Orbelus.6
1About 23 miles.2Continued in chap. 29. 2.3Continued from Book 19. 105. 4.4Cp. Justin, 15. 2. 1. One of Audoleon’s daughters married Pyrrhus of Epirus (Plutarch, Pyrrhus, 9).5A strong Illyrian people living in the Dalmatian mountains.6On the border between Thrace and Macedonia.191