Diodorus of Sicily

Ἀλέξανδρος πυθόμενος περὶ τούτων ἔτι μᾶλλον
παρωξύνθη πολιορκῆσαι τὸ ὀχύρωμα καὶ διαμιλληθῆναι
τῇ τοῦ θεοῦ δόξῃ.
3Ἡ δὲ πέτρα τὸν μὲν περίβολον εἶχε σταδίων
ἑκατόν, τὸ δ᾿ ὕψος ἑκκαίδεκα, τὴν δ᾿ ἐπιφάνειαν
ὁμαλὴν καὶ πάντῃ περιφερῆ· καὶ τὸ μὲν πρὸς
μεσημβρίαν μέρος αὐτῆς προσέκλυζεν ὁ Ἰνδὸς
ποταμός, μέγιστος ὢν τῶν κατὰ τὴν Ἰνδικήν, τὰ
δ᾿ ἄλλα μέρη περιείχετο φάραγξι βαθείαις καὶ
4κρημνοῖς ἀπροσίτοις. τοῦ δὲ Ἀλεξάνδρου κατασκεψαμένου
τὴν δυσχωρίαν καὶ τὴν ἐκ βίας ἅλωσιν
ἀπογνόντος ἧκέν τις πρὸς αὐτὸν πρεσβύτης μετὰ
5δυεῖν υἱῶν. οὗτος δ᾿ ὢν πένης παντελῶς καὶ πολὺν
χρόνον ἐντεθραμμένος τοῖς τόποις κατῴκει μὲν ἔν
τινι σπηλαίῳ τρεῖς στιβάδας1 ἔχοντι κατὰ τὴν
πέτραν ἐντετμημένας, ἐν αἷς ὁ γέρων μετὰ τῶν
υἱῶν ἐναυλιζόμενος ἐμπειρίαν περιεπεποίητο τῶν
τόπων. οὗτος οὖν προσελθὼν τῷ βασιλεῖ καὶ τὰ
περὶ ἑαυτὸν δηλώσας ἐπηγγείλατο καθηγήσεσθαι
διὰ τῆς δυσχωρίας καὶ ποιήσειν αὐτὸν ὑπερδέξιον
γενέσθαι τῶν κατειλημμένων τὴν πέτραν βαρβάρων.
6Ὁ δὲ Ἀλέξανδρος ἐπαγγειλάμενος μεγάλας
δωρεὰς δώσειν καὶ τῷ πρεσβύτῃ χρησάμενος ὁδηγῷ
πρῶτον μὲν τὴν πάροδον τὴν εἰς τὴν πέτραν φέρουσαν
κατελάβετο καὶ μηδεμιᾶς οὔσης ἄλλης ἐξόδου
συνέκλεισε τοὺς βαρβάρους εἰς ἀβοήθητον πολιορκίαν·
ἔπειτα τῇ πολυχειρίᾳ χώσας τὴν φάραγγα
κατὰ τὴν ῥίζαν τῆς πέτρας, προσελθὼν ἐνεργῆ
πολιορκίαν συνεστήσατο, συνεχῶς ἐφ᾿ ἡμέρας ἑπτὰ
1Suidas quotes this passage, substituting the word προστιβάδας, which he glosses.366Book XVII

other divine signs, and this made Alexander even 327/6 b.c. more eager to capture the stronghold when he heard it, and so to rival the god’s reputation.1
The circumference of the “rock” was one hundred furlongs, and its height sixteen. Its surface was even and circular on all sides. Its southern side was washed by the Indus River, the largest of those in India, and on the other sides it was surrounded by deep gorges and sheer cliffs. Alexander surveyed these difficulties and decided that its forcible capture was impossible, but then there came to him an old man with two sons,2 He lived in extreme poverty and had for a long time supported himself in the region, occupying a cave in which three beds had been cut out of the rock. Here the old man camped with his sons, and had come to know the country intimately. When he appeared before the king, he told his story and offered to guide the king through the hills and bring him to a point where he would be above the people who occupied the rock.
Alexander promised him rich gifts.3 Using the old man as a guide, he first occupied the path which led up to the rock; since there was no other egress, he had thus enclosed the defenders in a hopeless siege. Then he put many hands to work filling up the chasm at the foot of the rock, drew near to it, and mounted a vigorous attack, assaulting continuously for seven





1Curtius, 8. 11. 2; Justin, 12. 7. 12. The tradition is rationalized by Arrian, 4. 28. 1–2.2Curtius, 8. 11. 3. Arrian (4. 29. 1) says “some of the neighbouring tribesmen.”3Curtius (8. 11. 4) says “eighty talents.”367