Diodorus of Sicily
80. Καινοποιηθείσης δὲ τῆς μάχης καὶ τῶν
Φοινίκων τῷ πλήθει περιχεομένων1 τοὺς Ἕλληνας
ἄφνω πολὺς ἐκ τοῦ περιέχοντος ὄμβρος κατερράγη
καὶ χαλάζης εὐμεγέθους πλῆθος, ἀστραπαί τε καὶ
βρονταὶ μετὰ πνευμάτων μεγάλων κατέσκηπτον·
καὶ τούτων ἁπάντων θυελλοφορουμένων τοῖς μὲν
Ἕλλησι κατὰ νώτου, τοῖς δὲ βαρβάροις κατὰ πρόσωπον
οἱ μὲν περὶ τὸν Τιμολέοντα τὸ σύμπτωμα
ῥᾳδίως ὑπέμενον, οἱ δὲ Φοίνικες τὸ μέγεθος τῆς
περιστάσεως φέρειν ἀδυνατοῦντες, ἅμα δὲ καὶ τῶν
Ἑλλήνων ἐπικειμένων, πρὸς φυγὴν ὥρμησαν.
2Πάντων δ᾿ ἐπὶ τὸν ποταμὸν τρεπομένων, ἀναμὶξ
ἱππέων τε καὶ πεζῶν, καὶ τῶν ἁρμάτων ἅμα τούτοις
φυρομένων οἱ μὲν ὑπ᾿ ἀλλήλων συμπατούμενοι καὶ
τοῖς τῶν συμμάχων ξίφεσι καὶ λόγχαις περιπειρόμενοι
τὴν συμφορὰν ἔσχον ἀβοήθητον, οἱ δ᾿ ὑπὸ
τῶν παρὰ τοῖς πολεμίοις ἱππέων εἰς τὸ τοῦ ποταμοῦ
ῥεῖθρον ἀγεληδὸν συνελαυνόμενοι καὶ κατὰ
3νώτου τὰς πληγὰς λαμβάνοντες ἀπέθνησκον. πολλοὶ
δὲ ἄνευ πολεμίας πληγῆς διεφθείροντο σωρευομένων
τῶν σωμάτων διά τε τὸν φόβον καὶ τὸ
πλῆθος καὶ διὰ τὰς ἐν τῷ ῥείθρῳ δυσχερείας. τὸ
δὲ μέγιστον, λάβρων γεγενημένων τῶν ὄμβρων ὁ
ποταμὸς βιαιοτέρῳ τῷ ῥεύματι καταφερόμενος πολλοὺς
ἐβάπτιζε καὶ μετὰ τῶν ὅπλων διανηχομένους
διέφθειρε.
4Τέλος δὲ τῶν Καρχηδονίων οἱ μὲν τὸν ἱερὸν
λόχον ἀναπληροῦντες καὶ τὸν μὲν ἀριθμὸν ὄντες
δισχίλιοι καὶ πεντακόσιοι, ταῖς δ᾿ ἀρεταῖς καὶ δόξαις
ἔτι δὲ ταῖς οὐσίαις πρωτεύοντες ἅπαντες ἀγωνισάμενοι
5λαμπρῶς κατεκόπησαν. τῶν δ᾿ ἄλλων τῶν
συστρατευομένων αὐτοῖς ἀπέθανον πλείους τῶν μυρίων,
1So Wesseling: περιεχομένων.60Book XVI
80. As the battle was renewed, the Phoenicians 340/39 b.c. were overwhelming the Greeks with their superior numbers when, suddenly, from the heavens sheets of rain broke and a storm of great hailstones, while lightning flashed and thunder roared and the wind blew in fierce gusts. All of this tempest buffeted the backs of the Greeks but struck the faces of the barbarians, so that, though Timoleon’s soldiers were not much inconvenienced by the affair, the Phoenicians could not stand the force of circumstances, and as the Greeks continued to attack them, they broke into flight.
As all sought the river together—horse and foot intermingled, while the chariots added to the confusion—some perished helplessly trodden under foot or pierced by the swords or lances of their comrades, while others were herded by Timoleon’s cavalry into the bed of the river and were struck down from behind. Many died without an enemy’s stroke as the bodies piled up in the panic. There was crowding and it was difficult to keep one’s feet in the stream. Worst of all, as the rain came down heavily, the river swept downstream as a raging torrent and carried the men with it, drowning them as they struggled to swim in their heavy armour.
In the end, even the Carthaginians who composed the Sacred Battalion,1 twenty-five hundred in number and drawn from the ranks of those citizens who were distinguished for valour and reputation as well as for wealth, were all cut down after a gallant struggle. In the other elements of their army, more than ten



1This unit is mentioned again by Diodorus in another connection, Book 20. 10. 6.61