Diodorus of Sicily
3Πρῶτον μὲν γὰρ ἁρμόζον1 τῷ σώματι κατεσκευάσθη
χρυσοῦν σφυρήλατον ἀγγεῖον2 καὶ τοῦτ᾿ ἀνὰ
μέσον ἐπλήρωσαν ἀρωμάτων τῶν ἅμα δυναμένων
τὴν εὐωδίαν καὶ τὴν διαμονὴν παρέχεσθαι τῷ σώματι.
4ἐπάνω δὲ τῆς θήκης ἐπετέθειτο3 καλυπτὴρ
χρυσοῦς, ἁρμόζων ἀκριβῶς καὶ περιλαμβάνων τὴν
ἀνωτάτω περιφέρειαν. ταύτης δ᾿ ἐπάνω περιέκειτο
φοινικὶς διαπρεπὴς χρυσοποίκιλτος, παρ᾿ ἣν ἔθεσαν
τὰ τοῦ μετηλλαχότος ὅπλα, βουλόμενοι συνοικειοῦν
τὴν ὅλην φαντασίαν ταῖς προκατειργασμέναις
5πράξεσι. μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα παρέστησαν τὴν τοῦτο
κομιοῦσαν ἁρμάμαξαν, ἧς κατεσκεύαστο κατὰ μὲν
τὴν κορυφὴν καμάρα χρυσῆ, ἔχουσα φολίδα λιθοκόλλητον,
ἧς ἦν τὸ μὲν πλάτος ὀκτὼ πηχῶν, τὸ
δὲ μῆκος δώδεκα, ὑπὸ δὲ τὴν ὑπωροφίαν παρ᾿ ὅλον
τὸ ἔργον θριγκὸς4 χρυσοῦς, τῷ σχήματι τετράγωνος,
ἔχων τραγελάφων προτομὰς ἐκτύπους, ἐξ ὧν
ἤρτηντο κρίκοι χρυσοῖ διπάλαιστοι, δι᾿ ὧν κατακεκρέμαστο
στέμμα πομπικὸν χρώμασι παντοδαποῖς
6διαπρεπῶς κατηνθισμένον. ἐπὶ δὲ τῶν
ἄκρων ὑπῆρχε θύσανος δικτυωτὸς ἔχων εὐμεγέθεις
κώδωνας, ὥστ᾿ ἐκ πολλοῦ διαστήματος προσπίπτειν
τὸν ψόφον τοῖς ἐγγίζουσι. κατὰ δὲ τὰς
τῆς καμάρας γωνίας ἐφ᾿ ἑκάστης ἦν πλευρᾶς Νίκη
χρυσῆ τροπαιοφόρος. τὸ δ᾿ ἐκδεχόμενον τὴν καμάραν
περίστυλον χρυσοῦν ὑπῆρχεν, ἔχον Ἰωνικὰ
κιονόκρανα. ἐντὸς δὲ τοῦ περιστύλου δίκτυον ἦν
χρυσοῦν, τὸ πάχος τῇ πλοκῇ δακτυλιαῖον καὶ



1ἁρμόζον transposed from after σφυρήλατον by Fischer
(app. crit.).2ἀγγεῖον conjecturally added by Fischer (app. crit.).
Other editors suggest λέκτρον, κρωσσίον, φέρετρον, ἄγγος.3ἐπετέθειτο Dindorf: ἐπετίθετο.4θριγκὸς Wachsmuth, θρᾶνος Ussing: θρόνος.88Book XVIII
First they prepared a coffin of the proper size for 322 b.c. the body, made of hammered gold, and the space about the body they filled with spices such as could make the body sweet smelling and incorruptible. Upon this chest there had been placed a cover of gold, matching it to a nicety, and fitting about its upper rim. Over this was laid a magnificent purple robe embroidered with gold, beside which they placed the arms of the deceased, wishing the design of the whole to be in harmony with his accomplishments. Then they set up next to it the covered carriage that was to carry it. At the top of the carriage was built a vault of gold, eight cubits wide and twelve long, covered with overlapping scales set with precious stones.1 Beneath the roof all along the work was a rectangular cornice of gold, from which projected heads of goat-stags in high relief.2 Gold rings two palms broad were suspended from these, and through the rings there ran a festive garland beautifully decorated in bright colours of all kinds. At the ends there were tassels of network suspending large bells, so that any who were approaching heard the sound from a great distance. On each corner of the vault on each side was a golden figure of Victory holding a trophy. The colonnade that supported the vault was of gold with Ionic capitals. Within the colonnade was a golden net, made of cords the thickness




1The chamber was, in round numbers, twelve by eighteen feet. For the roof of scales compare that of the Monument of Lysicrates in Athens.2Or, reading θρᾶνος for θριγκός, “Beneath the roof and covering the entire chamber there was a rectangular ceiling (?) of gold, from the edges of which projected heads of goat-stags in high relief.”89