Diodorus of Sicily
2μισθοφόρων1 ἐπιθέσθαι τοῖς πολεμίοις. ὁ δὲ Μέμνων
ὁρῶν τὸν Ἐφιάλτην πρὸς ἀρετὴν ὁρμώμενον καὶ
μεγάλας ἔχων ἐλπίδας ἐν αὐτῷ διὰ τὴν ἀνδρείαν
καὶ τὴν τοῦ σώματος ῥώμην συνεχώρησεν αὐτῷ
3πράττειν ὃ βούλοιτο. ὁ δὲ δισχιλίους τῶν μισθοφόρων
ἐπιλέκτους ἀναλαβὼν καὶ τοῖς ἡμίσεσι διαδοὺς
δᾷδας ἡμμένας τοὺς δ᾿ ἄλλους ἀντιτάξας τοῖς
πολεμίοις ἄφνω τὰς πύλας πάσας ἀνεπέτασεν.
ἅμα δ᾿ ἡμέρᾳ μετὰ τούτων ἐκχυθεὶς τοῖς μὲν μηχανήμασιν
ἐνῆκε πῦρ καὶ παραχρῆμα πολλὴν
4συνέβη γενέσθαι φλόγα, τῶν δ᾿ ἄλλων ἐν βαθείᾳ
φάλαγγι πεπυκνωμένων αὐτὸς προηγεῖτο καὶ τοῖς
ἐκβοηθοῦσι Μακεδόσιν ἐπέρραξεν. ὁ δὲ βασιλεὺς
κατανοήσας τὸ γινόμενον τοὺς μὲν προμάχους τῶν
Μακεδόνων πρώτους ἔταξε, ἐφέδρους δ᾿2 ἔστησε
τοὺς ἐπιλέκτους· ἐπὶ δὲ τούτοις τρίτους ἐπέταξεν
ἑτέρους τοὺς ταῖς ἀνδραγαθίαις ὑπεράγοντας. αὐτὸς
δὲ πρὸ πάντων τούτων ἡγούμενος ὑπέστη τοὺς
πολεμίους, δόξαντας διὰ τὸ βάρος ἀκαταγωνίστους
εἶναι. ἐξέπεμψε δὲ καὶ τοὺς κατασβέσοντας τὴν
φλόγα καὶ βοηθήσοντας ταῖς μηχαναῖς.
5Ἅμα δὲ παρ᾿ ἀμφοτέροις τῆς τε βοῆς ἐξαισίου
γινομένης καὶ τῶν σαλπίγγων σημαινουσῶν τὸ
πολεμικὸν μέγας ἀγὼν συνέστη διὰ τὰς ἀρετὰς τῶν
ἀγωνιζομένων καὶ τὴν ὑπερβολὴν τῆς φιλοτιμίας.
6τὸ μὲν οὖν πῦρ ἐκώλυσαν οἱ Μακεδόνες ἐπινεμηθῆναι,
κατὰ δὲ τὴν μάχην ἐπλεονέκτουν οἱ περὶ τὸν

1So MSS.: μετὰ τῶν μισθοφόρων Rhodoman and Wesseling
(cp. Book 11. 31. 2).2ἐφέδρους δ᾿ Dindorf, τούτοις δ᾿ ἐφέδρους Reiske; τοὺς δ᾿ ἐφέδρους RX, πρὸς τοὺς ἐφέδρους δὲ F.190Book XVII

on the enemy.1 Memnon recognized that Ephialtes 334/3 b.c. was eager to prove himself and, having great hopes of him because of his courage and bodily strength, allowed him to do as he wished. Accordingly he collected two thousand picked men and, giving half of them lighted torches and forming the others so as to meet the enemy, he suddenly threw all the gates wide open. It was daybreak, and sallying forth with his band he employed the one group to set fire to the siege engines, causing a great conflagration to flame up at once,2 while he personally led the rest deployed in a dense phalanx many ranks deep and charged the Macedonians as they issued forth to help extinguish the fire. When the king saw what was happening, he placed the best fighters of the Macedonians in front and stationed picked men in reserve. Behind these he posted a third group also consisting of others who had a good record for stout fighting. He himself3 at the head of all took command and made a stand against the enemy, who had supposed that because of their mass they would be invincible. He also sent men out to extinguish the fire and to rescue the siege engines.
As violent shouts arose at the same time on both sides and the trumpets sounded the attack, a terrific contest ensued because of the valour of the contestants and their consummate fighting spirit. The Macedonians prevented the fire from spreading, but Ephialtes’s men had the advantage in the battle,





1Arrian mentions two sallies of the besieged, one or the other of which may be identified with this (1. 21. 5–6; 22. 1–3).2Arrian, 1. 22. 1.3Arrian, 1. 21. 5.191