Diodorus of Sicily
6ποιῆσαι τῶν τηρούντων τὰς παρόδους. ὁ δὲ βασιλεὺς
μεγάλαις δωρεαῖς τιμήσειν ἐπαγγειλάμενος
τὸν ἄνδρα τούτου καθηγουμένου διῆλθεν ἐπιπόνως
τὴν ὀρεινὴν νυκτὸς πολλὴν μὲν πατήσας χιόνα,
πᾶσαν δὲ κρημνώδη χώραν περάσας, χαράδραις
7βαθείαις καὶ πολλαῖς φάραγξι διειλημμένην. ἐπιφανεὶς
δὲ ταῖς προφυλακαῖς τῶν πολεμίων τοὺς μὲν
πρώτους κατέκοψε, τοὺς δ᾿ ἐπὶ τῆς δευτέρας
φυλακῆς τεταγμένους ἐζώγρησε, τοὺς δὲ τρίτους
τρεψάμενος ἐκράτησε τῶν παρόδων καὶ τοὺς πλείστους
τῶν περὶ τὸν Ἀριοβαρζάνην ἀπέκτεινε.
69. Μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα ἐπὶ τὴν Περσέπολιν προάγων
κατὰ τὴν ὁδὸν ἐπιστολὴν ἐκομίσατο παρὰ τοῦ κυριεύοντος
τῆς πόλεως Τιριδάτου. ἐν ταύτῃ δ᾿ ἦν
γεγραμμένον ὅτι1 ἐὰν παραγενόμενος φθάσῃ τοὺς
ἐπιβαλλομένους διατηρῆσαι Δαρείῳ τὴν Περσέπολιν,
κύριος ἔσται ταύτης ὑπ᾿ αὐτοῦ παραδοθείσης.
2διόπερ ὁ Ἀλέξανδρος κατὰ σπουδὴν ἦγε τὴν δύναμιν
καὶ τὸν Ἀράξην ποταμὸν ζεύξας διεβίβασε τοὺς
στρατιώτας.
Προάγοντος δὲ τοῦ βασιλέως θέαμα παράδοξον
καὶ δεινὸν ὤφθη, μισοπονηρίαν μὲν περιέχον κατὰ
τῶν πραξάντων, ἔλεον δὲ καὶ συμπάθειαν ἐπιφέρον
3πρὸς τοὺς ἀνήκεστα πεπονθότας. ἀπήντησαν γὰρ
αὐτῷ μεθ᾿ ἱκετηριῶν Ἕλληνες ὑπὸ τῶν πρότερον
βασιλέων ἀνάστατοι γεγονότες, ὀκτακόσιοι μὲν
σχεδὸν τὸν ἀριθμὸν ὄντες, ταῖς δ᾿ ἡλικίαις οἱ



1ὅτι supplied by Fischer.314Book XVII

the rear of the Persians guarding the pass. The king 330/29 b.c. promised that he would load him with gifts,1 and under his direction Alexander did make his way over the mountain at night struggling through deep snow.2 The route crossed a very broken country, seamed by deep ravines and many gorges. Coming into sight of the enemy outposts, he cut down their first line and captured those who were stationed in the second position, then routed the third line and won the pass, and killed most of the troops of Ariobarzanes.3
69. Now he set out on the road to Persepolis, and while he was on the road received a letter from the governor of the city, whose name was Tiridates.4 It stated that if he arrived ahead of those who planned to defend the city for Dareius, he would become master of it, for Tiridates would betray it to him. Accordingly Alexander led his army on by forced marches; he bridged the Araxes River and so brought his men to the other bank.5
At this point in his advance the king was confronted by a strange and dreadful sight, one to provoke indignation against the perpetrators and sympathetic pity for the unfortunate victims.6 He was met by Greeks bearing branches of supplication. They had been carried away from their homes by previous kings of Persia and were about eight hundred in





1Curtius, 5. 7. 12, states that he did actually receive thirty talents.2Curtius, 5. 4. 18. Arrian (3. 18. 5) states that this force included five squadrons of heavy cavalry and 4500 Macedonian hoplites.3For the whole story, Curtius, 5. 4; Plutarch, Alexander, 37; Arrian, 3. 18. 1–9.4“Custos pecuniae regiae,” Curtius, 5. 5. 2.5Curtius, 5. 5. 4.6This story is told at somewhat greater length by Curtius (5. 5. 5–24), as well as by Justin (11. 14.11–12). It is not given by Plutarch or Arrian.315