Diodorus of Sicily

ἀποτυχοῦσα τῆς κρίσεως ἀπῄει μετὰ κλαυθμοῦ,
καταρρήξασα τὸ περὶ τὴν κεφαλὴν διάδημα καὶ τὰς
τρίχας σπαράσσουσα, καθαπερεί τινος συμφορᾶς
μεγάλης προσηγγελμένης· ἡ δὲ ἐπὶ τῇ νίκῃ περιχαρὴς
ἀπῄει πρὸς τὴν πυράν, στεφανουμένη μὲν
μίτραις ὑπὸ τῶν οἰκείων γυναικῶν, κεκοσμημένη δὲ
διαπρεπῶς ὥσπερ εἴς τινα γάμον προεπέμπετο ὑπὸ
τῶν συγγενῶν, ᾀδόντων ὕμνον εἰς τὴν ἀρετὴν αὐτῆς.
4ὡς δὲ ἐγγὺς ἐγενήθη τῆς πυρᾶς, περιαιρουμένη
τὸν κόσμον ἑαυτῆς διεδίδου τοῖς οἰκείοις καὶ
φίλοις, ὡς ἂν εἴποι τις, καταλείπουσα τοῖς ἀγαπῶσι
μνημεῖον. ὁ δὲ κόσμος ἦν περὶ μὲν τὰς χεῖρας
δακτυλίων1 πλῆθος ἐνδεδεμένων λίθοις πολυτελέσι
καὶ διηλλαγμένοις τοῖς χρώμασι, περὶ δὲ τὴν
κεφαλὴν χρυσῶν ἀστερίσκων2 οὐκ ὀλίγος ἀριθμὸς
παντοδαποῖς λίθοις διειλημμένων,3 περὶ δὲ τὸν
τράχηλον ὅρμων πλῆθος, τῶν μὲν ἐλασσόνων, τῶν
δ᾿ ἐκ τοῦ κατ᾿ ὀλίγον ἀεὶ καθ᾿ ὑπέρθεσιν μειζόνων.
5τὸ δὲ τελευταῖον ἀσπασαμένη τοὺς οἰκείους ὑπὸ
τἀδελφοῦ μὲν ἐπὶ τὴν πυρὰν ἀνεβιβάσθη, ὑπὸ δὲ
τοῦ συνδραμόντος ἐπὶ τὴν θέαν πλήθους θαυμασθεῖσα
6κατέστρεψεν ἡρωικῶς τὸν βίον· ἡ μὲν γὰρ
δύναμις ἐν τοῖς ὅπλοις πᾶσα πρὶν ἅπτεσθαι τὴν
πυρὰν τρὶς περιῆλθεν, αὐτὴ4 δὲ τἀνδρὶ παρακλιθεῖσα
καὶ κατὰ τὴν τοῦ πυρὸς ὁρμὴν οὐδεμίαν φωνὴν
ἀγεννῆ προεμένη προεκαλέσατο τῶν ὁρώντων
τοὺς μὲν εἰς ἔλεον, τοὺς δὲ εἰς ὑπερβολὴν ἐπαίνων.
οὐ μὴν ἀλλ᾿ ἔνιοι τῶν Ἑλλήνων ἐπετίμων
τοῖς νομίμοις ὡς ἀγρίοις οὖσι καὶ χαλεποῖς.
7Ὁ δ᾿ Εὐμενὴς ἀπὸ τῆς τῶν τετελευτηκότων
ταφῆς γενόμενος ἀνέζευξεν ἐκ τῶν Παραιτάκων

1τε after δακτυλίων deleted by Dindorf.2ἀστερίσκων Wesseling: ἀστερισμῶν3διειλημμένων Wesseling: διειλημμένος.4αὐτὴ Dindorf: αὕτη.322Book XIX

happened, the one who had lost the decision departed 317 b.c. weeping, rending the wreath that was about her head and tearing her hair, just as if some great disaster had been announced to her; but the other, rejoicing in her victory, went off to the pyre crowned with fillets that her maidservants bound upon her head, and magnificently dressed as if for a wedding she was escorted by her kinsfolk, who sang a hymn in honour of her virtue. As she drew near the pyre, she stripped off her ornaments and gave them to her servants and friends, leaving keepsakes, as one might say, to those who loved her. These were the ornaments: upon her hands a number of rings set with precious stones of various colours, about her head no small number of golden stars interspersed with stones of every kind, and about her neck numerous necklaces, some of them smaller, the others each a little larger in a constant progression. Finally, after taking leave of the household, she was assisted to mount the pyre by her brother, and while the multitude that had gathered for the spectacle watched with amazement, she ended her life in heroic fashion. For the entire army under arms marched three times about the pyre before it was lighted, and she herself, reclining beside her husband and letting no ignoble cry escape her during the onset of the fire, stirred some of those who beheld her to pity, others to extravagant praise. Nevertheless some of the Greeks denounced the custom as barbarous and cruel.
When Eumenes had completed the burial of the dead, he moved the army from among the Paraetaceni




323