Diodorus of Sicily

οὐσίας· ἐν οἷς ἦν καὶ Φωκίων ὁ ἐπ᾿ Ἀντιπάτρου
τὴν τῶν ὅλων ἀρχὴν ἐσχηκώς.
66. Οὗτοι μὲν οὖν ἐκβληθέντες ἐκ τῆς πόλεως
κατέφυγον πρὸς Ἀλέξανδρον τὸν Πολυπέρχοντος
καὶ διὰ τούτου τὴν σωτηρίαν ἑαυτοῖς πορίζειν
ἐφιλοτιμοῦντο. προσδεχθέντες δὲ ὑπ᾿ αὐτοῦ φιλοφρόνως
γράμματα ἔλαβον πρὸς τὸν πατέρα Πολυπέρχοντα,
ὅπως μηδὲν πάθωσιν οἱ περὶ Φωκίωνα,
τἀκείνου πεφρονηκότες καὶ νῦν ἐπαγγελλόμενοι
2πάντα συμπράξειν. ἀποστείλαντος δὲ καὶ τοῦ
δήμου πρεσβείαν πρὸς τὸν Πολυπέρχοντα τὴν
κατηγοροῦσαν μὲν τῶν περὶ Φωκίωνα, παρακαλοῦσαν
δὲ τὴν Μουνυχίαν αὐτοῖς δοῦναι μετὰ τῆς
αὐτονομίας, ὁ Πολυπέρχων ἔσπευδε μὲν φρουρᾷ
κατέχειν τὸν Πειραιᾶ διὰ τὸ πολλὰ δύνασθαι χρησιμεύειν
τὸν λιμένα πρὸς τὰς ἐν τοῖς πολέμοις χρείας·
αἰσχυνόμενος δ᾿ ἐναντία πράττειν τῷ ὑφ᾿ ἑαυτοῦ
γεγραμμένῳ διαγράμματι καὶ νομίζων ἄπιστος
κριθήσεσθαι παρὰ τοῖς Ἕλλησιν ἐὰν εἰς τὴν ἐπιφανεστάτην
παρανομήσῃ πόλιν, μετενόησε τῇ
3γνώμῃ. διακούσας δὲ τῶν πρέσβεων τοῖς μὲν παρὰ
τοῦ δήμου πρεσβεύουσι φιλανθρώπως κεχαρισμένας
ἔδωκεν ἀποκρίσεις, τοὺς δὲ περὶ Φωκίωνα συλλαβὼν
ἀπέστειλε δεσμίους εἰς τὰς Ἀθήνας, διδοὺς
τὴν ἐξουσίαν τῷ δήμῳ εἴτε βούλεται θανατοῦν εἴτ᾿
ἀπολῦσαι τῶν ἐγκλημάτων.
4Συναχθείσης οὖν ἐκκλησίας ἐν ταῖς Ἀθήναις καὶ
προτεθείσης κρίσεως τοῖς περὶ τὸν Φωκίωνα πολλοὶ
τῶν τε φυγάδων γεγονότων ἐπ᾿ Ἀντιπάτρου
καὶ τῶν ἀντιπολιτευομένων κατηγόρησαν αὐτῶν


192Book XVIII

property for others, among whom was Phocion, who 318 b.c. had held supreme authority under Antipater.
66. These men, on being driven from the city, fled to Alexander the son of Polyperchon and strove to secure safety for themselves through his good offices. They were well received by him and given letters to his father, Polyperchon, urging that Phocion and his friends should suffer no ill, since they had favoured his interests and now promised to co-operate with him in every way. The Athenian people also sent an embassy to Polyperchon laying charges against Phocion and praying Polyperchon to restore to them Munychia and their autonomy. Now Polyperchon was eager to occupy the Piraeus with a garrison because the port could be of great service to him in meeting the needs of the wars; but since he was ashamed of acting contrary to the edict that he himself had issued, believing that he would be held faithless among the Greeks if he broke his word to the most famous city, he changed his purpose. When he had heard the embassies,1 he gave a favourable answer in friendly terms to the one sent by the people, but he arrested Phocion and his companions and sent them bound to Athens, granting the people the authority either to put them to death or to dismiss the charges as they pleased.
When an assembly was called together in Athens and the case of Phocion and his fellows was brought forward, many of those who had been exiles in the days of Antipater2 and many of those who had been

1This audience is described in some detail by Plutarch
(Phocion, 33. 5–7).2Cp. chap. 18. 4–5. These exiles had been restored by Polyperchon’s decree (chap. 56). According to Plutarch (Phocion, 32. 2), one important purpose of the restoration of the exiles was to make possible the ruin of Phocion. For the trial and death of Phocion cp. Plutarch, Phocion, 34–37.193