Diodorus of Sicily

Ἀχραδινῆς πορευθεὶς εἰς τὴν ἀγορὰν κατεστρατοπέδευσεν,
5οὐδενὸς τολμῶντος ἐπεξιέναι. ὁ δὲ σύμπας
ἀριθμὸς ἦν τῶν μετὰ Δίωνος στρατιωτῶν οὐκ
ἐλάττους τῶν πεντακισμυρίων. οὗτοι δὲ πάντες
ἐστεφανωμένοι κατῆλθον εἰς τὴν πόλιν προηγουμένου
τοῦ τε Δίωνος καὶ τοῦ Μεγακλέους καὶ μετὰ
τούτων τριάκοντα Συρακοσίων, οἳ μόνοι τῶν κατὰ
τὴν Πελοπόννησον φυγάδων Συρακοσίοις μετασχεῖν
τῶν κινδύνων1 ἠθέλησαν.
11. Τῆς δὲ πόλεως πάσης μετημφιεσμένης ἀντὶ
τῆς δουλείας τὴν ἐλευθερίαν καὶ τὸ σκυθρωπὸν τῆς
τυραννίδος εἰς πανηγυρικὴν ἱλαρότητα τῆς τύχης
ἀγούσης πᾶσα οἰκία θυσιῶν καὶ χαρᾶς ἔγεμε, τῶν
ἰδιωτῶν ἐπὶ ταῖς ἰδίαις ἑστίαις θυμιώντων καὶ περὶ
μὲν τῶν παρόντων ἀγαθῶν εὐχαριστούντων τοῖς
θεοῖς, περὶ δὲ τῶν μελλόντων εὐχὰς ἀγαθὰς ποιουμένων.
ἐγένετο δὲ καὶ τῶν γυναικῶν ἐπὶ ταῖς
ἀνελπίστοις εὐημερίαις ὀλολυγμὸς πολὺς καὶ καθ᾿
2ἅπασαν τὴν πόλιν συνδρομαί. οὐδεὶς δ᾿ ἦν ἐλεύθερος,
οὐ δοῦλος, οὐ ξένος, ὃς οὐκ ἔσπευδεν ἰδεῖν
τὸν Δίωνα, καὶ τὴν ἀρετὴν τοῦ ἀνδρὸς πάντες
ἀπεδέχοντο μειζόνως ἢ κατ᾿ ἄνθρωπον. καὶ τοῦτ᾿
εὐλόγως ἔπασχον διὰ τὸ μέγεθος καὶ παράδοξον
τῆς μεταβολῆς· πεντηκονταετοῦς γὰρ δουλείας πεπειραμένοι
καὶ τῆς ἐλευθερίας διὰ τὸν χρόνον ἐπιλελησμένοι
δι᾿ ἑνὸς ἀνδρὸς ἀρετὴν ἀπελύθησαν τῆς
συμφορᾶς.
3Διονύσιος δὲ κατὰ τούτους τοὺς καιροὺς αὐτὸς



1τὸν κίνδυνον P.268Book XVI

Achradina1 encamped in the market-place, no one 357/6 b.c. daring to come out against him. The whole number of the soldiers with Dion was not less than fifty thousand.2 All of these with garlands on their heads came down to the city under the leadership of Dion and Megacles and with them thirty3 Syracusans who alone of the exiles in the Peloponnese were willing to share the battles with their fellow Syracusans.
11. Now that all the city had put on the garb of freedom in exchange for that of slavery and that fortune had changed the sullen looks of the tyranny to festival gaiety, every house was filled with sacrificing and rejoicing, as the citizens burnt incense on their own hearths, thanked the gods for their present blessings, and offered hopeful prayers for blessings to come. The women too raised great shouts of joy for the unexpected good fortune and gathered together in throngs throughout the whole city. There was no freeman, no slave, no stranger who did not hasten to gaze upon Dion, and all applauded the man’s valour in terms too exalted for a mere mortal.4 And they had good reason for such feelings because of the magnitude and unexpected nature of the change; for after having experienced fifty years5 of slavery and forgotten the meaning of freedom through the lapse of time, they were suddenly released from their misfortune by the valour of a single man.
Dionysius himself at this time chanced to be




1See Plutarch’s account in Dion, 28–29. Achradina (ibid.
29. 1) is an extension of the city, covering the eastern part of
the plateau of Epipolae.2See Plutarch, Dion, 27. 3, who says five thousand, which is undoubtedly too low an estimate as Diodorus’ is too high. See Hackforth, Cambridge Ancient History, 6. 278.3Twenty-five is the number given by Plutarch, Dion, 22. 4.4ὥσπερ ἱεράν τινα καὶ θεοπρεπῆ πομπήν (Plutarch, Dion, 28. 3) and προστρεπομένων ὥσπερ θεὸν κατευχαῖς (ibid. 29. 1).5Forty-eight in Plutarch, Dion, 28. 3, 405–357 b.c.269