Diodorus of Sicily

οἱ γὰρ πλεῖστοι φθάσαντες ἐξεπήδησαν
ἐκ τῶν οἰκιῶν εἰς τοὺς μετεώρους τόπους τῆς
πόλεως· πρὸς δὲ τούτοις τὸ μὴ πλινθίνας εἶναι τὰς
οἰκίας, ἀλλὰ λιθίνας καὶ διὰ τοῦτο τοὺς ἐπὶ τὰ
8στέγη καταφυγόντας ἀσφαλῶς διασωθῆναι. ὅμως
δὲ τηλικούτων ἀτυχημάτων γενομένων σώματα μὲν
διεφθάρη πλείω τῶν πεντακοσίων, οἰκίαι δὲ αἱ μὲν
τελέως ἔπεσον, αἱ δὲ διεσείσθησαν.
Καὶ τὰ μὲν περὶ τὴν Ῥόδον συμβάντα τοιοῦτον
ἔσχε τὸν κίνδυνον.
46. Ἀντίγονος δὲ χειμάζων ἐν τῇ Μηδίᾳ καὶ
πυθόμενος Πίθωνα πολλοὺς τῶν ἐν τῇ χειμασίᾳ
στρατιωτῶν ἐπαγγελίαις καὶ δωρεαῖς ἰδίους κατασκευάζειν
καὶ διανοεῖσθαι νεωτερίζειν, τὴν μὲν
ἰδίαν προαίρεσιν ἐπεκρύψατο, προσποιηθεὶς δὲ ἀπιστεῖν
τοῖς διαβάλλουσι, τούτοις μὲν πολλῶν ἀκουόντων
ἐπετίμησεν ὡς διιστάνουσι τὴν φιλίαν, πρὸς
δὲ τοὺς ἐκτὸς διέδωκε λόγον ὅτι μέλλει καταλιπεῖν
τῶν ἄνω σατραπειῶν στρατηγὸν Πίθωνα καὶ δύναμιν
2ἱκανὴν τὴν παρέξουσαν τὴν ἀσφάλειαν. ἔγραψε
δὲ καὶ πρὸς αὐτὸν ἐπιστολήν, ἀξιῶν ἥκειν τὴν
ταχίστην, ὅπως κατὰ πρόσωπον περὶ τῶν ἀναγκαίων
κοινολογησάμενος ταχέως τὴν ἐπὶ θάλασσαν
κατάβασιν ποιήσηται. ταῦτα δ᾿ ἐμηχανήσατο
σπεύδων τῆς μὲν ἀληθοῦς ὑποψίας αὐτὸν ἀποστῆσαι,
πεῖσαι δ᾿ ὡς σατράπην καταλειφθησόμενον
ἐλθεῖν εἰς χεῖρας· μετὰ βίας γὰρ συλλαβεῖν οὐ
ῥᾴδιον ἦν ἄνδρα καὶ παρ᾿ Ἀλεξάνδρῳ προαγωγῆς
δι᾿ ἀρετὴν τετευχότα καὶ κατ᾿ ἐκεῖνον τὸν καιρὸν
σατράπην μὲν ὄντα τῆς Μηδίας, πεπολιτευμένον δὲ
3πρὸς ἅπαν τὸ στρατόπεδον. ὁ δὲ Πίθων ἐτύγχανε
μὲν ἐν τοῖς ἐσχάτοις μέρεσι τῆς Μηδίας χειμάζων
354Book XIX

most of the people escaped in time from their houses 316 b.c. to the higher parts of the city; and also that the houses were not constructed of sun-dried brick but of stone and that for this reason those who took refuge upon the roofs were safe. Yet in this great disaster more than five hundred persons lost their lives, while some houses collapsed completely and others were badly shaken.
Such was the disaster which befell Rhodes.
46. When Antigonus,1 who was wintering in Media, was informed that Pithon2 was winning the support of many of the soldiers in the winter quarters by promises and gifts and that he planned to revolt, he concealed his own intentions and, pretending not to believe those who were spreading the charges, he rebuked them, in the hearing of many, for trying to disrupt his friendship, and caused a report to be spread abroad that he was about to leave Pithon as general of the upper satrapies with an army sufficient for their safety. He even wrote to Pithon himself a letter asking him to come as soon as possible, so that he might discuss the necessary matters with him in person and then quickly make his journey to the sea. He devised this plan because he wished to prevent Pithon from suspecting the truth and to persuade him to come within reach on the assumption that he was about to be left behind as satrap; for it was no easy matter to arrest a man by force who had gained preferment for merit while serving under Alexander and who at that very time was satrap of Media and had curried favour with the entire army. Pithon, who was wintering in the most distant parts of Media, had


1Continued from chap. 44. 5.2For Pithon’s character cp. Book 18. 7. 4.355