Diodorus of Sicily

Ἱερώνυμον μὲν τὸν τὰς ἱστορίας γράψαντα
μετεπέμψατο, φίλον ὄντα καὶ πολίτην Εὐμενοῦς
τοῦ Καρδιανοῦ τοῦ συμπεφευγότος εἰς τὸ χωρίον
τὸ καλούμενον Νῶρα. τοῦτον δὲ μεγάλαις δωρεαῖς
προκαλεσάμενος ἐξαπέστειλε πρεσβευτὴν πρὸς τὸν
Εὐμενῆ, παρακαλῶν τῆς μὲν περὶ Καππαδοκίαν
μάχης γενομένης πρὸς αὐτὸν ἐπιλαθέσθαι, γενέσθαι
δὲ φίλον καὶ σύμμαχον αὐτῷ καὶ λαβεῖν δωρεὰς
πολλαπλασίους ὧν πρότερον ἦν ἐσχηκὼς καὶ σατραπείαν
μείζονα καὶ καθόλου πρωτεύοντα τῶν παρ᾿
ἑαυτοῦ φίλων κοινωνὸν ἔσεσθαι τῆς ὅλης ἐπιβολῆς.
5εὐθὺς δὲ καὶ τῶν φίλων συναγαγὼν συνέδριον καὶ
περὶ τῆς τῶν ὅλων ἐπιβολῆς κοινωσάμενος διέγραψε
τῶν ἀξιολόγων φίλων οἷς μὲν σατραπείας,
οἷς δὲ στρατηγίας· πᾶσι δὲ μεγάλας ἐλπίδας ὑποθεὶς
προθύμους κατεσκεύασε πρὸς τὰς ἰδίας ἐπιβολάς.
διενοεῖτο γὰρ ἐπελθεῖν τὴν Ἀσίαν καὶ τοὺς
μὲν προϋπάρχοντας σατράπας ἐκβαλεῖν, πρὸς δὲ
τῶν ἑαυτοῦ φίλων καθιστάναι τὰς ἡγεμονίας.
51. Τούτου δὲ περὶ ταῦτ᾿ ὄντος Ἀρριδαῖος ὁ1
τῆς ἐφ᾿ Ἑλλησπόντῳ Φρυγίας σατράπης, γνοὺς
αὐτοῦ τὴν ἐπιβολήν, ἔκρινεν ἀσφαλισάμενος τὰ
κατὰ τὴν ἰδίαν σατραπείαν καὶ τὰς ἀξιολογωτάτας
πόλεις φρουραῖς περιλαμβάνειν. οὔσης δὲ τῆς τῶν
Κυζικηνῶν πόλεως ἐπικαιροτάτης καὶ μεγίστης
ἀνέζευξεν ἐπ᾿ αὐτὴν ἔχων πεζοὺς μὲν μισθοφόρους
πλείους τῶν μυρίων, Μακεδόνας δὲ χιλίους, Πέρσας
δὲ τοξότας καὶ σφενδονήτας πεντακοσίους, ἱππεῖς



1ὁ added by Dindorf.150Book XVIII

summoned Hieronymus the historian, a friend and
319 b.c. fellow citizen of Eumenes of Cardia, who had
taken refuge in the stronghold called Nora.1 After endeavouring to attach Hieronymus to himself by great gifts, he sent him as an envoy to Eumenes, urging the latter to forget the battle that had been fought against him in Cappadocia, to become his friend and ally, to receive gifts many times the
value of what he had formerly possessed and a greater satrapy, and in general to be the first of
Antigonus’ friends and his partner in the whole undertaking.2 Antigonus also at once called a council of his
friends and, after he had made them acquainted with his design for gaining imperial power, assigned
satrapies to some of the more important friends and military commands to others; and by holding up great expectations to all of them, he filled them with
enthusiasm for his undertakings. Indeed he had in mind to go through Asia, remove the existing satraps, and
reorganize the positions of command in favour of his friends.
51. While Antigonus was engaged in these matters, Arrhidaeus, the satrap of Hellespontine Phrygia, discovering his plan, decided to provide for the safety of his own satrapy and also to secure the most considerable cities by means of garrisons.3 As the city of the Cyziceni was strategically most important and very large, he set out against it with an infantry
force consisting of more than ten thousand mercenaries, a thousand Macedonians, and five hundred Persian


1Hieronymus had been sent by Eumenes to Antipater to
discuss terms of surrender (chap. 42. 1).2Cp. chap. 53. 5.3The Greek cities of Asia Minor, like those of Greece, were, at least in theory, autonomous allies of Macedon and were not subject to the satraps. For the siege of Cyzicus cp. Marmor Parium for 319/18.151