Diodorus of Sicily

πρεσβευτάς, προστάττων τοὺς μὲν δι᾿ Ἀντιπάτρου
καθεσταμένους ἄρχοντας ἐπὶ τῆς ὀλιγαρχίας θανατῶσαι,
τοῖς δὲ δήμοις ἀποδοῦναι τὴν αὐτονομίαν.
4πολλῶν δ᾿ ὑπακουσάντων καὶ κατὰ τὰς πόλεις
φόνων γινομένων καί τινων φυγαδευομένων οἱ μὲν
Ἀντιπάτρου φίλοι διεφθάρησαν, τὰ δὲ πολιτεύματα
τὴν ἐκ τῆς αὐτονομίας παρρησίαν ἀπέλαβον καὶ
συνεμάχουν τοῖς περὶ τὸν Πολυπέρχοντα. μόνων
δὲ τῶν Μεγαλοπολιτῶν διατηρούντων τὴν πρὸς
Κάσανδρον φιλίαν ἔκρινε πολιορκῆσαι τὴν πόλιν
αὐτῶν.
70. Οἱ δὲ Μεγαλοπολῖται γνόντες τὴν ἐπιβουλὴν
τοῦ Πολυπέρχοντος ἐψηφίσαντο τὰ μὲν ἀπὸ τῆς
χώρας κατάγειν εἰς τὴν πόλιν, τῶν δὲ πολιτῶν καὶ
ξένων καὶ δούλων ἀριθμὸν ποιησάμενοι μυρίους καὶ
πεντακισχιλίους εὗρον τοὺς δυναμένους παρέχεσθαι
τὰς πολεμικὰς χρείας. εὐθὺς οὖν τοὺς μὲν εἰς
τάξεις κατελόχιζον, οὓς δὲ πρὸς τὰς ὑπηρεσίας τοῖς
ἔργοις καθίστανον, οὓς δ᾿ ἐπὶ τὴν ἐπιμέλειαν τῶν
2τειχῶν ἔταττον. ὑφ᾿ ἕνα δὲ καὶ τὸν αὐτὸν καιρὸν
οἱ μὲν περὶ τὴν πόλιν τάφρον ὤρυττον βαθεῖαν, οἱ
δὲ ἀπὸ τῆς χώρας χάρακα παρεκόμιζον, τινὲς δὲ
τὰ πεπονηκότα τῶν τειχῶν κατεσκεύαζον, ἄλλοι δὲ
περὶ τὰς ὁπλοποιίας καὶ τὴν κατασκευὴν τῶν
ὀξυβελῶν καταπελτῶν ἐγίνοντο, πᾶσα δ᾿ ἡ πόλις
ἐν ἔργοις καθειστήκει διά τε τὴν προθυμίαν τῶν
ἀνδρῶν καὶ διὰ τοὺς προσδοκωμένους κινδύνους·
3διεβεβόητο γὰρ τό τε μέγεθος τῆς βασιλικῆς
δυνάμεως καὶ τὸ πλῆθος τῶν συνακολουθούντων
ἐλεφάντων καὶ δοκούντων ἀνυπόστατον ἔχειν τήν τε
ἀλκὴν καὶ τὴν τοῦ σώματος ὁρμήν.
4Ταχὺ δὲ πάντων εὐτρεπῶν γενομένων ὁ μὲν
200Book XVIII

who through Antipater’s influence had been made 318 b.c. magistrates in the oligarchical governments should be put to death and that the people should be given back their autonomy. Many in fact obeyed him, there were massacres throughout the cities, and some were driven into exile; the friends of Antipater were destroyed, and the governments, recovering the freedom of action that came with autonomy, began to form alliances with Polyperchon. Since the Megalopolitans alone held to their friendship with Cassander, Polyperchon decided to attack their city.
70. When the Megalopolitans learned the intention of Polyperchon, they voted to bring all their property into the city from the country. On taking a census of citizens, foreigners, and slaves, they found that there were fifteen thousand men capable of performing military service. Some of these they at once attached to military formations, others they assigned to work gangs, and others they detailed to the care of the city wall. At one and the same time one group of men was digging a deep moat about the city, and another was bringing from the country timber for a palisade; some were repairing the weakened portions of the wall, while others were engaged in making weapons and in preparing engines for hurling bolts, and the whole city was deep in activity, owing both to the spirit of the population and to the danger that was foreseen. Indeed, word had spread abroad concerning the magnitude of the royal army and the multitude of the accompanying elephants, which were reputed to possess a fighting spirit and a momentum of body that were irresistible.
When all had been hastily made ready, Polyperchon
201