Diodorus of Sicily

φόβον ἀγάγῃ τοὺς Ῥοδίους, πολλῶν τῶν ἀντισπασμάτων
ὄντων.
87. Τοιαύτην δὲ τὴν πολιορκίαν ποιησάμενος ἐφ᾿
ἡμέρας ὀκτὼ τὰς μὲν μηχανὰς τὰς ἐπὶ τοῦ χώματος
τοῖς ταλαντιαίοις πετροβόλοις συνέτριψε,
τοῦ δὲ διατειχίσματος τὸ μεσοπύργιον σὺν αὐτοῖς
τοῖς πύργοις διέσεισεν. κατελάβοντο δὲ καὶ τῶν
στρατιωτῶν τινες μέρος τοῦ παρὰ τὸν λιμένα
διατειχίσματος· ἐφ᾿ οὓς1 συστραφέντες οἱ Ῥόδιοι
μάχην συνῆψαν καὶ πολλαπλάσιοι γενόμενοι τοὺς
μὲν ἀνεῖλον, τοὺς δ᾿ ἐπανελθεῖν εἰς τοὐπίσω συνηνάγκασαν·
συνήργει δὲ τοῖς ἐκ τῆς πόλεως ἡ τοῦ
παρὰ τὸ τεῖχος τόπου τραχύτης, πολλῶν καὶ μεγάλων
πετρῶν κατὰ τὸ συνεχὲς κειμένων παρὰ τὴν
2οἰκοδομὴν ἔξω τοῦ τείχους. τῶν δὲ τοὺς στρατιώτας
τούτους κομισάντων σκαφῶν οὐκ ὀλίγων
διὰ τὴν ἄγνοιαν2 ἐποκειλάντων οἱ Ῥόδιοι ταχέως
τὰ μὲν ἀκροστόλια περιέσπασαν, ὕλην δὲ ξηρὰν καὶ
δᾷδας ταῖς ναυσὶν ἐνέντες ἐνέπρησαν. τούτων δὲ
περὶ ταῦτ᾿ ὄντων οἱ μὲν τοῦ Δημητρίου στρατιῶται
πανταχοῦ περιπλέοντες κλίμακας προσέφερον τοῖς
τείχεσι καὶ βιαιότερον ἐνέκειντο, συναγωνιζομένων
καὶ τῶν ἀπὸ τῆς γῆς πανταχόθεν καὶ συναλαλαζόντων.
3ἔνθα δὴ πολλῶν παραβόλως κινδυνευσάντων
καὶ συχνῶν ἀναβάντων ἐπὶ τὰ τείχη συνίστατο καρτερὰ
μάχη, τῶν μὲν ἔξωθεν βιαζομένων, τῶν δ᾿
ἐκ τῆς πόλεως ἀθρόων παραβοηθούντων. τέλος δὲ
τῶν Ῥοδίων ἐκθύμως ἀγωνιζομένων οἱ μὲν ἔπεσον
τῶν προσαναβάντων, οἱ δὲ κατατραυματισθέντες
ἑάλωσαν, ἐν οἷς ἦσάν τινες καὶ τῶν ἐπιφανεστάτων
4ἡγεμόνων. τοιούτων δὲ γενομένων τοῖς ἔξωθεν

1ἐφ᾿ οὓς Fischer: ἐφ᾿ οὗ.2ἄγνοιαν Geer: ἀγωνίαν.370Book XX

in order to throw the Rhodians into an agony of 305 b.c. terror because of the many distractions.
87. After carrying on this kind of siege warfare for eight days, Demetrius shattered the engines of war upon the mole by means of his heavy ballistae and weakened the curtain of the cross-wall together with the towers themselves. Some of his soldiers also occupied a part of the fortifications along the harbour; the Rhodians rallying their forces joined battle against these, and now that they outnumbered the enemy, they killed some and forced the rest to withdraw. The men of the city were aided by the ruggedness of the shore along the wall, for many large rocks lay close together beside the structure outside of the wall. Of the ships which had conveyed these soldiers no small number ran aground in their ignorance; and the Rhodians at once, after stripping off the beaks, threw dry pitchy wood into the ships and burned them. While the Rhodians were so occupied, the soldiers of Demetrius sailing up on every side placed ladders against the walls and pressed on more strongly, and the troops who were attacking from the land also joined in the struggle from every side and raised the battle cry in unison. Then indeed, since many had recklessly risked their lives, and a good number had mounted the walls, a mighty battle arose, those on the outside trying to force their way in and those in the city coming to the defence with one accord. Finally, as the Rhodians contended furiously, some of the men who had mounted were thrown down and others were wounded and captured, among whom were some of their most distinguished leaders. Since such losses had befallen those who


371