Diodorus of Sicily
Ὡς διὰ τοῦ Ἰνδοῦ ποταμοῦ κατέπλευσεν ἐπὶ τὸν κατὰ
μεσημβρίαν Ὠκεανόν, καὶ τοξευθεὶς ἐκινδύνευσεν.1
Περὶ τῆς γενομένης μονομαχίας ἐκ προκλήσεως.
Περὶ τῶν καταπολεμηθέντων Ἰνδῶν ἐξ ἀμφοτέρων τῶν
μερῶν τοῦ ποταμοῦ μέχρι τοῦ Ὠκεανοῦ.
Περὶ τῶν παραδόξων2 καὶ νομίμων παρὰ τοῖς ἐγχωρίοις
καὶ τῶν θηριώδη βίον ἐχόντων.
Ὡς οἱ τὸν Ὠκεανὸν πλεύσαντες συνέμιξαν Ἀλεξάνδρῳ
παρὰ θάλατταν ἐστρατοπεδευκότι καὶ τὰ κατὰ τὸν πλοῦν
ἀπήγγειλαν.
Ὡς πάλιν ἐκπλεύσαντες πολλὴν τῆς παραθαλαττίας
χώρας παρέπλευσαν.
Ὡς τῶν Περσῶν τρισμυρίους νεανίσκους ἐπιλέξας καὶ
παιδεύσας τὰ πολεμικὰ τῶν ἔργων ἀντίταγμα κατεσκεύασε
τῇ Μακεδονικῇ φάλαγγι.
Ὡς Ἅρπαλος διὰ τὴν τρυφὴν καὶ τὰς ὑπερβολὰς τῶν
δαπανημάτων διαβληθεὶς ἔφυγεν ἐκ Βαβυλῶνος καὶ τοῦ
δήμου τῶν Ἀθηναίων ἱκέτης ἐγένετο.
Ὡς διαδρὰς ἐκ τῆς Ἀττικῆς ἀνῃρέθη καὶ τῶν χρημάτων
ἑπτακόσια μὲν τάλαντα παρέθετο τοῖς Ἀθηναίοις, τετρακισχίλια
δὲ καὶ μισθοφόρους ὀκτακισχιλίους3 περὶ Ταίναρον
τῆς Λακωνικῆς ἀπέλιπεν.
Ὡς Ἀλέξανδρος τοὺς γεγηρακότας τῶν Μακεδόνων
χρεολυτήσας καὶ καταναλώσας μύρια τάλαντα ἀπέλυσεν
εἰς τὰς πατρίδας.
Ὡς στασιαζόντων τῶν Μακεδόνων ἐκόλασε τοὺς αἰτίους.
1See note 3 on page 113.2So Cospus: παραδόσεων.3So MSS.: ἑξακισχιλίους chap. 108. 6.114Book XVII
How he sailed down the Indus River to the southern Ocean, and almost died of an arrow wound (chaps. 96–99).
Concerning the single combat that issued from a challenge (chaps. 100–101).
Concerning the Indians whom he conquered on both banks of the river as far as the Ocean (chaps. 102–103).
Concerning the marvels and practices found among the inhabitants and about the men who live a brutish existence (chaps. 104–106. 3).
How the naval expedition through the Ocean rejoined Alexander as he was encamped by the sea and gave an account of their voyage (chap. 106. 4–7).
How again setting sail they skirted a long expanse of coastline (chap. 107. 1).
How he selected thirty thousand young Persians, trained them in military exercises and formed them into a counterpart of his Macedonian phalanx (chap. 108. 1–3).
How Harpalus, who was accused of luxurious living and excessive expenditures, fled from Babylon and sought the protection of the people of Athens (chap. 108. 4–7).
How he fled from Attica and was killed; he had deposited seven hundred talents of his money with the Athenians and placed four thousand talents and eight thousand mercenaries on Taenarum in Laconia (chap. 108. 7–8).
How Alexander, having paid the debts of his veteran Macedonians, which cost him ten thousand talents, returned them to their homes (chap. 109. 1–2).
How the Macedonians revolted and he punished their ringleaders (chap. 109. 2–3).
115