Diodorus of Sicily

πρὸς ἄλλην ἐμβολὴν καὶ κατετραυμάτιζον
ἀλλήλους οἱ ταύταις ἐφεστῶτες, ἅτε τοῦ σκοποῦ
σύνεγγυς ἑκάστοις κειμένου. τινὲς δὲ τῶν τριηραρχῶν
ἐκ πλαγίας τυπτόντων1 καὶ τῶν ἐμβόλων
δυσαποσπάστως ἐχόντων ἐπεπήδων ἐπὶ τὰς τῶν
πολεμίων ναῦς, πολλὰ καὶ πάσχοντες δεινὰ καὶ
4διατιθέντες· οἱ μὲν γὰρ τῶν ἐγγιζόντων τοίχων
ἐφαψάμενοι καὶ σφαλέντες τῆς βάσεως περιέπιπτον
εἰς θάλασσαν καὶ παραχρῆμα τοῖς δόρασιν ὑπὸ τῶν
ἐφεστώτων ἐφονεύοντο, οἱ δὲ κρατήσαντες τῆς ἐπιβολῆς
τοὺς μὲν ἀνῄρουν, τοὺς δὲ κατὰ τὴν στενοχωρίαν
ἐκβιαζόμενοι περιέτρεπον εἰς τὸ πέλαγος.
ὅλως δὲ ποικίλαι καὶ παράλογοι συνίσταντο μάχαι,
πολλάκις τῶν μὲν ἡττόνων ἐπικρατούντων διὰ τὴν
τῶν σκαφῶν ὑπεροχήν, τῶν δὲ κρειττόνων θλιβομένων
διὰ τὸ περὶ τὴν στάσιν ἐλάττωμα καὶ τὴν
ἀνωμαλίαν τῶν συμβαινόντων ἐν τοῖς τοιούτοις
5κινδύνοις. ἐπὶ μὲν γὰρ τῶν ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς ἀγώνων
διάδηλος ἡ ἀρετὴ γίνεται, δυναμένη τυγχάνειν τῶν
πρωτείων μηδενὸς ἔξωθεν αὐτομάτου παρενοχλοῦντος·
κατὰ δὲ τὰς ναυμαχίας πολλὰς καὶ ποικίλας
αἰτίας συμβαίνει παραλόγως ἐλαττοῦν τοὺς δι᾿
ἀνδρείαν δικαίως ἂν τυχόντας τῆς νίκης.
52. Λαμπρότατα δὲ πάντων Δημήτριος ἠγωνίσατο
τῆς ἑπτήρους2 ἐπιβεβηκὼς ἐπὶ τῇ πρύμνῃ.
ἀθρόων γὰρ αὐτῷ περιχυθέντων οὓς μὲν ταῖς λόγχαις
ἀκοντίζων, οὓς δὲ ἐκ χειρὸς τῷ δόρατι τύπτων
ἀνῄρει· πολλῶν δὲ καὶ παντοίων βελῶν ἐπ᾿ αὐτὸν
φερομένων ἃ μὲν προορώμενος ἐξέκλινεν, ἃ δὲ τοῖς
1τυπτόντων Geer, ἔτυπτον.2Reiske adds ἑαυτοῦ or ναυαρχίδος before ἑπτήρους. Fischer
suggests τῆς ἰδίας ἑπτήρους.284Book XX

prow with their rams, they drew back for another 307 b.c. charge, and the soldiers on board shot at each other with effect since the mark was close at hand for each party. Some of the men, when their captains had delivered a broadside blow and the rams had become firmly fixed, leaped aboard the ships of the enemy, receiving and giving severe wounds; for certain of them, after grasping the rail of a ship that was drawing near, missed their footing, fell into the sea, and at once were killed with spears by those who stood above them; and others, making good their intent, slew some of the enemy and, forcing others along the narrow deck, drove them into the sea. As a whole the fighting was varied and full of surprises: many times those who were weaker got the upper hand because of the height of their ships, and those who were stronger were foiled by inferiority of position and by the irregularity with which things happen in fighting of this kind. For in contests on land, valour is made clearly evident, since it is able to gain the upper hand when nothing external and fortuitous interferes; but in naval battles there are many causes of various kinds that, contrary to reason, defeat those who would properly gain the victory through prowess.
52. Demetrius fought most brilliantly of all, having taken his stand on the stern of his seven. A crowd of men rushed upon him, but by hurling his javelins at some of them and by striking others at close range with his spear, he slew them; and although many missiles of all sorts were aimed at him, he avoided some that he saw in time and received others



285