Diodorus of Sicily

προσετίθει δὲ καὶ τῆς Ἀσίας τὴν ἐντὸς
Ἅλυος χώραν καὶ πόλεις συγχωρήσειν,1 ἐὰν βουληθῇ
2γενέσθαι φίλος. ὁ δ᾿ Ἀλέξανδρος συναγαγὼν
τοὺς φίλους καὶ τὴν μὲν ἀληθινὴν ἐπιστολὴν ἀποκρυψάμενος,
ἑτέραν δὲ γράψας ῥέπουσαν πρὸς τὸ
ἑαυτῷ συμφέρον προσήνεγκε τοῖς συνέδροις καὶ
3τοὺς πρέσβεις ἀπράκτους ἐξαπέστειλεν. διόπερ ὁ
Δαρεῖος ἀπογνοὺς τὴν διὰ τῶν ἐπιστολῶν σύνθεσιν
παρασκευὰς μεγάλας ἐποιεῖτο πρὸς τὸν πόλεμον
καὶ τοὺς μὲν κατὰ τὴν τροπὴν ἀποβεβληκότας τὰς
πανοπλίας καθώπλιζεν, ἄλλους δ᾿ ἐπιλεγόμενος εἰς
στρατιωτικὰς τάξεις κατέγραφε· τὰς δ᾿ ἐκ τῶν
ἄνω σατραπειῶν δυνάμεις, ἃς ἀπολελοιπὼς ἦν διὰ
4τὴν ὀξύτητα τῆς στρατείας, μετεπέμπετο. καὶ
τέλος τοσαύτην εἰσηνέγκατο σπουδὴν εἰς τὴν κατασκευὴν
τῆς δυνάμεως ὥστε διπλασίαν γενέσθαι τῆς
ἐν Ἰσσῷ παραταξαμένης· ὀγδοήκοντα μὲν γὰρ μυριάδες
πεζῶν, εἴκοσι δ᾿ ἱππέων ἠθροίσθησαν καὶ
χωρὶς ἁρμάτων δρεπανηφόρων πλῆθος.
Ταῦτα μὲν οὖν ἐπράχθη κατὰ τοῦτον τὸν
ἐνιαυτόν.
1Reiske: συνεχώρησεν.228Book XVII

Alexander the territory and cities of Asia west of the 333/2 b.c. Halys River if he would sign a treaty of friendship with him. Alexander summoned his Friends to a council and concealed the real letter. Forging another more in accord with his interests he introduced it to his advisers and sent the envoys away empty handed.1 So Dareius gave up the attempt to reach an agreement with Alexander by diplomatic means and set to work on vast preparations for war. He re-equipped those who had lost their armour in the defeat and he enlisted others and assigned them to military units. He sent for the levies from the upper satrapies,2 which he had previously left unemployed because of the haste of the last campaign. He took such pains over the constitution of the army that he ended up with one twice the size of that which had been engaged at Issus. He assembled eight hundred thousand infantry and two hundred thousand cavalry, and a force of scythe-bearing chariots in addition.
These were the events of this year.
1Diodorus is the only author to report this forgery. Three
approaches by Dareius to Alexander are mentioned. (1) After
the battle of Issus. Justin (11. 12. 1–2), Arrian (2. 14), and
Curtius (4. 1. 7–14) state that this letter of Dareius demanded
that Alexander withdraw from Asia and release his captives
with (Curtius, Justin) or without (Arrian) a ransom. Curtius
adds that this letter was cast in an insulting tone, suggesting
the manner of the one here stated to have been forged by
Alexander. (2) After the capture of Tyre. Dareius now
offered the hand of one of his daughters and all the territory
west of the Halys River (Curtius, 4. 5. 1–8) or a share in the kingdom (Justin, 11, 19. 3–4). This is approximately the same as the true letter which Diodorus mentions here. Arrian locates at this point what appears elsewhere as the third letter. (3) After the departure from Egypt and before Gaugamela, and connected with Alexander’s kindly treatment of Dareius’s queen. This took the form of an embassy, probably (Diodorus, 17. 54. 1–6; Curtius, 4. 11; Arrian, 2. 25), rather than a letter (Justin, 11. 12. 7–16; Plutarch, Alexander, 29. 4). Dareius offered the hand of another daughter in marriage, cession of all territory west of the Euphrates, and a ransom for the royal women of 10,000 (Plutarch, Arrian) or 30,000 (Diodorus, Curtius, Justin) talents. An extensive correspondence, largely fictional, between Alexander and Dareius was in circulation in antiquity, and fragments of it occur in the papyri (cp. PSI, 12. 1285). Much of it found a place in or contributed to the Alexander Romance.2These are listed by Arrian, 3. 8. 3–6.229