Diodorus of Sicily

τούτων κατὰ τὴν Πελοπόννησον ἐγένοντο σεισμοὶ
μεγάλοι καὶ κατακλυσμοὶ χώρας καὶ πόλεων ἄπιστοι·
οὐδέποτε γὰρ ἐν τοῖς ἐπάνω χρόνοις ἐγένοντο
πάθη τοιαῦτα περὶ πόλεις Ἑλληνίδας, οὔτε τῶν
πόλεων αὐτάνδρων ἀφανισμός, θείας τινὸς ἐνεργείας
τὴν ἀπώλειαν καὶ φθορὰν τῶν ἀνθρώπων
2μηχανησαμένης. ἐπέτεινε δὲ τὸ μέγεθος τῆς συμφορᾶς
ὁ καιρός· οὐ γὰρ ἡμέρας συνέβη γενέσθαι
τὸν σεισμὸν ἐν ᾗ δυνατὸν ἦν τοὺς κινδυνεύοντας
βοηθεῖν ἑαυτοῖς, ἀλλὰ νυκτὸς τοῦ πάθους συμβάντος
αἱ μὲν οἰκίαι διὰ τὸ μέγεθος τοῦ σεισμοῦ
καταρριπτούμεναι συνεχέοντο, οἱ δὲ ἄνθρωποι διά
τε τὸ σκότος καὶ τὸ τῆς περιστάσεως ἀπροσδόκητον
καὶ παράδοξον ἀδυνάτως εἶχον ἀντιλαμβάνεσθαι
3τῆς σωτηρίας. οἱ μὲν οὖν πλείους ἐναποληφθέντες
τοῖς πτώμασι τῶν οἰκιῶν ἠφανίσθησαν· ἐπιλαβούσης
δ᾿ ἡμέρας τινὲς ἐξεπήδων ἐκ τῶν οἰκιῶν,
καὶ δόξαντες ἐκπεφευγέναι τὸν κίνδυνον μείζονι
καὶ παραδοξοτέρᾳ συμφορᾷ περιέπεσον· τῆς γὰρ
θαλάσσης μετεωρισθείσης ἐπὶ πολὺ καὶ κύματος
ὑψηλοῦ ἐξαιρομένου κατεκλύσθησαν ἅπαντες σὺν
ταῖς πατρίσιν ἀφανισθέντες. ἐγένετο δὲ τοῦτο τὸ
πάθος τῆς Ἀχαΐας περὶ δύο πόλεις, Ἑλίκην τε καὶ
Βοῦραν, ὧν τὴν Ἑλίκην1 συνέβαινε μέγιστον τῶν
κατὰ τὴν Ἀχαΐαν πόλεων ἔχειν ἀξίωμα πρὸ τοῦ
4σεισμοῦ. περὶ δὲ τῶν συμπτωμάτων μεγάλης
οὔσης ζητήσεως, οἱ μὲν φυσικοὶ πειρῶνται τὰς
αἰτίας τῶν τοιούτων παθῶν οὐκ εἰς τὸ θεῖον ἀναφέρειν,



1τε after Ἑλίκην deleted by Dindorf.82Book XV

Postumius. During their term of office great earthquakes 373/2 b.c. occurred in the Peloponnese accompanied by tidal waves which engulfed the open country and cities in a manner past belief; for never in the earlier periods had such disasters befallen Greek cities, nor had entire cities along with their inhabitants disappeared as a result of some divine force wreaking destruction and ruin upon mankind. The extent of the destruction was increased by the time of its occurrence; for the earthquake did not come in the daytime when it would have been possible for the sufferers to help themselves, but the blow came at night, so that when the houses crashed and crumbled under the force of the shock, the population, owing to the darkness and to the surprise and bewilderment occasioned by the event, had no power to struggle for life. The majority were caught in the falling houses and annihilated, but as day returned some survivors dashed from the ruins and, when they thought they had escaped the danger, met with a greater and still more incredible disaster. For the sea rose to a vast height, and a wave towering even higher washed away and drowned all the inhabitants and their native lands as well. Two cities in Achaia bore the brunt of this disaster, Helice and Bura,1 the former of which had, as it happened, before the earthquake held first place among the cities of Achaia. These disasters have been the subject of much discussion. Natural scientists make it their endeavour to attribute responsibility in such cases not to divine providence, but

1See Strabo, 1. 3. 18: “Then there are Bura and Helicê;
Bura disappeared in a chasm of the earth, and Helicê was
wiped out by a wave from the sea” (H. L. Jones, L.C.L.). These cities are in Achaia, Helice east of Aegium on the Corinthian Gulf and Bura inland. It is strange that no mention occurs of Delphi if the same earthquake caused the fire of 373 (Marm. Par. 71; Dittenberger3, 295; Hommolle, Bull. Corr. Hell. 20 (1896), 677 ff.).83