Diodorus of Sicily

βασιλείας διαθήκην ἐκεῖ θέσθαι καὶ τἄλλα θαυμάζειν
4καὶ προάγειν εἰς ὑπεροχήν. οἱ δ᾿ οὖν
Ῥόδιοι πρὸς πάντας τοὺς δυνάστας συντεθειμένοι
τὴν φιλίαν διετήρουν μὲν ἑαυτοὺς ἐκτὸς ἐγκλήματος
δικαίου, ταῖς δ᾿ εὐνοίαις ἔρεπον μάλιστα πρὸς
Πτολεμαῖον· συνέβαινε γὰρ αὐτοῖς τῶν τε προσόδων
τὰς πλείστας εἶναι διὰ τοὺς εἰς Αἴγυπτον πλέοντας
ἐμπόρους καὶ τὸ σύνολον τρέφεσθαι τὴν πόλιν ἀπὸ
ταύτης τῆς βασιλείας.
82. Ὃ δὴ συνορῶν ὁ Ἀντίγονος καὶ σπεύδων
αὐτοὺς ἀποσπάσαι τῆς πρὸς ἐκεῖνον ἐπιπλοκῆς τὸ
μὲν πρῶτον πρεσβευτὰς ἀπέστειλε καθ᾿ ὃν καιρὸν
ὑπὲρ τῆς Κύπρου διεπολέμει πρὸς Πτολεμαῖον,
ἀξιῶν αὑτῷ συμμαχεῖν καὶ ναῦς συναποστεῖλαι τῷ
2Δημητρίῳ· οὐ προσεχόντων δ᾿ αὐτῶν ἀπέστειλέ
τινα τῶν στρατηγῶν μετὰ νεῶν, συντάξας τοὺς
πλέοντας εἰς Αἴγυπτον ἐκ τῆς Ῥόδου κατάγειν καὶ
περιαιρεῖσθαι τὰ φορτία. τούτου δ᾿ ἐκβληθέντος
ὑπὸ τῶν Ῥοδίων φήσας αὐτοὺς ἀδίκου κατῆρχθαι
πολέμου διηπειλήσατο πολιορκήσειν δυνάμεσιν
ἁδραῖς τὴν πόλιν. οἱ δὲ Ῥόδιοι τὸ μὲν πρῶτον
ἐψηφίσαντο μεγάλας αὐτῷ τιμὰς καὶ πέμψαντες
πρέσβεις ἠξίουν μὴ βιάσασθαι τὴν πόλιν προπεσεῖν1
παρὰ τὰς συνθήκας εἰς τὸν πόλεμον πρὸς Πτολεμαῖον.
3τραχύτερον δὲ τοῦ βασιλέως ἀπαντῶντος
καὶ τὸν υἱὸν Δημήτριον ἐκπέμψαντος μετὰ δυνάμεως
καὶ πολιορκητικῶν ὀργάνων φοβηθέντες τὴν



1προπεσεῖν Dindorf: προσπεσεῖν.356Book XX

testament1 disposing of his whole realm and in other 305 b.c. ways showed admiration for her and promoted her to a commanding position. At any rate, the Rhodians, having established pacts of friendship with all the rulers, carefully avoided giving legitimate grounds for complaint; but in displaying goodwill they inclined chiefly toward Ptolemy, for it happened that most of their revenues were due to the merchants who sailed to Egypt, and that in general the city drew its food supply from that kingdom.
82. Because Antigonus knew this and was intent on separating the Rhodians from their connection with Ptolemy, he first sent out envoys to them at the time when he was fighting with Ptolemy for Cyprus and asked them to ally themselves with him and to dispatch ships in company with Demetrius2; and when they did not consent, he dispatched one of his generals with ships, ordering him to bring to land any merchants sailing to Egypt from Rhodes and to seize their cargoes. When this general was driven off by the Rhodians, Antigonus, declaring that they were authors of an unjust war, threatened to lay siege to the city with strong forces. The Rhodians, however, first voted great honours for him; and, sending envoys, they begged him not to force the city to rush into the war against Ptolemy contrary to their treaties. But then, when the king answered rather harshly and sent his son Demetrius with an army and siege equipment, they were so


1Alexander entrusted certain memoranda to Craterus
(Book 18. 4. 1), but these were not a will, and Diodorus’ narrative of the events following Alexander’s death assumes that no will existed.2Cp. chap. 46. 6. In 315 b.c.. Rhodes had built warships for Antigonus from timber that he furnished (Book 19. 57. 4; 58. 5); and in 313 b.c. she had furnished 10 ships for the campaign to free Greece (Book 19. 77. 2).357