Diodorus of Sicily

ὅτι τοὺς Ἀλεξάνδρῳ συνεστρατευκότας καὶ δι᾿
ἀρετὴν ὑπ᾿ ἐκείνου προηγμένους προσήκει μὴ πάντως
δυνάμει καὶ χρήμασι πεποιθότας ἀντέχεσθαι
πραγμάτων, ἀλλ᾿ ἐμπειρίᾳ καὶ συνέσει, δι᾿ ὧν
κἀκεῖνος τὰ μεγάλα καὶ παρὰ πᾶσι θαυμαζόμενα
κατειργάσατο. πιστεύειν δὲ δεῖν καὶ ταῖς τῶν
θεῶν προρρήσεσι τὸ τέλος ἔσεσθαι τῆς στρατείας
4ἄξιον τῆς ἐπιβολῆς· ἐν μὲν γὰρ Βραγχίδαις αὐτοῦ
χρηστηριαζομένου τὸν θεὸν προσαγορεῦσαι Σέλευκον
βασιλέα, τὸν δὲ Ἀλέξανδρον καθ᾿ ὕπνον ἐπιστάντα
φανερῶς διασημᾶναι περὶ τῆς ἐσομένης
ἡγεμονίας, ἧς δεῖ τυχεῖν αὐτὸν προϊόντος τοῦ χρόνου.
5πρὸς δὲ τούτοις ἀπεφαίνετο διότι πάντα
γίνεται τὰ καλὰ καὶ παρ᾿ ἀνθρώποις θαυμαζόμενα
διὰ πόνων καὶ κινδύνων. ἐπολιτεύετο δὲ καὶ πρὸς
τοὺς συστρατεύοντας καὶ κατεσκεύαζεν αὑτὸν ἴσον
ἅπασιν, ὥσθ᾿ ἕκαστον αἰδεῖσθαι καὶ τὸ παράβολον
τῆς τόλμης ἑκουσίως ὑπομένειν.
91. Ἐπεὶ δὲ προάγων κατήντησεν εἰς Μεσοποταμίαν,
τῶν ἐν Κάραις κατῳκισμένων Μακεδόνων
οὓς μὲν ἔπεισεν, οὓς δ᾿ ἐβιάσατο συστρατεύειν
αὐτῷ. ὡς δ᾿ εἰς τὴν Βαβυλωνίαν ἐνέβαλεν, οἱ
πλείους τῶν ἐγχωρίων ἀπήντων καὶ προστιθέμενοι
2πᾶν ἔφασαν αὐτῷ τὸ δοκοῦν συμπράξειν· τετραετῆ
γὰρ χρόνον γεγονὼς σατράπης τῆς χώρας ταύτης
πᾶσι προσενήνεκτο καλῶς, ἐκκαλούμενος τὴν εὔνοιαν
τοῦ πλήθους καὶ πόρρωθεν προπαρασκευαζόμενος
τοὺς συμπράξοντας, ἐὰν αὐτῷ δοθῇ καιρὸς


78Book XIX

them, saying that men who had campaigned with 312 b.c. Alexander and had been advanced by him because of their prowess ought not to rely solely on armed force and wealth when confronting difficult situations, but upon experience and skill, the means whereby Alexander himself had accomplished his great and universally admired deeds. He added that they ought also to believe the oracles of the gods which had foretold that the end of his campaign would be worthy of his purpose; for, when he had consulted the oracle in Branchidae, the god had greeted him as King Seleucus, and Alexander standing beside him in a dream had given him a clear sign of the future leadership that was destined to fall to him in the course of time.1 Moreover, he pointed out that everything that is good and admired among men is gained through toil and danger. But he also sought the favour of his fellow soldiers and put himself on an equality with them all in such a way that each man respected him and willingly accepted the risk of the daring venture.
91. When in his advance he entered Mesopotamia, he persuaded some of the Macedonians who were settled at Carae2 to join his forces, and compelled the rest. When he pushed into Babylonia, most of the inhabitants came to meet him, and, declaring themselves on his side, promised to aid him as he saw fit; for, when he had been for four years satrap of that country, he had shown himself generous to all, winning the goodwill of the common people and long in advance securing men who would assist him if an opportunity should ever be given him to make

1Cp. also chap. 55. 7, where we are told that the astrologers
warned Antigonus to expect danger from Seleucus. Other
signs and omens of Seleucus’ future greatness are given by
Appian, Syrian Wars, 9. 56.2Probably the same as Carrhae, and not to be identified with the Carae of Book 17. 110. 3; 19. 12. 1.79