Diodorus of Sicily

ἡγεμονίαν, πεζοὶ μὲν ὑπῆρχον μύριοι καὶ δισχίλιοι,
ἱππεῖς1 δὲ χίλιοι καὶ πεντακόσιοι.
6Τοῦ δὲ βασιλέως ἀναζεύξαντος ἐκ τῆς Τρῳάδος
καὶ καταντήσαντος πρὸς τὸ τέμενος τῆς Ἀθηνᾶς ὁ
μὲν θύτης Ἀλέξανδρος2 κατανοήσας πρὸ τοῦ νεὼ
κειμένην εἰκόνα χαμαὶ τοῦ Φρυγίας ποτὲ σατραπεύσαντος
Ἀριοβαρζάνου καί τινων οἰωνῶν αἰσίων
ἄλλων ἐπιγενομένων προσῆλθε τῷ βασιλεῖ καὶ νικήσειν
αὐτὸν ἱππομαχίᾳ μεγάλῃ διεβεβαιοῦτο καὶ
μάλιστ᾿, ἂν τύχῃ περὶ τὴν Φρυγίαν ἀγωνισάμενος.
7προσετίθει δὲ καὶ διότι ταῖς ἰδίαις χερσὶν ἀποκτενεῖ3
μαχόμενος ἐν παρατάξει στρατηγὸν ἐπιφανῆ
τῶν πολεμίων· ταῦτα γὰρ αὐτῷ προσημαίνειν τοὺς
θεοὺς καὶ μάλιστα τὴν Ἀθηνᾶν, ἣν καὶ συνεργήσειν
ἐν4 τοῖς εὐημερήμασιν.
18. Ὁ δ᾿ Ἀλέξανδρος ἀποδεξάμενος τὴν τοῦ
μάντεως πρόρρησιν τῇ μὲν Ἀθηνᾷ λαμπρὰν ἐπετέλεσε
θυσίαν καὶ τὸ μὲν ἴδιον ὅπλον ἀνέθηκε τῇ
θεῷ, τῶν δ᾿ ἐν τῷ νεῷ κειμένων ὅπλων τὸ κράτιστον
ἀναλαβὼν καὶ τούτῳ καθοπλισθεὶς ἐχρήσατο
κατὰ τὴν πρώτην μάχην, ἣν διὰ τῆς ἰδίας ἀνδραγαθίας
κρίνας περιβόητον ἔσχε τὴν νίκην. ἀλλὰ
ταῦτα μὲν ὕστερον ἡμέραις ὀλίγαις ἐπράχθη.
1So Rhodoman: ἱππεῖς δὲ μύριοι καὶ χίλιοι καὶ πεντακόσιοι.2So MSS.: Ἀλεξάνδρου Rhodoman.3So edd.: ἀποκτείνει.4ἐν added by Kallenbach.166Book XVII

of Antipater numbered twelve thousand foot and 334/3 b.c. fifteen hundred horse.1
As the king began his march out of the Troad and came to the sanctuary of Athena,2 the sacrificant named Alexander noticed in front of the temple a statue of Ariobarzanes,3 a former satrap of Phrygia, lying fallen on the ground, together with some other favourable omens that occurred. He came to the king and affirmed that he would be victor in a great cavalry battle and especially if he happened to fight within the confines of Phrygia; he added that the king with his own hands would slay in battle a distinguished general of the enemy. Such, he said, were the portents the gods disclosed to him, and particularly Athena who would help him in his success.
18. Alexander welcomed the prediction of the seer and made a splendid sacrifice to Athena, dedicating his own armour to the goddess. Then, taking the finest of the panoplies deposited in the temple, he put it on and used it in his first battle.4 And this he did in fact decide through his own personal fighting ability and won a resounding victory. But this did not take place till a few days later.
1These figures are not given elsewhere.2The well-known temple at Ilium (Arrian, 1. 11.7; Plutarch, Alexander, 15. 4).3It may be that Diodorus has garbled his source; no sacrificant Alexander is otherwise mentioned, and this may be a mistake for Aristander (Berve, Alexanderreich, 2, no. 117), Ariobarzanes was satrap of Phrygia in 388–361 b.c., and then arrested and punished as a rebel. His statue may have been overthrown at that time.4Cp. chap. 21.2, below, and Arrian, 1. 11.7–8, who states that the arms were carried before him into battle. The shield was carried by Peucestes in the assault on the citadel of the Malli in 325 (Arrian, 6. 9. 3).167