Diodorus of Sicily

κινδύνους ἐμπεσὼν παραδόξως ἰσχυροτέραν
κατεσκεύασε τὴν περὶ αὑτὸν δύναμιν. διὸ καὶ τοῖς
στρατιώταις παραγγείλας ἀναζευγνύειν προῆγεν
ἐπὶ Φοινίκης, σπεύδων τὰς ναῦς ἐξ ἁπασῶν τῶν
πόλεων ἀθροῖσαι καὶ στόλον ἀξιόλογον κατασκευάσαι,
ὅπως Πολυπέρχων μὲν προσλαβόμενος τὰς
ἐκ τῆς Φοινίκης ναῦς θαλαττοκρατῇ καὶ δύνηται
διαβιβάζειν ἀσφαλῶς, ὅταν βούληται, τὰς ἐκ τῆς
Μακεδονίας δυνάμεις εἰς τὴν Ἀσίαν ἐπ᾿ Ἀντίγονον.
οὗτος μὲν οὖν ἐν Φοινίκῃ διέτριβε κατασκευαζόμενος
τὴν ναυτικὴν δύναμιν.
64. Ἅμα δὲ τούτοις πραττομένοις Νικάνωρ ὁ
τὴν Μουνυχίαν κατέχων ἀκούων τὸν μὲν Κάσανδρον
ἐκ Μακεδονίας κεχωρίσθαι πρὸς Ἀντίγονον,
τὸν δὲ Πολυπέρχοντα προσδόκιμον εἶναι συντόμως
ἥξειν εἰς τὴν Ἀττικὴν μετὰ τῆς δυνάμεως ἠξίου
τοὺς Ἀθηναίους διαφυλάττειν τὴν πρὸς τὸν Κάσανδρον
2εὔνοιαν. οὐθενὸς δὲ αὐτῷ προσέχοντος, ἀλλὰ
καὶ τὴν φρουρὰν πάντων οἰομένων δεῖν ἐξάγειν τὴν
ταχίστην τὸ μὲν πρῶτον παρακρουσάμενος τὸν
δῆμον ἔπεισεν ὀλίγας ἡμέρας ἐπισχεῖν, πράξειν γὰρ
αὐτὸν τὰ συμφέροντα τῇ πόλει· μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα τῶν
Ἀθηναίων ἐπί τινας ἡμέρας ἡσυχίαν ἐχόντων ἔλαθε
νυκτὸς κατ᾿ ὀλίγους1 στρατιώτας εἰσαγαγὼν εἰς
τὴν Μουνυχίαν, ὥστε γενέσθαι δύναμιν ἀξιόχρεων
τηρεῖν τὴν φυλακὴν καὶ διαγωνίζεσθαι πρὸς τοὺς
3ἐπιβαλλομένους πολιορκεῖν τὴν φρουράν. οἱ δὲ
Ἀθηναῖοι γνόντες τὸν Νικάνορα μηδὲν ὑγιὲς πράττοντα
πρὸς μὲν τοὺς βασιλέας2 καὶ Πολυπέρχοντα




1κατ᾿ ὀλίγους MSS. and editors, οὐκ ὀλίγους Wurm.2τοὺς βασιλέας Fischer, cp. chap. 65. 1: τὸν βασιλέα.186Book XVIII

into unforeseen danger, unexpectedly made his own 318 b.c. power greater. Therefore he ordered the soldiers to break camp and led them to Phoenicia, desiring to gather ships from all the cities and assemble a considerable fleet, so that Polyperchon, by the addition of the Phoenician ships, might have control of the sea and be able to transport the Macedonian armies safely to Asia against Antigonus whenever he wished. Accordingly he remained in Phoenicia preparing the naval force.1
64. Meanwhile Nicanor, the commander of Munychia,2 on hearing that Cassander had gone from Macedonia to Antigonus and that Polyperchon was expected to come shortly into Attica with his army, asked the Athenians to continue to favour Cassander, No one approved, but all thought that it was necessary to get rid even of the garrison as soon as possible. Nicanor therefore at first deceived the Assembly and persuaded them to wait for a few days, saying that Cassander would do what was for the advantage of the city; but then, while the Athenians remained inactive for a short time, he secretly introduced soldiers into Munychia by night, a few at a time, so that there was a force there strong enough to maintain the guard and fight against any who undertook to besiege the garrison. The Athenians, when they found out that Nicanor was not acting honourably with them, sent an embassy to the kings and to Polyperchon, asking

1Continued in chap. 73. 1.2Immediately after Antipater’s death, Cassander appointed Nicanor commander of Munychia in place of Menyllus (Plutarch, Phocion, 31. 1; cp. chap. 18. 5 above). For Nicanor cp. note on chap. 39. 6. The following events to the death of Phocion (chap. 67. 6) belong to the winter of 319/18. For events in Greece to the death of Phocion cp. Plutarch, Phocion, 31–37; Nepos, Phocion, 3–4.187