Diodorus of Sicily

ἀρκεσθεὶς τῷ πρώτῳ προτερήματι, τὴν
δύναμιν ἀσινῆ διεφύλαξεν.
4Μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα ὁ μὲν Ἀγησίλαος μετὰ τῆς
δυνάμεως ἐπανῆλθεν εἰς τὴν Πελοπόννησον, οἱ
δὲ Θηβαῖοι διὰ τὴν Χαβρίου στρατηγίαν σωθέντες
ἐθαύμασαν τἀνδρὸς τὴν ἐν τῷ στρατηγήματι ἀγχίνοιαν.
ὁ δὲ Χαβρίας, πολλῶν καὶ καλῶν αὐτῷ
πεπραγμένων κατὰ πόλεμον, ἐπὶ τούτῳ μάλιστα
ἐσεμνύνετο τῷ στρατηγήματι, καὶ τὰς εἰκόνας τὰς
ὑπὸ τοῦ δήμου δοθείσας αὐτῷ καθίστανεν ἐχούσας
5τοῦτο τὸ σχῆμα. οἱ δὲ Θηβαῖοι μετὰ τὴν ἀπαλλαγὴν
τὴν Ἀγησιλάου στρατεύσαντες ἐπὶ Θεσπιὰς
τὴν μὲν προφυλακήν, οὖσαν ἀνδρῶν διακοσίων,
ἀνεῖλον, τῇ δὲ πόλει προσβολὰς συνεχεῖς ποιούμενοι,
καὶ μηδὲν ἀξιόλογον πράξαντες, ἀπῆγον τὴν
6δύναμιν εἰς τὰς Θήβας. Φοιβίδας δὲ ὁ Λακεδαιμόνιος,
ἔχων1 ἀξιόλογον φρουρὰν ἐν ταῖς Θεσπιαῖς,
ἐκχυθεὶς ἐκ τῆς πόλεως καὶ προπετῶς τοῖς ἀποχωροῦσι
Θηβαίοις ἐπιθέμενος, τῶν μὲν στρατιωτῶ
ἀπέβαλε πλείους τῶν πεντακοσίων, αὐτὸς δὲ λαμπρῶς
ἀγωνισάμενος καὶ πολλοῖς ἐναντίοις τραύμασι
περιπεσὼν ἡρωικῶς κατέστρεψε τὸν βίον.
34. Οὐ πολλῷ δ᾿ ὕστερον χρόνῳ πάλιν τῶν2
Λακεδαιμονίων τῇ αὐτῇ δυνάμει στρατευσάντων
ἐπὶ τὰς Θήβας, οἱ μὲν Θηβαῖοι δυσχωρίας τινὰς
ἑτέρας καταλαμβανόμενοι διεκώλυον μὲν τοὺς πολεμίους
λεηλατεῖν τὴν χώραν, κατὰ στόμα δὲ πρὸς
ἅπασαν τὴν δύναμιν ἐν τοῖς πεδίοις οὐκ ἐτόλμων


1ἔχων] AFLJ: Θεσπιαῖς ἔχων cet.2πάλιν τῶν Dindorf: πάντων.40Book XV

Agesilaüs, prudently satisfied with his first success, 377/6 b.c. brought his army through unharmed.
After this Agesilaüs returned with his army to the Peloponnese, while the Thebans, saved by the generalship of Chabrias, marvelled at his skill in strategy. Chabrias, though he had performed many gallant deeds in war, was particularly proud of this bit of strategy and he caused the statues which had been granted to him by his people to be erected to display that posture.1 The Thebans after the departure of Agesilaüs, leading an expedition against Thespiae, destroyed the advance outpost2 consisting of two hundred men, but after making repeated assaults on the city itself and accomplishing nothing worthy of mention, led their army back to Thebes. Phoebidas,3 the Lacedaemonian, who had a considerable garrison in Thespiae, sallied forth from the city, fell rashly upon the retreating Thebans, and lost more than five hundred soldiers, while he himself, fighting brilliantly, after receiving many wounds in front, met a hero’s death.
34. Not long after this the Lacedaemonians again4 took the field against Thebes in the same strength as before, but the Thebans, by occupying certain new obstacles, prevented the enemy from devastating the country, though they did not venture to offer battle in the plains face to face against the whole army of




1As described in chap. 32. 5. For the statues see Nepos, Chabrias, 1.2The camp site of Agesilaüs, chap. 32. 2.3See Xenophon, Hell. 5. 4. 42–46; Plutarch, Pelopidas, 15; Polyaenus, 2. 5. 2.4This is the campaign of a new year (this time 377), the account of which is found in Xenophon, Hell. 5. 4. 47–55; Plutarch, Agesilaüs, 26. 3 f.41