Diodorus of Sicily

σκευῇ κεκοσμημένον χρηματίζειν καὶ τὰ προστάγματα
διδόναι τοῖς ἡγεμόσι καὶ πάντα τὰ κατὰ
6τὴν βασιλείαν διοικεῖν ἐνεργῶς. “διόπερ οἶμαι1
δεῖν ἐκ τῆς βασιλικῆς γάζης κατασκευάσαι χρυσοῦν
θρόνον, ἐν ᾧ τεθέντος τοῦ διαδήματος καὶ
σκήπτρου καὶ στεφάνου καὶ τῆς ἄλλης κατασκευῆς
ἐπιθύειν ἅμ᾿ ἡμέρᾳ πάντας αὐτῷ τοὺς ἡγεμόνας καὶ
πλησίον τοῦ θρόνου συνεδρεύειν καὶ τὰ προστάγματα
λαμβάνειν ἐκ τοῦ ὀνόματος τοῦ βασιλέως, ὡς
ζῶντος καὶ προεστηκότος τῆς ἰδίας βασιλείας.”
61. Πάντων δ᾿ ἀποδεξαμένων τοὺς λόγους ταχέως
ἅπαντα κατεσκευάσθη τὰ πρὸς τὴν χρείαν,
ὡς ἂν πολυχρύσου τῆς βασιλικῆς οὔσης γάζης.
εὐθὺς οὖν κατασκευασθείσης μεγαλοπρεποῦς σκηνῆς
ὅ τε θρόνος ἔχων τὸ διάδημα καὶ τὸ σκῆπτρον
ἐτέθη καὶ τὰ ὅπλα οἶς εἰώθει χρῆσθαι. καὶ κειμένης
ἐσχάρας ἐχούσης πῦρ ἐπέθυον ἐκ κιβωτίου χρυσοῦ
πάντες οἱ ἡγεμόνες τόν τε λιβανωτὸν καὶ τῶν
ἄλλων εὐωδιῶν2 τὰ πολυτελέστατα καὶ προσεκύνουν
2ὡς θεὸν τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον. ἀκολούθως δὲ τούτοις
δίφρων πολλῶν κειμένων ἐκάθιζον ἐπὶ τούτων οἱ
τὰς ἡγεμονίας ἔχοντες καὶ συνεδρεύοντες ἐβουλεύοντο
περὶ τῶν ἀεὶ κατεπειγόντων. ὁ δ᾿ Εὐμενὴς
ἐν πᾶσι τοῖς χρηματιζομένοις ἴσον ἑαυτὸν τοῖς
ἄλλοις ἡγεμόσιν ἀποδεικνύων καὶ πάντας ταῖς
φιλανθρωποτάταις ὁμιλίαις δημαγωγῶν τόν τε καθ᾿
ἑαυτοῦ φθόνον ἀπετρίψατο καὶ πολλὴν εὔνοιαν ἐν
3τοῖς ἡγεμόσι πρὸς ἑαυτὸν κατεσκεύασεν. ἅμα δὲ
καὶ τῆς κατὰ τὸν βασιλέα δεισιδαιμονίας ἐνισχυούσης


1οἶμαι MSS., Fischer: οἴεσθαι Dindorf.2εὐωδιῶν Geer, cp. Book 1. 18. 6, θυμιαμάτων εὐωδῶν
Fischer: εὐωδῶν.178Book XVIII

a council, giving orders to the commanders, and 318 b.c. actively administering all the affairs of the monarchy. “Therefore,” he said, “I think that we must make ready a golden throne from the royal treasure, and that after the diadem, the sceptre, the crown, and the rest of the insignia have been placed on it, all the commanders must at daybreak offer incense to Alexander before it, hold the meetings of the council in its presence, and receive their orders in the name of the king just as if he were alive and at the head of his own kingdom.”
61. As all agreed to his proposal, everything needed was quickly made ready, for the royal treasure was rich in gold. Straightway then, when a magnificent tent had been set up, the throne was erected, upon which were placed the diadem, the sceptre, and the armour that Alexander had been wont to use. Then when an altar with a fire upon it had been put in place, all the commanders would make sacrifice from a golden casket, presenting frankincense and the most costly of the other kinds of incense and making obeisance to Alexander as to a god. After this those who exercised command would sit in the many chairs that had been placed about and take counsel together, deliberating upon the matters that from time to time required their attention. Eumenes, by placing himself on an equality with the other commanders in all the matters that were discussed and by seeking their favour through the most friendly intercourse, wore down the envy with which he had been regarded and secured for himself a great deal of goodwill among the commanders. As their reverence for the king grew stronger, they were all filled with
179