Diodorus of Sicily
2ὑπερβολὴν τῆς εὐνοίας. καὶ τὸ μὲν πρῶτον καταλαβόμενοι
μέρος τῆς πόλεως ἐψηφίσαντο τὰς μὲν
οἰκίας ἐμπρῆσαι, μετὰ δὲ τῶν ὅπλων ἐκχυθέντας
ἐκ τῆς πόλεως καὶ τῆς ὀρεινῆς ἐχομένους πορθεῖν
τὴν ὑπ᾿ Ἀντίγονον τεταγμένην χώραν, ὕστερον δὲ
μετανοήσαντες τοῦ μὲν ἐμπρῆσαι τὴν πόλιν ἀπέσχοντο,
δόντες δ᾿ ἑαυτοὺς εἰς λῃστείας καὶ καταδρομὰς
πολλὴν τῆς πολεμίας χώραν κατέφθειραν.
3ὁ δ᾿ Ἀντίγονος παραλαβὼν τὸ σῶμα καὶ καταικισάμενος
ἐπὶ τρεῖς ἡμέρας καὶ τοῦ νεκροῦ σῆψιν
λαβόντος ἀφεὶς αὐτὸν ἄταφον ἀνέζευξεν ἐκ τῆς
Πισιδικῆς. οἱ δὲ τῶν Τερμησσέων νέοι φυλάττοντες
τὴν πρὸς τὸν ᾐκισμένον εὔνοιαν τό τε σῶμα
ἀνείλαντο καὶ λαμπρῶς ἐκήδευσαν. οὕτως ἡ τῆς
εὐεργεσίας φύσις, ἴδιόν τι φίλτρον ἔχουσα πρὸς
τοὺς εὖ πεποιηκότας, ἀμετάθετον διαφυλάττει τὴν
4εἰς αὐτοὺς εὔνοιαν. ὁ δ᾿ οὖν Ἀντίγονος ἀναζεύξας
ἐκ τῆς Πισιδικῆς προῆγεν ἐπὶ Φρυγίας μετὰ πάσης
τῆς δυνάμεως. ὡς δὲ κατήντησεν εἰς Κρητῶν
πόλιν, ἧκεν πρὸς αὐτὸν Ἀριστόδημος ὁ Μιλήσιος
ἀπαγγέλλων ὅτι Ἀντίπατρος μὲν τετελεύτηκεν,
ἡ δὲ τῶν ὅλων ἡγεμονία καὶ τῶν βασιλέων ἡ
ἐπιμέλεια μεταπέπτωκεν εἰς Πολυπέρχοντα τὸν
5Μακεδόνα. ἡσθεὶς δ᾿ ἐπὶ τοῖς γεγονόσι μετέωρος
ἦν ταῖς ἐλπίσι καὶ διενοεῖτο τῶν κατὰ τὴν Ἀσίαν
ἔχεσθαι πραγμάτων καὶ τῆς κατ᾿ αὐτὴν ἡγεμονίας
μηδενὶ παραχωρεῖν.
Καὶ τὰ μὲν περὶ τὸν Ἀντίγονον ἐν τούτοις ἦν.
48. Κατὰ δὲ τὴν Μακεδονίαν Ἀντιπάτρου περιπεσόντος
ἀρρωστίᾳ βαρυτέρᾳ καὶ τοῦ γήρως συνεργοῦντος
πρὸς τὴν ἀπόλυσιν τοῦ βίου Ἀθηναῖοι
μὲν ἐξέπεμψαν πρεσβευτὴν πρὸς Ἀντίπατρον Δημάδην,
142Book XVIII

to Alcetas. At first they gained possession of 319 b.c. part of the town and voted to set the buildings on fire and then, rushing from the town under arms and keeping to the mountains, to plunder the country that was subject to Antigonus; later, however, they changed their minds and refrained from burning the city, but they devoted themselves to brigandage and guerrilla warfare, ravaging much of the hostile territory. As for Antigonus, he took the body of Alcetas and maltreated it for three days; then, as the corpse began to decay, he threw it out unburied and departed from Pisidia. But the young men of Termessus,
still preserving their goodwill for the victim, recovered the body and honoured it with splendid obsequies. Thus kindness in its very nature possesses the peculiar power of a love charm in behalf of benefactors, preserving unchanged men’s goodwill toward them. Be that as it may, Antigonus set out from Pisidia and marched toward Phrygia with all his forces. When he had come to Cretopolis, Aristodemus
of Miletus met him with the news that Antipater
had died, and that the supreme command and the guardianship of the kings had fallen to Polyperchon
the Macedonian. Being delighted at what had happened, he was carried away by hope and made up his mind to maintain a firm grip upon the government of Asia and to yield the rule of that continent to no one.
This was the situation in regard to Antigonus.1
48. As to Macedonia,2 after Antipater had been stricken by a rather serious illness, which old age was tending to make fatal, the Athenians sent Demades as envoy to Antipater, a man who had the


1Continued in chap. 50.2Continued from chap. 39. 7.143