Diodorus of Sicily

αὐτὸν1 τὸν πάντα πόλεμον ἐκ τῆς Ἀσίας εἰς
τὴν Εὐρώπην· ὡς δ᾿ ἤκουσε τὴν Μέμνονος τελευτήν,
συνήγαγε τῶν φίλων συνέδριον καὶ προέθηκε
βουλὴν πότερον δεῖ στρατηγοὺς καὶ στρατιὰν καταπέμπειν
ἐπὶ θάλατταν ἢ τὸν βασιλέα μετὰ πάσης
τῆς δυνάμεως καταβάντα διαγωνίζεσθαι τοῖς Μακεδόσιν.
2ἔνιοι μὲν οὖν ἔφασαν δεῖν αὐτὸν τὸν βασιλέα
παρατάττεσθαι καὶ τὸ πλῆθος τῶν Περσῶν ἀπεφαίνοντο
προθυμότερον ἀγωνιεῖσθαι· Χαρίδημος δ᾿
Ἀθηναῖος, ἀνὴρ θαυμαζόμενος ἐπ᾿ ἀνδρείᾳ καὶ
δεινότητι στρατηγίας, συνεστρατεύσατο μὲν Φιλίππῳ
τῷ βασιλεῖ καὶ πάντων τῶν ἐπιτηδευμάτων
ἀρχηγὸς καὶ σύμβουλος γεγονὼς ἦν, συνεβούλευεν
δὲ τῷ Δαρείῳ μὴ προπετῶς ἀποκυβεῦσαι περὶ τῆς
βασιλείας, ἀλλ᾿ αὐτὸν μὲν τὸ βάρος καὶ τὴν τῆς
Ἀσίας ἀρχὴν συνέχειν, ἐπὶ δὲ τὸν πόλεμον ἀποστέλλειν
στρατηγὸν πεῖραν δεδωκότα τῆς ἰδίας
3ἀρετῆς.2 δύναμιν δ᾿ ἱκανὴν εἶναι δέκα μυριάδων,
ἧς τὸ τρίτον Ἕλληνας ποιῆσαι μισθοφόρους, καὶ δι᾿
ἐμφάσεως αὐτὸς ἀνεδέχετο κατορθώσειν τὴν ἐπιβολὴν
ταύτην.
4Τὸ μὲν οὖν πρῶτον ὁ βασιλεὺς συγκατετίθετο
τοῖς λεγομένοις, μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα τῶν φίλων γενναιότερον
ἀντειπόντων καὶ τὸν Χαρίδημον εἰς ὑποψίαν
ἀγόντων ὅτι τῆς στρατηγίας ὀρέγεται τυχεῖν, ὅπως
τοῖς Μακεδόσι προδῷ τὴν Περσῶν ἡγεμονίαν, ὁ




1Added by Fischer.2So Rhodoman: ἀρχῆς.200Book XVII

the impact of the war from Asia into Europe, but 333/2 b.c. learning of his death called a session of his Council of Friends and laid before them the alternatives, either to send generals with an army down to the coast or for himself, the king, to march down with all his armed forces and fight the Macedonians in person. Some said that the king must join in battle personalty, and they argued that the Persians would fight better in that event. Charidemus,1 however, the Athenian, a man generally admired for his bravery and skill as a commander—he had been a comrade-in-arms of King Philip and had led or counselled all his successes2—recommended that Dareius should on no account stake his throne rashly on a gamble, but should keep in his own hands the reserve strength and the control of Asia while sending to the war a general who had given proof of his ability. One hundred thousand men would be an adequate force, so long as a third of these were Greek mercenaries, and Charidemus hinted that he himself would assume the responsibility for the success of the plan.
The king was moved by his arguments at first but his Friends opposed them stoutly, and even brought Charidemus into suspicion of wanting to get the command so that he could betray the Persian empire to


1Curtius, 3. 2. 10–19, with strong reminiscences of the rôle of Demaratus in Herodotus. Charidemus is not mentioned in Justin, Plutarch, or Arrian (except earlier, 1. 10. 4–6).2It seems impossible that Diodorus can be right here. Charidemus was not always a dutiful Athenian, but he was one of the generals whom Alexander had demanded after the capture of Thebes, and who had had to flee like Ephialtes and Thrasybulus (chap. 25. 6). It is possible that Charidemus had visited Philip’s court about 354 b.c., when his patron Cersobleptes became Philip’s friend, but most of Charidemus’s career was spent in operations against the Macedonians (Berve, Alexanderreich, 2, no. 823).201