Diodorus of Sicily

τὴν ἀδιαίρετον1 τετρακισμύριοι, εἰς δὲ τὴν Ἀγυριναίαν
μύριοι διὰ τὸ μέγεθος καὶ κάλλος τῆς χώρας.
6Εὐθὺ δὲ καὶ τοὺς προϋπάρχοντας νόμους ἐν ταῖς
Συρακούσσαις, οὓς συνέγραψε Διοκλῆς, διώρθωσε.
καὶ τοὺς μὲν περὶ τῶν ἰδιωτικῶν2 συμβολαίων ἢ
κληρονομιῶν εἴασεν ἀμεταθέτους, τοὺς δὲ περὶ
τῶν δημοσίων νενομοθετημένους πρὸς τὴν ἰδίαν
ὑπόστασιν ὥς ποτ᾿ ἐδόκει συμφέρειν διώρθωσεν.
7ἐπιστάτης δ᾿ ἦν καὶ διορθωτὴς τῆς νομοθεσίας
Κέφαλος ὁ Κορίνθιος, ἀνὴρ ἐν παιδείᾳ καὶ συνέσει
δεδοξασμένος. ἀπὸ δὲ τούτων γενόμενος τοὺς μὲν
Λεοντίνους εἰς Συρακούσσας μετῴκισεν, εἰς δὲ τὴν
Καμαριναίαν οἰκήτορας προσθεὶς ἐπηύξεσε τὴν
πόλιν.
83. Καθόλου δὲ πάντα τὰ κατὰ τὴν Σικελίαν
εἰρηνικῶς καταστήσας ἐποίησε τὰς πόλεις ταχὺ
λαβεῖν πολλὴν αὔξησιν πρὸς εὐδαιμονίαν. ἐκ πολλοῦ
γὰρ χρόνου διὰ τὰς στάσεις καὶ τοὺς ἐμφυλίους
πολέμους, ἔτι δὲ τὸ πλῆθος τῶν ἐπανισταμένων
αἰεὶ τυράννων αἱ μὲν πόλεις ἔρημοι τῶν οἰκητόρων
ἦσαν, αἱ δὲ χῶραι διὰ τὴν ἀργίαν ἐξηγρίωντο
καὶ καρπῶν ἡμέρων ἄφοροι3 καθειστήκεισαν· τότε
δὲ διὰ τὸ πλῆθος τῶν ἐπιπολασάντων οἰκητόρων
καὶ διὰ τὴν πολυχρόνιον ἐπιγεγενημένην εἰρήνην
ἐξημερώθησαν ταῖς ἐργασίαις καὶ πολλοὺς καὶ
παντοδαποὺς ἐξήνεγκαν καρπούς. τούτους δ᾿ οἱ
Σικελιῶται λυσιτελῶς πιπράσκοντες τοῖς ἐμπόροις
ταχὺ προσανέδραμον ταῖς οὐσίαις.
2Τοιγαροῦν διὰ τὴν ἐκ τούτων εὐπορίαν πολλὰ



1See SIG3, 141. 10 ἀδιαιρέτου sc. χώρας.2ἰδιωτικῶν Wesseling, cp. chap. 70. 5: ἰδιωτῶν PXR,
ἰδίων F.3So Stephanus: ἄποροι.68Book XVI

the vacant land of Syracuse and ten thousand to that 339/8 b.c. of Agyrium, because of its extent and quality.
At this time, also, Timoleon revised the existing laws of Syracuse, which Diocles had composed.1 Those concerning private contracts and inheritance he allowed to remain unaltered, but he amended those concerned with public affairs in whatever way seemed advantageous to his own concept. Chairman and director of this legislative programme was Cephalus the Corinthian, a man distinguished for education and intelligence. When his hands were free of this matter, Timoleon transferred the people of Leontini to Syracuse, but sent additional settlers to Camarina and enlarged the city.
83. So, having established peaceful conditions everywhere throughout Sicily, he caused the cities to experience a vast growth of prosperity.2 For many years, because of domestic troubles and border wars, and still more because of the numbers of tyrants who kept constantly appearing, the cities had become destitute of inhabitants and the open country had become a wilderness for lack of cultivation, producing no useful crops. But now new settlers streamed into the land in great numbers, and as a long period of peace set in, the fields were reclaimed for cultivation and bore abundant crops of all sorts. These the Siceliot Greeks sold to merchants at good prices and rapidly increased their wealth.
It was by reason of the funds so acquired that many


1Cp. Book 13. 33 and 35.2Nepos, Timoleon, 3. 1–2. These observations are probably Diodorus’s own, based on his personal experience and knowledge. Note the reference to his city, Agyrium, in chap, 83. 3. Kokalos, 4 (1958) is devoted exclusively to articles concerned with the effect of Timoleon on Sicily.69