Diodorus of Sicily
5ἀναγνώσεως, οὐκ ἀλόγως τοῦτο πάσχοντες· τὸ γὰρ
τῆς ἱστορίας γένος ἁπλοῦν ἐστι καὶ συμφυὲς αὑτῷ
καὶ τὸ σύνολον ἐμψύχῳ σώματι παραπλήσιον, οὗ τὸ
μὲν ἐσπαραγμένον ἐστέρηται τῆς ψυχικῆς χάριτος,
τὸ δὲ τὴν ἀναγκαίαν σύνθεσιν ἔχον εὐκαίρως τετήρηται
καὶ τῷ συμφυεῖ τῆς ὅλης περιγραφῆς ἐπιτερπῆ
καὶ σαφῆ παρίστησι τὴν ἀνάγνωσιν.
2. Οὐ μὴν παντελῶς γε τοὺς ῥητορικοὺς λόγους
ἀποδοκιμάζοντες ἐκβάλλομεν ἐκ τῆς ἱστορικῆς
πραγματείας τὸ παράπαν· ὀφειλούσης γὰρ τῆς ἱστορίας
τῇ ποικιλίᾳ κεκοσμῆσθαι κατ᾿ ἐνίους τόπους
ἀνάγκη προσλαμβάνεσθαι καὶ τοὺς τοιούτους λόγους—καὶ
ταύτης τῆς εὐκαιρίας οὐδ᾿ ἂν ἐμαυτὸν ἀποστερῆσαι
βουληθείην—ὥσθ᾿ ὅταν τὰ τῆς περιστάσεως
ἀπαιτῇ πρεσβευτοῦ ἢ συμβούλου δημηγορίαν
ἢ τῶν ἄλλων τι τοιοῦτον, ὁ μὴ τεθαρρηκότως
συγκαταβαίνων πρὸς τοὺς ἐν τοῖς λόγοις ἀγῶνας
2καὶ αὐτὸς ὑπαίτιος ἂν εἴη. οὐκ ὀλίγας γὰρ ἄν τις
αἰτίας εὕροι, καθ᾿ ἃς κατὰ πολλὰ ἀναγκαίως παραληφθήσεται
τὰ τῆς ῥητορείας· ἢ γὰρ πολλῶν εἰρημένων
εὐστόχως καὶ καλῶς οὐ παραλειπτέον δι᾿
ὀλιγωρίαν τὰ μνήμης ἄξια καὶ τῇ ἱστορίᾳ κεκραμένην
ἔχοντα τὴν ὠφέλειαν, ἢ μεγάλων καὶ λαμπρῶν
τῶν ὑποθέσεων οὐσῶν οὐ περιορατέον ἐλάττονα
τῶν ἔργων φανῆναι τὸν λόγον· ἔστι δ᾿ ὅτε παρὰ
προσδοκίαν τοῦ τέλους ἐκβάντος ἀναγκασθησόμεθα
τοῖς οἰκείοις1 τῆς ὑποθέσεως λόγοις χρήσασθαι
χάριν τοῦ λῦσαι τὴν ἀλογίαν.
3Ἀλλὰ περὶ μὲν τούτων ἅλις ἡμῖν ἐχέτω, περὶ
δὲ τῶν ὑποκειμένων πράξεων ῥητέον, παραθέντας
πρότερον τοὺς οἰκείους τῇ γραφῇ χρόνους. ἐν
μὲν οὖν ταῖς προηγουμέναις βύβλοις ἀναγεγράφαμεν
1οἰκείοις added by Fischer, cp. Book 19. 34. 3.146Book XX

the reading entirely; and this attitude is not without reason, for the genius of history is simple and self-consistent
and as a whole is like a living organism. If it is mangled, it is stripped of its living charm; but if it retains its necessary unity, it is duly preserved and, by the harmony of the whole composition, renders the reading pleasant and clear.
2. Nevertheless, in disapproving rhetorical speeches, we do not ban them wholly from historical works; for, since history needs to be adorned with variety, in certain places it is necessary to call to our aid even such passages—and of this opportunity I should not wish to deprive myself—so that, whenever the situation requires either a public address from an ambassador or a statesman, or some such thing from the other characters, whoever does not boldly enter the contest of words would himself be blameworthy. For one would find no small number of reasons for which on many occasions the aid of rhetoric will necessarily be enlisted; for when many things have been said well and to the point, one should not in contempt pass over what is worthy of memory and possesses a utility not alien to history, nor when the subject matter is great and glorious should one allow the language to appear inferior to the deeds; and there are times when, an event turning out contrary to expectation, we shall be forced to use words suitable to the subject in order to explain the seeming paradox.
But let this suffice on this subject; we must now write about the events that belong to my theme, first setting forth the chronological scheme of our narrative. In the preceding Books we have written of the


147