Diodorus of Sicily

μὲν γὰρ Μέντωρ ἐν τοῖς παραθαλαττίοις μέρεσι
τῆς Ἀσίας ἡγεμὼν μέγιστος ἀποδειχθεὶς τῷ
βασιλεῖ μεγάλας παρείχετο χρείας ἐκ μὲν τῆς
Ἑλλάδος μισθοφόρους ἀθροίζων καὶ πέμπων πρὸς
Ἀρταξέρξην, κατὰ δὲ τὰς πράξεις ἀνδρείως καὶ
8πιστῶς ἅπαντα1 διοικῶν· ὁ δὲ Βαγώας ἐν ταῖς ἄνω
σατραπείαις ἅπαντα τῷ βασιλεῖ διῳκηκὼς1 τοσοῦτον
ἴσχυσε διὰ τὴν πρὸς τὸν Μέντορα κοινωνίαν
τῶν πράξεων ὥστε τῆς βασιλείας κύριον εἶναι καὶ
μηδὲν πράττειν τὸν Ἀρταξέρξην ἄνευ τῆς ἐκείνου
γνώμης. καὶ μετὰ τὴν ἐκείνου τελευτὴν τοὺς διαδόχους
αἰεὶ τῆς βασιλείας οὗτος ἀπεδείκνυτο καὶ
πάντα βασιλέως εἶχε πλὴν τῆς προσηγορίας. ἀλλὰ
περὶ μὲν τούτων τὰ κατὰ μέρος ἐν τοῖς οἰκείοις
χρόνοις ἀναγράψομεν.
51. Τότε δὲ μετὰ τὴν τῆς Βουβάστου παράδοσιν
αἱ λοιπαὶ πόλεις καταπλαγεῖσαι καθ᾿ ὁμολογίαν παρεδόθησαν
τοῖς Πέρσαις. ἐν δὲ τῇ Μέμφει διατρίβων
ὁ βασιλεὺς Νεκτανεβὼς καὶ θεωρῶν τὴν
τῶν πόλεων ἐπὶ τὴν προδοσίαν2 ὁρμὴν οὐκ ἐτόλμησεν
ὑποστῆναι τοὺς ὑπὲρ τῆς ἡγεμονίας κινδύνους.
ἀπογνοὺς οὖν τὴν βασιλείαν καὶ τὰ πλεῖστα τῶν
χρημάτων ἀναλαβὼν ἔφυγεν εἰς τὴν Αἰθιοπίαν.
2Ἀρταξέρξης δὲ παραλαβὼν πᾶσαν τὴν Αἴγυπτον
καὶ τῶν ἀξιολογωτάτων πόλεων τὰ τείχη περιελὼν
τὰ μὲν ἱερὰ συλήσας ἤθροισεν ἀργύρου τε καὶ
χρυσοῦ πλῆθος, ἀπήνεγκε δὲ καὶ τὰς ἐκ τῶν
ἀρχαίων ἱερῶν ἀναγραφάς, ἃς ὕστερον Βαγώας

1So Stephanus: ἅπαντα διῳκηκὼς τῷ βασιλεῖ τοσοῦτον ἴσχυσεν PX by haplography (ὁ Βαγώας superscribed X); RF interchange διοικῶν and κιῳκηκώς.2ἐπὶ τὴν προδοσίαν supplied by Fischer (cp. chap. 54. 2).380Book XVI

at Artaxerxes’ court. In fact Mentor, having been 350/49 b.c. appointed to the chief command in the coastal districts of Asia, performed great services to the King in gathering mercenaries from Greece and sending them to Artaxerxes, and in the course of his activities administering all his duties courageously and loyally. As for Bagoas, after he had administered all the King’s affairs in the upper satrapies,1 he rose to such power because of his partnership with Mentor that he was master of the kingdom, and Artaxerxes did nothing without his advice. And after Artaxerxes’ death he designated in every case the successor to the throne and enjoyed all the functions of kingship save the title. But of these matters we shall record the details in their proper chronological sequence.
51. At the time under consideration, after the surrender of Bubastus, the remaining cities, terror-stricken,
were delivered to the Persians by capitulation. But King Nectanebôs, while still tarrying in Memphis and perceiving the trend of the cities toward betrayal, did not dare risk battles for his dominion. So giving up hope of his kingship and taking with him the greater part of his possessions, he fled into Aethiopia.
Artaxerxes, after taking over all Egypt and demolishing the walls of the most important cities, by plundering the shrines gathered a vast quantity of silver and gold, and he carried off the inscribed records from the ancient temples, which later on




1In the interior. Bagoas was commander of the King’s bodyguard. He arranged the succession by the use of poison (cp. Book 17. 5. 3–4) and was himself its victim.381