Diodorus of Sicily

τὴν ἀπὸ τοῦ δυνάστου τιμωρίαν νυκτὸς ἐπέθεντο
τοῖς ἐν τῷ φρουρίῳ καὶ τῇ μάχῃ κρατούμενοι
κατελάβοντο τόπον ἐρυμνόν, ὄντες οὐκ ἐλάττους τῶν
χιλίων, ὧν ἦσαν Συρακόσιοι πλείους τῶν πεντακοσίων·
6Ἀγαθοκλῆς δὲ πυθόμενος τὸ πεπραγμένον
ἧκε μετὰ τῆς δυνάμεως καὶ καταβιβάσας ὑποσπόνδους
τοὺς ἐπιθεμένους ἅπαντας ἀπέσφαξεν.
40. Ἀπὸ δὲ τῆς μάχης ταύτης γενόμενος καὶ
πάντα τῇ διανοίᾳ σκοπούμενος πρὸς τὸ λαβεῖν τοὺς
Καρχηδονίους ὑποχειρίους ἐξέπεμψε πρεσβευτὴν
Ὄρθωνα τὸν Συρακόσιον πρὸς Ὀφέλλαν εἰς Κυρήνην.
οὗτος δ᾿ ἦν μὲν τῶν φίλων τῶν συνεστρατευμένων
Ἀλεξάνδρῳ, κυριεύων δὲ τῶν περὶ
Κυρήνην πόλεων καὶ δυνάμεως ἁδρᾶς περιεβάλετο
2ταῖς ἐλπίσι μείζονα δυναστείαν. τοιαύτην οὖν αὐτοῦ
διάνοιαν ἔχοντος ἧκεν ὁ παρ᾿ Ἀγαθοκλέους
πρεσβευτής, ἀξιῶν συγκαταπολεμῆσαι Καρχηδονίους·
ἀντὶ δὲ ταύτης τῆς χρείας ἐπηγγέλλετο τὸν
Ἀγαθοκλέα συγχωρήσειν αὐτῷ τῶν ἐν Λιβύῃ
3πραγμάτων κυριεύειν. εἶναι γὰρ ἱκανὴν αὐτῷ τὴν
Σικελίαν, ἵν᾿ ἐξῇ τῶν ἀπὸ τῆς Καρχηδόνος κινδύνων
ἀπαλλαχθέντα μετ᾿ ἀδείας κρατεῖν ἁπάσης τῆς
νήσου· παρακεῖσθαι δὲ καὶ τὴν Ἰταλίαν αὐτῷ πρὸς
ἐπαύξησιν τῆς ἀρχῆς, ἐὰν κρίνῃ μειζόνων ὀρέγεσθαι.
4τὴν μὲν γὰρ Λιβύην διεζευγμένην μεγάλῳ καὶ
χαλεπῷ πελάγει μηδαμῶς ἁρμόζειν αὐτῷ, εἰς ἣν
καὶ νῦν οὐ κατ᾿ ἐπιθυμίαν, ἀλλὰ κατ᾿ ἀνάγκην
5ἀφῖχθαι. ὁ δὲ Ὀφέλλας τῇ πάλαι βεβουλευμένῃ


248Book XX

from the prince, attacked those in the fortress at 308 b.c. night and, although defeated in the battle, occupied a strong position, being in number not less than a thousand, of whom above five hundred were Syracusans.
However, when Agathocles heard what had happened, he came with his army, induced them to leave their position under a truce, and slaughtered all those who had made the attack.
40. After he had finished this battle, Agathocles, examining in mind every device for bringing the Carthaginians into subjection, sent Orthon the Syracusan
as an envoy into Cyrenê to Ophelias.1 The latter was one of the companions who had made the campaign with Alexander; now, master of the cities of Cyrenê and of a strong army, he was ambitious for a greater realm. And so it was to a man in this state of mind that there came the envoy from Agathocles inviting him to join him in subduing the Carthaginians.2 In return for this service Orthon promised Ophellas that Agathocles would permit him to exercise dominion over Libya. For, he said, Sicily was enough for Agathocles, if only it should be possible for him, relieved of danger from Carthage, to rule over all the island without fear. Moreover, Italy was close at his hand for increasing his realm if he should decide to reach after greater things. For Libya, separated by a wide and dangerous sea, did not suit him at all, into which land he had even now come through no desire but because of necessity. Ophellas, now that to his long-considered judgement


1In 322 b.c. Ophellas as general of Ptolemy restored the
oligarchy in Cyrenê, which had been threatened by the mercenary
leader Thibron in the service of the democrats (Book
18. 19–21). He seems to have remained in Cyrenê as Ptolemy’s governor, although he is not mentioned in connection with the insurrection there put down by Ptolemy in 312 b.c. (Book 19. 79. 1–3).2According to Justin, 22. 7. 4, Ophellas rather than Agathocles first proposed the alliance.249