Diodorus of Sicily

τὰ δὲ φρούρια καὶ τὰς πόλεις ἐνεχείρισεν
Ἀγαθοκλεῖ, διετῆ χρόνον ἀναλώσας εἰς τὴν τῶν
πολεμίων παράθεσιν.
3Κατὰ δὲ τὴν Ἰταλίαν Ῥωμαῖοι μὲν Παιλιγνοὺς1
καταπολεμήσαντες τὴν χώραν ἀφείλοντο καί τισι
τῶν δοξάντων τὰ Ῥωμαίων πεφρονηκέναι μετέδωκαν
τῆς πολιτείας. μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα Σαμνιτῶν τὴν
Φαλερνῖτιν πορθούντων ἀνέζευξαν ἐπ᾿ αὐτοὺς οἱ
ὕπατοι καὶ γενομένης παρατάξεως προετέρησαν οἱ
4Ῥωμαῖοι. σημείας μὲν οὖν εἷλον εἴκοσι, στρατιώτας
δ᾿ ἐζώγρησαν ὑπὲρ τοὺς δισχιλίους. τῶν δ᾿
ὑπάτων εὐθὺς ἑλόντων πόλιν Βῶλαν, Γέλλιος Γάιος
ὁ τῶν Σαμνιτῶν ἡγεμὼν ἐφάνη μετὰ στρατιωτῶν
ἑξακισχιλίων. γενομένης δὲ μάχης ἰσχυρᾶς αὐτός
τε ὁ Γέλλιος ἑάλω καὶ τῶν ἄλλων Σαμνιτῶν οἱ
πλεῖστοι μὲν κατεκόπησαν, τινὲς δε καὶ ζῶντες συνελήφθησαν.
οἱ δ᾿ ὕπατοι τοιούτοις προτερήμασι
χρησάμενοι τῶν συμμαχίδων πόλεων τὰς ἁλούσας
ἀνεκτήσαντο Σώραν, Ἁρπίναν καὶ Σερεννίαν.
91. Τοῦ δ᾿ ἐνιαυσίου χρόνου διεληλυθότος Ἀθήνησι
μὲν ἦρχε Φερεκλῆς, ἐν Ῥώμῃ δὲ τὴν ὑπατικὴν
ἀρχὴν διεδέξαντο Πόπλιος Σεμπρώνιος καὶ Πόπλιος
Σολπίκιος, ὀλυμπιὰς δ᾿ ἤχθη παρὰ τοῖς Ἠλείοις
ἑνάτη πρὸς ταῖς ἑκατὸν δέκα, καθ᾿ ἣν ἐνίκα στάδιον
Ἀνδρομένης Κορίνθιος. ἐπὶ δὲ τούτων Δημήτριος





1Παιλιγνοὺς Fischer in apparatus (cp. Ptolemaeus, Geography,
3. 1. 16. 55): Παλινίους RX, Παληνίους F.380Book XX

strongholds and the cities to Agathocles, spending 305 b.c. two years in the delivery of the enemy.1
In Italy2 the Romans defeated the Paeligni and took their land, and to some of those who seemed well disposed toward Home, they granted citizenship. Thereafter, since the Samnites were plundering Falernitis,3 the consuls took the field against them, and in the battle that followed the Romans were victorious. They took twenty standards and made prisoners of more than two thousand soldiers. The consuls at once took the city of Bola, but Gellius Gaius, the leader of the Samnites, appeared with six thousand soldiers. A hard fought battle took place in which Gellius himself was made prisoner, and of the other Samnites most were cut down but some were captured alive. The consuls, taking advantage of such victories, recovered those allied cities that had been captured: Sora, Harpina, and Serennia.4
91. When that year had passed, Pherecles became 304 b.c. archon in Athens and in Rome Publius Sempronius and Publius Sulpicius received the consulship5; and in Elis the Olympian Games were celebrated for the one hundred and nineteenth time, at which celebration Andromenes of Corinth won the footrace. While


1Continued in chap. 101.2Continued from chap. 80. Cp. Livy, 9. 44.3The Ager Falernus is in northern Campania, a little to
the west of the Ager Stellatinus where Livy places these
Samnite raids.4Livy (9. 44) places three battles in this year, the first indecisive, the other two decisive Roman victories with 21 standards captured in one and 26 in the other. According to him Bovianum (not Bola, which is unknown) was captured after the second battle (not between them), the Samnite leader is named Statius Gellius (not Gellius Gains), and the three cities recovered are Sora, Arpinum, and Cesennia (or Censennia). Diodorus returns to Italian affairs in chap. 101. 5.5Pherecles was archon in 304/3 b.c. Livy, 9. 45. 1, gives the consuls of 304 b.c. as P. Sulpicius Saverrio and P. Sempronius Sophus.381