Diodorus of Sicily

πολιτικῆς ἐν ἀνέσει καὶ σκιατροφίᾳ γεγενημένης,
τῆς δ᾿ ἐν ἀγραυλίᾳ καὶ συνεχέσι στρατείαις γεγυμνασμένης.
5διὸ καὶ μάχης γενομένης οἱ περὶ
τὸν Λεπτίνην ταχὺ τοὺς Ἀκραγαντίνους τρεψάμενοι
συνεδίωξαν εἰς τὴν πόλιν· ἔπεσον δ᾿ ἐπὶ τῆς παρατάξεως
τῶν ἡττηθέντων πεζοὶ μὲν περὶ πεντακοσίους,
ἱππεῖς δὲ πλείω τῶν πεντήκοντα. εἶθ᾿ οἱ
μὲν Ἀκραγαντῖνοι δυσφοροῦντες ἐπὶ τοῖς ἐλαττώμασιν
ἐν αἰτίαις εἶχον τὸν Ξενόδοκον, ὡς δι᾿ ἐκεῖνον
δὶς ἡττημένοι· ὁ δὲ φοβηθεὶς τὰς ἐπιφερομένας
εὐθύνας καὶ κρίσεις ἀπεχώρησεν εἰς τὴν Γέλαν.
63. Ἀγαθοκλῆς δὲ ἐν ἡμέραις ὀλίγαις καὶ πεζῇ
καὶ κατὰ θάλατταν νενικηκὼς τοὺς πολεμίους ἔθυε
τοῖς θεοῖς καὶ λαμπρὰς ὑποδοχὰς τῶν φίλων ἐποιεῖτο.
ἀπετίθετο δ᾿ ἐν τοῖς πότοις τὸ τῆς τυραννίδος
ἀξίωμα καὶ τῶν τυχόντων ἰδιωτῶν ταπεινότερον
ἑαυτὸν ἀπεδείκνυεν, ἅμα μὲν διὰ τῆς τοιαύτης
πολιτείας θηρώμενος τὴν παρὰ τῶν πολλῶν εὔνοιαν
ἅμα δὲ διδοὺς ἐν τῇ μέθῃ καθ᾿ αὑτοῦ παρρησίαν,
ἀκριβῶς κατενόει τὴν ἑκάστου διάνοιαν, τῆς ἀληθείας
ἐκφερομένης ἀπαρακαλύπτως διὰ τὸν οἶνον.
2ὑπάρχων δὲ καὶ φύσει γελωτοποιὸς καὶ μῖμος οὐδ᾿
ἐν ταῖς ἐκκλησίαις ἀπείχετο τοῦ σκώπτειν τοὺς
καθημένους καί τινας αὐτῶν εἰκάζειν, ὥστε τὸ
πλῆθος πολλάκις εἰς γέλωτα ἐκτρέπεσθαι καθάπερ
τινὰ τῶν ἠθολόγων ἢ θαυματοποιῶν θεωροῦντας.
3δορυφορούμενος δὲ ὑπὸ πλήθους εἰς τὰς ἐκκλησίας
εἰσῄει μόνος, οὐχ ὁμοίως Διονυσίῳ τῷ τυράννῳ·
οὗτος γὰρ ἐπὶ τοσοῦτον ἀπίστως διέκειτο πρὸς
ἅπαντας ὥστε κατὰ μὲν τὸ πλεῖστον κομᾶν καὶ
πωγωνοτροφεῖν, ὅπως μὴ συναναγκασθῇ τῷ τοῦ
κουρέως σιδήρῳ παραβαλεῖν τὰ κυριώτατα μέρη
314Book XX

amid indulgence and a sheltered way of life and the 307 b.c. other had been trained in military service in the field and in constant campaigns. Therefore when battle was joined, Leptines quickly routed the men of Acragas and pursued them into the city; and there fell in the battle on the side of the vanquished about five hundred foot soldiers and more than fifty horsemen. Then the people of Acragas, vexed over their disasters, brought charges against Xenodocus, saying that because of him they had twice been defeated; but he, fearing the impending investigation and trial, departed to Gela.
63. Agathocles, having within a few days defeated his enemies both on land and on sea, sacrificed to the gods and gave lavish entertainments for his friends. In his drinking bouts he used to put off the pomp of tyranny and to show himself more humble than the ordinary citizens; and by seeking through a policy of this sort the goodwill of the multitude and at the same time giving men licence to speak against him in their cups he used to discover exactly the opinion of each, since through wine the truth is brought to light without concealment. Being by nature also a buffoon and a mimic, not even in the meetings of the assembly did he abstain from jeering at those who were present and from portraying certain of them, so that the common people would often break out into laughter as if they were watching one of the impersonators or conjurors. With a crowd serving as his bodyguard he used to enter the assembly unattended, unlike Dionysius the tyrant. For the latter was so distrustful of one and all that as a rule he let his hair and beard grow long so that he need not submit the most vital parts of his body to the
315