Diodorus of Sicily
4ἀπολείπων, τοὺς δὲ μεθ᾿ ἑαυτοῦ διακομίζων· πρόδηλον
γὰρ ἦν ὡς οἱ μένοντες ἐν ταῖς Συρακούσσαις,
κἂν ἀλλοτριώτατα τυγχάνωσι πρὸς τὸν δυνάστην
διακείμενοι,1 διὰ τὴν πρὸς τοὺς ἀπογόνους εὔνοιαν
οὐδὲν ἂν πράξειαν ἄτοπον κατὰ Ἀγαθοκλέους.
5ἀπορούμενος δὲ χρημάτων τά τε τῶν ὀρφανῶν παρὰ
τῶν ἐπιτροπευόντων εἰσεπράξατο, φάσκων πολὺ
βέλτιον ἐκείνων ἐπιτροπεύσειν καὶ τοῖς παισὶν εἰς
ἡλικίαν ἐλθοῦσι πιστότερον ἀποδώσειν, ἐδανείσατο
δὲ καὶ παρὰ τῶν ἐμπόρων καί τινα τῶν ἐν τοῖς
ἱεροῖς ἀναθημάτων ἔλαβεν καὶ τῶν γυναικῶν τὸν
6κόσμον περιείλετο. ἔπειθ᾿ ὁρῶν2 τῶν εὐπορωτάτων
τοὺς πλείστους δυσχεραίνοντας τοῖς πραττομένοις
καὶ πρὸς αὐτὸν ἀλλοτριώτατα διακειμένους συνήγαγεν
ἐκκλησίαν, ἐν ᾗ περί τε τῆς προγεγενημένης
συμφορᾶς καὶ τῶν προσδοκωμένων δεινῶν κατοδυρόμενος
αὐτὸς μὲν ῥᾳδίως ὑπομενεῖν3 ἔφησε τὴν
πολιορκίαν συνήθης ὢν πάσῃ κακοπαθείᾳ, ἐλεεῖν δὲ
τοὺς πολίτας, εἰ συγκλεισθέντες ἀναγκασθήσονται
7πολιορκίαν ὑπομένειν. διεκελεύετο οὖν σώζειν
ἑαυτοὺς μετὰ τῶν ἰδίων κτήσεων τοὺς μὴ βουλομένους
ὑπομένειν ὅ τι ποτ᾿ ἂν δοκῇ τῇ τύχῃ πάσχειν.
ἐξορμησάντων δ᾿ ἐκ τῆς πόλεως τῶν μάλιστ᾿ εὐπόρων
καὶ μισούντων τὸν δυνάστην τούτους μὲν
ἐπαποστείλας τινὰς τῶν μισθοφόρων ἀνεῖλε καὶ τὰς
8οὐσίας εἰς αὑτὸν ἀνέλαβε, διὰ δὲ μιᾶς ἀνοσίου πράξεως
χρημάτων εὐπορήσας καὶ τῶν ἀλλοτρίως διακειμένων
πρὸς αὐτὸν καθαρὰν ποιήσας τὴν πόλιν
ἠλευθέρωσε τῶν οἰκετῶν τοὺς εὐθέτους εἰς στρατείαν.
1διακείμενοι added by Dindorf, cp. § 6.2καὶ after ὁρῶν omitted by Fischer.3ὑπομενεῖν Dindorf: ὑπομένειν MSS. followed by Fischer.152Book XX

in the city and taking the others across with him; 310 b.c. for it was clear that those who remained in Syracuse, even if they were most ill disposed toward the tyrant, because of their affection for their relatives would do nothing unbecoming against Agathocles. Since he was in need of money he exacted the property of the orphans from those who were their guardians, saying that he would guard it much better than they and return it more faithfully to the children when they became of age; and he also borrowed from the merchants, took some of the dedications in the temples, and stripped the women of their jewels. Then, seeing that the majority of the very wealthy were vexed by his measures and were very hostile to him, he summoned an assembly in which, deploring both the past disaster and the expected hardships, he said that he himself would endure the siege easily because he was accustomed to every manner of hardship, but that he pitied the citizens if they should be shut in and forced to endure a siege. He therefore ordered those to save themselves and their own possessions who were unwilling to endure whatever fortune might see fit that they should suffer. But when those who were wealthiest and most bitter against the tyrant had set out from the city, sending after them some of his mercenaries, he killed the men themselves and confiscated their property. When, through a single unholy act, he had gained an abundance of wealth and had cleared the city of those who were opposed to him, he freed those of their slaves who were fit for military service.
153