Diodorus of Sicily
Περὶ τῆς ἐξ ἀρχῆς εὑρέσεως τοῦ μαντείου.
Φιλομήλου τοῦ Φωκέως ἧττα καὶ θάνατος.
Ὀνομάρχου παράληψις τῆς ἀρχῆς καὶ παρασκευὴ πρὸς
πόλεμον.
Ὡς Βοιωτοὶ Ἀρταβάζῳ βοηθήσαντες ἐνίκησαν τοὺς
βασιλέως σατράπας.
Ὡς Ἀθηναῖοι Χερρονήσου κρατήσαντες κατεκληρούχησαν
αὐτήν.
Ὡς Φίλιππος Μεθώνην ἑλὼν κατέσκαψεν.
Ὡς Φίλιππος Φωκεῖς νικήσας ἐξέβαλεν ἐκ τῆς
Θετταλίας.
Ὡς Ὀνόμαρχος ὁ Φωκεὺς Φίλιππον δυσὶ μάχαις νικήσας
εἰς τοὺς ἐσχάτους κινδύνους ἤγαγεν.
Ὡς Ὀνόμαρχος Βοιωτοὺς νικήσας Κορώνειαν εἷλεν.
Ὡς Ὀνόμαρχος ἐν Θετταλίᾳ παραταξάμενος πρὸς Φίλιππον
καὶ Θετταλοὺς ἡττήθη.
Ὡς αὐτὸς μὲν ἐκρεμάσθη, οἱ δ᾿ ἄλλοι κατεποντίσθησαν
ὡς ἱερόσυλοι.
Ὡς Φάυλλος διαδεξάμενος τὴν ἀρχὴν πολλὰ τῶν
ἀργυρῶν καὶ χρυσῶν ἀναθημάτων κατέκοψεν.
Ὡς τὰς μισθοφορίας ἀναβιβάσας ἤθροισε μισθοφόρων
πλῆθος.
Ὡς τεταπεινωμένα τὰ τῶν Φωκέων πράγματα
διωρθώσατο.
Ὡς χρήμασι διαφθείρων τὰς πόλεις καὶ τοὺς προεστηκότας
αὐταῖς πολλοὺς προσελάβετο συμμάχους.
226Book XVI
On the original discovery of the oracle (chap. 26).
The defeat and death of Philomelus the Phocian (chaps. 27–31).
Onomarchus’ succession to the command and his preparations for war (chaps. 32–33).
How the Boeotians, having come to the assistance of Artabazus, defeated the satraps of the Great King (chap. 34. 1–2).
How the Athenians, having gained the mastery of the Chersonesus, colonized it (chap. 34. 3–4).
How Philip, having captured Methone, razed it (chap. 34. 4–end).
How Philip, having defeated the Phocians, drove them from Thessaly (chap. 35. 1).
How Onomarchus the Phocian, having defeated Philip in two battles, brought him into extreme peril (chap. 35. 2).
How Onomarchus, having defeated the Boeotians, seized Coroneia (chap. 35. 3).
How Onomarchus, in a pitched battle with Philip and the Thessalians in Thessaly, was defeated (chap. 35. 4–5).
How Onomarchus himself was hanged and the rest of his faction were drowned in the sea as temple-robbers (chap. 35. 6).
How Phayllus, having succeeded to the command, coined into money many of the silver and gold dedications at the shrine (chap. 36. 1).
How, having raised the rate of pay, he gathered a multitude of mercenaries (chap. 36).
How he raised the fortunes of the Phocians when they were at their lowest ebb (chap. 37. 1).
How, by corrupting the cities and their chief men with bribes, he won many allies (chap. 37. 2–3).
227