Diodorus of Sicily

τυραννίδα διὰ τὴν ἰδίαν ἀνανδρίαν παραδόξως ἀπέβαλεν.
τὰς δὲ αἰτίας τῆς καταλύσεως καὶ τὰς
κατὰ μέρος πράξεις ἀναγράφειν πειρασόμεθα.
6. Ἐπ᾿ ἄρχοντος γὰρ Ἀθήνησι Κηφισοδότου
Ῥωμαῖοι κατέστησαν ὑπάτους Γάιον Λικίνιον καὶ
Γάιον Σουλπίκιον. ἐπὶ δὲ τούτων Δίων ὁ Ἱππαρίνου,
Συρακοσίων ὑπάρχων ἐπιφανέστατος, ἔφυγεν
ἐκ τῆς Σικελίας καὶ διὰ τὴν λαμπρότητα τῆς ψυχῆς
ἠλευθέρωσε Συρακοσίους καὶ τοὺς ἄλλους Σικελιώτας
2διὰ τοιαύτας τινὰς αἰτίας. ὁ πρεσβύτερος
Διονύσιος ἐκ δυεῖν γυναικῶν ἦν πεπαιδοποιημένος,
ἐκ μὲν τῆς πρώτης Λοκρίδος οὔσης τὸ γένος Διονύσιον
τὸν διαδεξάμενον τὴν τυραννίδα, ἐκ δὲ τῆς
δευτέρας Ἱππαρίνου θυγατρὸς οὔσης, εὐδοκιμωτάτου
Συρακοσίων, δύο παῖδας, Ἱππαρῖνον καὶ
3Νυσαῖον.1 ἐτύγχανε δὲ τῆς δευτέρας γυναικὸς
ἀδελφὸς ὢν Δίων, ἀνὴρ ἐν φιλοσοφίᾳ μεγάλην ἔχων
προκοπὴν καὶ κατ᾿ ἀνδρείαν καὶ στρατηγίαν πολὺ
4προέχων τῶν κατ᾿ αὐτὸν Συρακοσίων. οὗτος δὲ
διὰ τὴν εὐγένειαν καὶ τὴν λαμπρότητα τῆς ψυχῆς
εἰς ὑποψίαν ἦλθε τῷ τυράννῳ, δόξας ἀξιόχρεως
εἶναι καταλῦσαι τὴν τυραννίδα. φοβούμενος οὖν
αὐτὸν ὁ Διονύσιος ἔκρινεν ἐκποδὼν ποιήσασθαι τὸν
ἄνδρα, συλλαβὼν ἐπὶ θανάτῳ. ὁ δὲ Δίων αἰσθόμενος
τὸ μὲν πρῶτον ἐκρύφθη παρά τισιν τῶν
φίλων, μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα ἔφυγεν ἐκ τῆς Σικελίας εἰς



1So Wesseling (cp. Theopompus, frs. 179 and 187 (Oxford);
Plutarch, Timoleon, 1; Nepos, Dion, 1; Aelian,
Varia Historia, 2. 41): Ναυσαῖον PX, Ναρσαῖον cet.250Book XVI

fast by adamantine chains,1 yet, strange to say, he 359/8 b.c. lost it all by his pusillanimity. The causes for its dissolution and the various events I shall attempt to record.
6. When Cephisodotus was archon at Athens, the 358/7 b.c. Romans elected as consuls Gaius Licinius and Gaius Sulpicius. During their term of office Dion, son of Hipparinus and the most distinguished of the Syracusans, escaped from Sicily2 and by his nobility of spirit set free the Syracusans and the other Sicilian Greeks in the following manner. Dionysius the Elder had begotten children of two wives, of the first, who was a Locrian by birth, Dionysius, who succeeded to the tyranny, and of the second, who was the daughter of Hipparinus, a Syracusan of great renown, two sons Hipparinus and Nysaeus. It chanced that the brother of the second wife was Dion, a man who had great proficiency in philosophy3 and, in the matter of courage and skill in the art of war, far surpassed the other Syracusans of his time. Dion, because of his high birth and nobility of spirit, fell under suspicion with the tyrant, for he was considered powerful enough to overthrow the tyranny. So, fearing him, Dionysius decided to get him out of the way by arresting him on a charge involving the death penalty. But Dion, becoming aware of this, was at first concealed in the homes of some of his friends, and


1This phrase is found in chap. 70. 2, in Plutarch, Dion, 7. 3
and 10. 3, and in Aelian, Varia Historia, 6. 12.2According to Plutarch, Dion, 14. 5, Dion was placed on a boat by Dionysius and sent to Italy (Nepos says to Corinth, Dion, 3 f.). This must have happened considerably earlier as Plato (Epistles, 7. 329 c) says that it happened three months after his arrival in 367. Diodorus has evidently compressed the earlier details into this year.3For the association of Plato and Dion see Plato, Epistles, 7. 327 a; Anth. Pal. 7. 99 (L.C.L. 2. 60).251