Diodorus of Sicily

πόλεως κατέστησε βασιλέα τὸν ὀνομαζόμενον Βαλώνυμον,1
περὶ οὗ τὰ κατὰ μέρος οὐκ ἄξιον παραλιπεῖν
διὰ τὸ τῆς περιπετείας παράδοξον.
47. Τοῦ γὰρ προϋπάρχοντος βασιλέως Στράτωνος
διὰ τὴν πρὸς Δαρεῖον φιλίαν ἐκπεσόντος ἐκ τῆς
ἀρχῆς ὁ Ἀλέξανδρος ἔδωκεν ἐξουσίαν Ἡφαιστίωνι
καταστῆσαι βασιλέα τῆς Τύρου τῶν ἰδιοξένων ὃν
2ἂν προαιρῆται. τὸ μὲν οὖν πρῶτον οὗτος εὐδοκήσας
τῷ ξένῳ, παρ᾿ ᾧ τὴν ἐπισταθμίαν ἐπεποίητο
κεχαρισμένως, τοῦτον ἐπεβάλετο κύριον ἀναγορεῦσαι
τῆς πόλεως· ὁ δὲ πλούτῳ μὲν καὶ δόξῃ διαφέρων
τῶν πολιτῶν, οὐδεμίαν δὲ συγγένειαν ἔχων
πρὸς τοὺς γεγονότας βασιλεῖς οὐκ ἐδέξατο τὴν
3δωρεάν. τοῦ δ᾿ Ἡφαιστίωνος ἐπιτρέψαντος αὐτῷ
τὴν ἐκλογὴν ποιήσασθαι ἐκ τοῦ γένους τῶν βασιλέων
ἔφησεν εἶναί τινα τῆς βασιλικῆς οἰκίας
ἀπόγονον τὰ μὲν ἄλλα σώφρονα καὶ ἀγαθὸν ἄνδρα,
4πένητα δὲ καθ᾿ ὑπερβολήν. συγχωρήσαντος δὲ τοῦ
Ἡφαιστίωνος τούτῳ τὴν δυναστείαν ὁ λαβὼν τὴν
ἐπιτροπὴν κατήντησεν ἐπὶ τὸν ὠνομασμένον μετὰ
βασιλικῆς ἐσθῆτος καὶ κατέλαβεν αὐτὸν ἔν τινι
κήπῳ μισθοῦ μὲν ἀντλοῦντα, ῥάκεσι δὲ τοῖς τυχοῦσιν
5ἐσθῆτι χρώμενον. δηλώσας δὲ τὴν περιπέτειαν
καὶ περιθεὶς τὴν βασιλικὴν στολὴν καὶ τὸν
ἄλλον τὸν ἁρμόζοντα κόσμον ἀνήγαγεν αὐτὸν εἰς
τὴν ἀγορὰν καὶ ἀπέδειξε βασιλέα τῶν Τυρίων.
6ἀσμένως δὲ τοῦ πλήθους προσδεξαμένου καὶ τὸ



1Βαλώνυμον X; Βαλλώνυμον RF.252Book XVII

named Ballonymus,1 the story of whose career I cannot 332/1 b.c. omit because it is an example of a quite astonishing reversal of fortune.
47. The former king, Straton, was deprived of his throne because of his friendship for Dareius, and Alexander invited Hephaestion to nominate as king of Tyre any personal guest-friend whom he wished. At first he favoured the host with whom he found pleasant lodging, and proposed that he should be designated master of the city. He was prominent among the citizens in wealth and position, but not being related to those who had been kings he would not accept the offer. Hephaestion then asked him to make a choice from among the members of the royal family, and he said that he knew a man of royal descent who was wise and good in all respects, but he was poor in the extreme. Hephaestion nevertheless agreed that he should be given the royal power, and the one who had been given the choice went off to find the man he had named, bearing with him the royal dress, and came upon him drawing water for hire in a garden, dressed in common rags. He informed him of the transformation in his position, dressed him in the king’s robe, and gave him the other appropriate trappings of office. Then he conducted him to the market place and proclaimed him king of Tyre. Everyone accepted him with enthusiasm and

1Presumably the correct form of the name, Abdalonymus,
is preserved in Curtius (4. 1. 15–26) and Justin (11. 10. 8), and
it is a proper Phoenician nomenclature, with the meaning “Servant of the gods.” Some have wished to see this king as the owner of the Alexander Sarcophagus from Sidon, now in Istanbul; cp., e.g., I. Kleemann, Der Satrapen-Sarkophag aus Sidon (1958), pp. 28 f. In any case, the mention of King Straton shows that the incident occurred in Sidon, not in Tyre. Plutarch, De Fortuna ant Virtute Alexandria 2. 8. 340 c-e, locates it in Paphos (rendering the name Aralynomus). See Addenda.253