Diodorus of Sicily
22. Χάρης δὲ παραλαβὼν παντὸς τοῦ στόλου τὴν
ἡγεμονίαν καὶ σπεύδων τῆς δαπάνης ἀπαλλάξαι
τοὺς Ἀθηναίους ἐπεχείρησε πράξει παραβόλῳ. Ἀρταβάζου1
γὰρ ἀποστάντος ἀπὸ τοῦ βασιλέως καὶ
μέλλοντος ὀλίγοις στρατιώταις πρὸς τοὺς σατράπας
διαγωνίζεσθαι μυριάδας ἑπτὰ στρατιωτῶν ἔχοντας,
συμμαχήσαντος αὐτῷ Χάρητος πάσῃ τῇ δυνάμει
καὶ νικήσαντος τὴν τοῦ βασιλέως δύναμιν, ὁ μὲν
Ἀρτάβαζος1 ἀποδιδοὺς τῆς εὐεργεσίας χάριτας
ἐδωρήσατο πλῆθος χρημάτων, ἐξ ὧν δυνατὸν ἦν
2πᾶσαν τὴν δύναμιν ὀψωνιάζεσθαι, οἱ δ᾿ Ἀθηναῖοι
τὸ μὲν πρῶτον ἀπεδέξαντο τὴν πρᾶξιν τοῦ Χάρητος,
ὕστερον δὲ τοῦ βασιλέως πρέσβεις ἀποστείλαντος
καὶ κατηγοροῦντος τοῦ Χάρητος τὴν ἐναντίαν ἔσχον
γνώμην· διεδόθη γὰρ λόγος ὅτι τοῖς πολεμίοις τῶν
Ἀθηναίων βασιλεὺς ἐπηγγείλατο τριακοσίαις ναυσὶ
συγκαταπολεμήσειν τοὺς Ἀθηναίους. ταῦτ᾿ οὖν ὁ
δῆμος εὐλαβηθεὶς ἔκρινε καταλύσασθαι τὸν πρὸς
τοὺς ἀφεστηκότας πόλεμον· εὑρὼν δὲ κἀκείνους
ἐπιθυμοῦντας τῆς εἰρήνης ῥᾳδίως πρὸς αὐτοὺς διελύσατο.
Ὁ μὲν οὖν συμμαχικὸς ὀνομασθεὶς πόλεμος τοιοῦτον
ἔσχε τὸ τέλος, διαμείνας ἔτη τέτταρα.2
3Κατὰ δὲ τὴν Μακεδονίαν τρεῖς βασιλεῖς συνέστησαν
ἐπὶ τὸν Φίλιππον, ὅ τε τῶν Θρᾳκῶν καὶ
Παιόνων καὶ Ἰλλυριῶν. οὗτοι γὰρ ὄντες ὅμοροι
τοῖς Μακεδόσι καὶ τὴν αὔξησιν ὑφορώμενοι τοῦ


1So Wesseling (cp. chap. 34. 1; also Demosthenes, 4. 24,
23. 154; Polyaenus, 7. 33. 2 and Cospus): Φαρναβάζου
(similarly below).2τέτταρα] τρία Wesseling (cp. Cospus and chap. 7. 3).298Book XVI
22. Chares, now that he had succeeded to the command 356/5 b.c. of the whole fleet and was eager to relieve the Athenians of its expense, undertook a hazardous operation. Now Artabazus had revolted from the Persian King and with only a few soldiers was on the point of joining combat with the satraps who had more than seventy thousand. Chares with all his forces took part with Artabazus in a battle and defeated the King’s army. And Artabazus, out of gratitude for his kindness, made him a present of a large sum of money, with which he was able to furnish his entire army with supplies.1 The Athenians at first approved Chares’ action, but later, when the King sent ambassadors and denounced Chares, they changed their minds; for word had been spread abroad that the King had promised Athens’ enemies that he would join them in their war against the Athenians with three hundred ships. The assembly, accordingly, taking a cautious attitude, decided to bring to a close the war against their revolted allies; and finding that they too desired peace they easily came to terms with them.2
So the Social War, as it was called, came to such a close after lasting four years.
In Macedon three kings combined against Philip,—the kings of the Thracians, Paeonians, and Illyrians. For these peoples, inasmuch as they bordered upon Macedonia, eyed with suspicion the aggrandizement


1See chap. 34. 1; Isocrates, Areopagiticus, 8, 10, 81; Plutarch, Aratus, 16: Papyrus frag. in Festschrift für O. Hirschfeld, 100; Schol. Demosthenes, 4. 19.2See Demosthenes, 15. 26; Isocrates, Peace, 16 et passim. Diodorus fails to state that Chios, Cos, and Rhodes were allowed to withdraw from the League and .the independence of Byzantium was recognized. See Pickard - Cambridge, Cambridge Ancient History, 6. 210–212.299