Diodorus of Sicily

ἀξιολόγους πόλεις ἔπαυσε τοῦ θράσους τοὺς Θρᾷκας.
διόπερ αἱ τῶν Ἑλλήνων πόλεις ἀπολυθεῖσαι
τῶν φόβων εἰς τὴν συμμαχίαν τοῦ Φιλίππου προθυμότατα
κατετάχθησαν.
3Τῶν δὲ συγγραφέων Θεόπομπος ὁ Χῖος ἐν τῇ
τῶν Φιλιππικῶν ἱστορίᾳ κατέταξε τρεῖς βύβλους
περιεχούσας Σικελικὰς πράξεις· ἀρξάμενος δὲ ἀπὸ
τῆς Διονυσίου τοῦ πρεσβυτέρου τυραννίδος διῆλθε
χρόνον ἐτῶν πεντήκοντα καὶ κατέστρεψεν εἰς τὴν
ἔκπτωσιν Διονυσίου τοῦ νεωτέρου. εἰσὶ δὲ αἱ βύβλοι
τρεῖς, ἀπὸ τῆς μιᾶς τεσσαρακοστῆς ἄχρι τῆς
τρίτης καὶ τεσσαρακοστῆς.
72. Ἐπ᾿ ἄρχοντος δ᾿ Ἀθήνησι Σωσιγένους Ῥωμαῖοι
κατέστησαν ὑπάτους Μάρκον Οὐαλέριον καὶ
Μάρκον Γναῖον Πόπλιον.1 ἐπὶ δὲ τούτων Ἀρύμβας2
ὁ τῶν Μολοττῶν βασιλεὺς ἐτελεύτησεν ἄρξας
ἔτη δέκα, ἀπολιπὼν υἱὸν τὸν Πύρρου πατέρα Αἰακίδην·
τὴν δ᾿ ἀρχὴν διεδέξατο Ἀλέξανδρος ὁ ἀδελφὸς
Ὀλυμπιάδος, συνεργήσαντος Φιλίππου τοῦ Μακεδόνος.
2Κατὰ δὲ τὴν Σικελίαν Τιμολέων μὲν ἐστράτευσεν
ἐπὶ Λεοντίνους· εἰς ταύτην γὰρ τὴν πόλιν Ἱκέτας
κατεπεφεύγει μετὰ δυνάμεως ἀξιολόγου. τὸ μὲν
οὖν πρῶτον προσέβαλε τῇ Νέᾳ καλουμένῃ πόλει·
μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα πολλῶν στρατιωτῶν ἐν τῇ πόλει
συγκεκλεισμένων καὶ ῥᾳδίως ἀπὸ τῶν τειχῶν ἀμυνομένων
ἄπρακτος γενόμενος ἔλυσε τὴν πολιορκίαν.




1So PXQ; other MSS. omit Γναῖον.2Ἀρύμβας] Ἀρύββας X.40Book XVI

places made it impossible for the Thracians to commit 343/2 b.c. any outrages in the future. So the Greek cities were freed from this fear and gladly joined Philip’s alliance.
Theopompus of Chios, the historian, in his History of Philip, included three books dealing with affairs in Sicily.1 Beginning with the tyranny of Dionysius the Elder he covered a period of fifty years, closing with the expulsion of the younger Dionysius. These three books are XLI–XLIII.
72. When Sosigenes was archon at Athens, the 342/1 b.c. Romans elected as consuls Marcus Valerius and Marcus Gnaeus Publius.2 In this year, Arymbas king of the Molossians died after a rule of ten years,3 leaving a son Aeacides, Pyrrhus’s father, but Alexander the brother of Olympias succeeded to the throne with the backing of Philip of Macedon.
In Sicily, Timoleon made an expedition against Leontini, for this was the city where Hicetas had taken refuge with a substantial army.4 He launched an assault on the part called Neapolis, but since the soldiers in the city were numerous and had an advantage in fighting from the walls, he accomplished nothing and broke off the siege. Passing on to the




1Similar references to literary figures are a recurring
feature of Diodorus’s narrative (E. Schwartz, Real-Encyclo- pädie, 5 (1905), 668 f.). Cp. also chap. 76. 5–6 below. These are usually, although not always, historians, and we must suppose that Diodorus was familiar with their writings. To what extent they are to be taken as his specific sources is unknown. Diodorus referred to the beginning of Theopompus’s Philippica above, chap. 3. 8.2Sosigenes was archon at Athens from July 342 to June 341 b.c. The consuls of 346 b.c. were M. Valerius Corvus and C. Poetelius Libo Visolus (Broughton, 1. 131).3His accession is not mentioned by Diodorus under the year 351/0 b.c. Alexander’s accession is otherwise known from Demosthenes, 7. 32.4Continued from chap. 70. Cp. Plutarch, Timoleon, 24. 1–2.41