Diodorus of Sicily

ἐπεὶ τὸ πλεῖον μέρος τῶν στρατιωτῶν ἐπὶ χορτάσματα
καὶ σιτολογίαν ἐξεληλύθει, τὸν δὲ Ὀφέλλαν
ἑώρα μηδὲν τῶν ὑφ᾿ ἑαυτοῦ βεβουλευμένων ὑπονοοῦντα,
συνήγαγεν ἐκκλησίαν τῶν ἰδίων στρατιωτῶν,
κατηγορήσας δὲ τοῦ παρόντος ἐπὶ τὴν
συμμαχίαν ὡς ἐπιβουλεύοντος καὶ παροξύνας τὸ
πλῆθος εὐθὺς διεσκευασμένην τὴν δύναμιν ἦγεν
4ἐπὶ τοὺς Κυρηναίους. εἶθ᾿ ὁ μὲν Ὀφέλλας διὰ τὸ
παράδοξον καταπλαγεὶς ἐπεχείρησε μὲν ἀμύνασθαι,
καταταχούμενος δὲ καὶ τὴν ὑπολελειμμένην δύναμιν
οὐκ ἔχων ἀξιόχρεων μαχόμενος ἐτελεύτησεν·
5ὁ δ᾿ Ἀγαθοκλῆς συναναγκάσας τὸ λοιπὸν πλῆθος
ἀποθέσθαι1 τὰ ὅπλα καὶ φιλανθρώποις ἐπαγγελίαις
παραστησάμενος ἅπαντας κύριος ἐγένετο τῆς δυνάμεως
πάσης. Ὀφέλλας μὲν οὖν ἐλπίσας μεγάλα
καὶ προχειρότερον αὑτὸν πιστεύσας τοιαύτης ἔτυχε
τῆς τοῦ βίου καταστροφῆς.
43. Ἐν δὲ τῇ Καρχηδόνι Βορμίλκας πάλαι διανενοημένος
ἐπιθέσθαι τυραννίδι καιρὸν ἐπεζήτει
ταῖς ἰδίαις ἐπιβολαῖς οἰκεῖον. πολλάκις δὲ διδόντος
τοῦ καιροῦ τὰς ἀφορμὰς τοῦ πράττειν τὸ βεβουλευμένον
ἀεί τις αἰτία μικρὰ παρεμπίπτουσα διεκώλυεν·
δεισιδαίμονες γὰρ οἱ μέλλοντες ἐγχειρεῖν ταῖς
παρανόμοις καὶ μεγάλαις πράξεσι καὶ τὸ μέλλειν
ἀεὶ τοῦ πράττειν καὶ τὴν ὑπέρθεσιν τῆς συντελείας
προκρίνουσιν. ὃ καὶ τότε συνέβαινεν καὶ περὶ



1ἀποθέσθαι Dindorf: ἀποδόσθαι.256Book XX

new arrivals. When the larger part of the soldiers 308 b.c. had scattered to find fodder and food, and when he saw that Ophellas had no suspicion of what he himself had planned, he summoned an assembly of his own soldiers and, after accusing the man who had come to join the alliance as if he were plotting against himself and thus rousing the anger of his men, straightway led his army in full array against the Cyreneans. Then Ophellas, stunned by this unexpected action, attempted to defend himself; but, pressed for time, the forces that he had remaining in camp not being adequate, he died fighting. Agathocles forced the rest of the army to lay down its arms, and by winning them all over with generous promises, he became master of the whole army. Thus Ophellas, who had cherished great hopes and had rashly entrusted himself to another, met an end so inglorious.1
43. In Carthage Bormilcar, who had long planned to make an attempt at tyranny, was seeking a proper occasion for his private schemes. Time and again when circumstances put him in a position to carry out what he had planned, some little cause intervened to thwart him.2 For those who are about to undertake lawless and important enterprises are superstitious and always choose delay rather than action, and postponement rather than accomplishment. This happened also on this occasion and in regard to this man;


1The whole account, with its emphasis on the treachery of Agathocles, is probably drawn from Duris, as a part of it quite certainly is (cp. note on chap. 41. 3).2For chaps. 43–44 cp. Justin, 22. 7. 6–11, who says that Bormilcar, after Agathocles had inflicted severe losses on the Carthaginians, wished to go over to Agathocles with his army, was prevented by a sedition in the Sicilian camp, and was put to death by his fellow citizens.257