Diodorus of Sicily

διεπέμπετο πρός τε τοὺς σατράπας καὶ στρατηγοὺς
τοὺς ἐν ταῖς ἄνω σατραπείαις, μεταπεμπόμενος
στρατιώτας τε καὶ χρήματα.
Καὶ τὰ μὲν κατὰ τὴν Ἀσίαν μέχρι τούτου προέβη
κατὰ1 τοῦτον τὸν ἐνιαυτόν.
74. Κατὰ δὲ τὴν Εὐρώπην Πολυπέρχοντος διὰ
τὴν ἐλάττωσιν τῆς κατὰ τοὺς Μεγαλοπολίτας πολιορκίας
καταφρονηθέντος αἱ πλεῖσται τῶν Ἑλληνίδων
πόλεων ἀφιστάμεναι τῶν βασιλέων πρὸς
Κάσανδρον ἀπέκλιναν. Ἀθηναίων δὲ μὴ δυναμένων
ἀποτρίψασθαι τὴν φρουρὰν μήτε διὰ τοῦ
Πολυπέρχοντος μήτε δι᾿ Ὀλυμπιάδος ἀπετόλμησέ
τις τῶν ἐπαινουμένων πολιτῶν εἰπεῖν ἐν ἐκκλησίᾳ
2διότι συμφέρει πρὸς Κάσανδρον διαλύσασθαι. τὸ
μὲν οὖν πρῶτον ἐγένετο θόρυβος, τῶν μὲν ἀντιλεγόντων,
τῶν δὲ συγκατατιθεμένων τοῖς λόγοις·
ὡς δὲ ἀνεθεωρήθη τὸ συμφέρον, ἔδοξε τοῖς πᾶσι
πρεσβεύειν πρὸς Κάσανδρον καὶ τίθεσθαι τὰ πρὸς
3αὐτὸν ὡς ἂν ᾖ δυνατόν. γενομένων δὲ πλειόνων
ἐντεύξεων συνέθεντο τὴν εἰρήνην ὥστε τοὺς Ἀθηναίους
ἔχειν πόλιν τε καὶ χώραν καὶ προσόδους καὶ
ναῦς καὶ τἄλλα πάντα φίλους ὄντας καὶ συμμάχους
Κασάνδρου, τὴν δὲ Μουνυχίαν κατὰ τὸ παρὸν
κρατεῖν Κάσανδρον, ἕως ἂν διαπολεμήσῃ πρὸς τοὺς
βασιλεῖς, καὶ τὸ πολίτευμα διοικεῖσθαι ἀπὸ τιμήσεων
ἄχρι μνῶν δέκα, καταστῆσαι δ᾿ ἐπιμελητὴν
τῆς πόλεως ἕνα ἄνδρα Ἀθηναῖον ὃν δόξῃ Κασάνδρῳ·
καὶ ᾑρέθη Δημήτριος ὁ Φαληρεύς. οὗτος
1κατὰ added by Kallenberg.212Book XVIII

army recover from its hardships, he sent word to the 318 b.c. satraps and generals in the upper satrapies, requesting soldiers and money.
And the affairs of Asia progressed to such a point during this year,1
74. In Europe,2 as Polyperchon had come to be regarded with contempt because of his failure at the siege of Megalopolis, most of the Greek cities deserted the kings and went over to Cassander. When the Athenians were unable to get rid of the garrison by the aid of either Polyperchon or Olympias, one of those citizens who were accepted leaders risked the statement in the Assembly that it was for the advantage of the city to come to terms with Cassander. At first a clamour was raised, some opposing and some supporting his proposal, but when they had considered more carefully what was the expedient course, it was unanimously determined to send an embassy to Cassander and to arrange affairs with him as best they could. After several conferences peace was made on the following terms: the Athenians were to retain their city and territory, their revenues, their fleet, and everything else, and to be friends and allies of Cassander; Munychia was to remain temporarily under the control of Cassander until the war against the kings should be concluded; the government was to be in the hands of those possessing at least ten minae; and whatever single Athenian citizen Cassander should designate was to be overseer of the city. Demetrius of Phalerum was chosen,




1Continued and in part repeated in Book 19. 12.2Continued from chap. 72. 1.213