Diodorus of Sicily

πέντε πρὸς τοῖς τριάκοντα. Ῥωμαῖοι δὲ πρὸς Λατίνους
καὶ Καμπανοὺς παραταξάμενοι περὶ πόλιν
Σούεσσαν ἐνίκησαν καὶ τῶν ἡττηθέντων μέρος τῆς
χώρας ἀφείλοντο. ὁ δὲ κατωρθωκὼς τὴν μάχην
Μάλλιος ὁ ὕπατος ἐθριάμβευσεν.
91. Ἐπ᾿ ἄρχοντος δ᾿ Ἀθήνησι Πυθοδώρου Ῥωμαῖοι
μὲν κατέστησαν ὑπάτους Κόιντον Πόπλιον
καὶ Τιβέριον Αἰμίλιον Μάμερκον, ὀλυμπιὰς δ᾿ ἤχθη
πρώτη πρὸς ταῖς ἑκατὸν καὶ δέκα, καθ᾿ ἣν ἐνίκα
2στάδιον Κλεόμαντις Κλειτόριος. ἐπὶ δὲ τούτων
Φίλιππος ὁ βασιλεὺς ἡγεμὼν ὑπὸ τῶν Ἑλλήνων
καθεσταμένος καὶ τὸν πρὸς Πέρσας πόλεμον ἐνστησάμενος
Ἄτταλον μὲν καὶ Παρμενίωνα προαπέστειλεν
εἰς τὴν Ἀσίαν, μέρος τῆς δυνάμεως δοὺς
καὶ προστάξας ἐλευθεροῦν τὰς Ἑλληνίδας πόλεις,
αὐτὸς δὲ σπεύδων μὲν μετὰ τῆς τῶν θεῶν γνώμης
ἐπανελέσθαι τὸν πόλεμον ἐπηρώτησε τὴν Πυθίαν
εἰ κρατήσει τοῦ βασιλέως τῶν Περσῶν. ἡ δ᾿
ἔχρησεν αὐτῷ τόνδε τὸν χρησμόν·
ἔστεπται μὲν ὁ ταῦρος, ἔχει τέλος, ἔστιν ὁ θύσων.
3Ὁ μὲν οὖν Φίλιππος σκολιῶς ἔχοντος τοῦ χρησμοῦ
πρὸς τὸ ἴδιον συμφέρον ἐξεδέχετο τὸ λόγιον,
ὡς τοῦ μαντείου προλέγοντος τὸν Πέρσην
ἱερείου τρόπον τυθήσεσθαι· τὸ δ᾿ ἀληθὲς οὐχ οὕτως
εἶχεν, ἀλλὰ τοὐναντίον ἐσήμαινεν ἐν πανηγύρει




88Book XVI

ruled for thirty-five.1 The Romans were victorious 337/6 b.c. in a battle against the Latins and Campanians in the vicinity of Suessa and annexed part of the territory of the vanquished. Manlius, the consul who had won the victory, celebrated a triumph.2
91. When Pythodorus was archon at Athens, the 336/5 b.c. Romans elected as consuls Quintus Publius and Tiberius Aemilius Mamercus, and the one hundred and eleventh celebration of the Olympic Games took place, in which Cleomantis of Cleitor won the foot-race.3 In this year, King Philip, installed as leader by the Greeks, opened the war with Persia by sending into Asia as an advance party Attalus and Parmenion,4 assigning to them a part of his forces and ordering them to liberate the Greek cities, while he himself, wanting to enter upon the war with the gods’ approval, asked the Pythia whether he would conquer the king of the Persians. She gave him the following response:

“Wreathed is the bull. All is done. There is also
the one who will smite him.”5
Now Philip found this response ambiguous but accepted it in a sense favourable to himself, namely that the oracle foretold that the Persian would be slaughtered like a sacrificial victim. Actually, however, it was not so, and it meant that Philip himself in the midst of a festival and holy sacrifices, like the



1This is the dynasty of Cius in Mysia which later provided
the kings of Pontus. Cp. Books 15. 90. 3 and note; 20. 111. 4.2Livy (8. 11. 11) states that the battle took place “inter
Sinuessam Minturnasque.” For the events see Broughton,
1. 135.3The archon’s name was Pythodelus, and his term ran from July 336 to June 335 b.c. The Olympic Games were held in midsummer, 336. The consuls of 339 b.c. were Ti. Aemilius Mamercinus and Q. Publilius Philo (Broughton, 1. 137).4Continued from chap. 89. For these events cp. Justin, 9. 5. 8–9.5The oracle is cited in the same form by Pausanias, 8. 7. 6.89