Diodorus of Sicily

ὑπ᾿ Ἀγαθοκλέους καταλαβόμενοί τινες τὴν
Ἐχέτλαν ἐπόρθουν τήν τε Λεοντίνην καὶ Καμαριναίαν.
2κακῶς οὖν πασχουσῶν τῶν πόλεων διὰ τὸ
τὴν χώραν δῃοῦσθαι καὶ τοὺς καρποὺς ἅπαντας
διαφθείρεσθαι ἐμβαλὼν εἰς τοὺς τόπους ὁ Ξενόδικος
Λεοντίνους μὲν καὶ Καμαριναίους ἀπήλλαξε τοῦ
πολέμου, τὴν δ᾿ Ἐχέτλαν χωρίον ὀχυρὸν ἐκπολιορκήσας
τοῖς μὲν πολίταις τὴν δημοκρατίαν
ἀποκατέστησε, τοὺς δὲ Συρακοσίους κατεπλήξατο·
καθόλου δ᾿ ἐπιπορευόμενος τά τε φρούρια καὶ τὰς
πόλεις ἠλευθέρου τῆς τῶν Καρχηδονίων ἐπιστασίας.
3Ἅμα δὲ τούτοις πραττομένοις Συρακόσιοι πιεζούμενοι
τῇ σιτοδείᾳ καὶ πυνθανόμενοι σιτηγὰ πλοῖα
μέλλοντα ποιεῖσθαι πλοῦν ἐπὶ Συρακούσσας ἐπλήρουν
τριήρεις εἴκοσι, τηρήσαντες δὲ τοὺς ἐφορμεῖν
εἰωθότας βαρβάρους ἀφυλάκτους ὄντας ἔλαθον ἐκπλεύσαντες
καὶ παρακομισθέντες εἰς τοὺς Μεγαρεῖς
4ἐπετήρουν τὸν τῶν ἐμπόρων κατάπλουν. μετὰ δὲ
ταῦτα τῶν Καρχηδονίων τριάκοντα ναυσὶν ἐκπλευσάντων
ἐπ᾿ αὐτοὺς τὸ μὲν πρῶτον ἐπεβάλοντο
ναυμαχεῖν, ταχὺ δὲ πρὸς τὴν γῆν ἐκδιωχθέντες
5ἐξεκολύμβησαν πρός τινα ναὸν Ἥρας. γενομένης
οὖν μάχης περὶ τῶν σκαφῶν καὶ τῶν Καρχηδονίων
ἐπιβαλλόντων σιδηρᾶς χεῖρας καὶ βιαιότερον ἀποσπώντων
ἀπὸ τῆς γῆς δέκα μὲν τριήρεις ἑάλωσαν,
τὰς δ᾿ ἄλλας ἐκ τῆς πόλεως ἐπιβοηθήσαντές τινες
διέσωσαν.
Καὶ τὰ μὲν περὶ Σικελίαν ἐν τούτοις ἦν.
33. Περὶ δὲ τὴν Λιβύην Ἀγαθοκλῆς, ἐπειδὴ
κατέπλευσαν οἱ τὴν Ἀμίλκα κεφαλὴν κομίζοντες,
ἀναλαβὼν ταύτην καὶ παριππεύσας πλησίον τῆς


226Book XX

Agathocles, after seizing Echetla,1 plundered Leontini 309 b.c. and Camarina. Since the cities were suffering from the plundering of their fields and the destruction of all their crops, Xenodicus entered the region and freed the peoples of Leontini and Camarina from the war; and after taking Echetla, a walled town, by siege, he re-established democracy for its citizens and struck fear into the Syracusans; and, in general, as he advanced he liberated the strongholds and the cities from Carthaginian domination.
Meantime the Syracusans, hard pressed by famine and hearing that grain ships were about to make the voyage to Syracuse, manned twenty triremes and, watching the barbarians who were accustomed to lie at anchor off the harbour to catch them off guard, sailed out unseen and coasted along to Megara, where they waited for the approach of the traders. Afterwards, however, when the Carthaginians sailed out against them with thirty ships, they first tried to fight at sea, but were quickly driven to land and leapt from their ships at a certain shrine of Hera. Then a battle took place for the ships; and the Carthaginians, throwing grappling irons into the triremes and with great force dragging them off from the shore, captured ten2 of them, but the others were saved by men who came to the rescue from the city.
And this was the condition of affairs in Sicily.
33. In Libya, when those who were carrying the head of Hamilcar had come into port, Agathocles took the head and, riding near the hostile camp to


1This town is not definitely identified. Polybius, 1. 15. 10, mentions it as on the frontier between Syracusan and Carthaginian territory at the time of Hieron II.2In the table of contents the number is given as twenty.227