Diodorus of Sicily
4ἱκανὰς τροφὰς χορηγῆσαι. ἔσπευδε γὰρ
περὶ τὴν Νίνον ποιήσασθαι τὴν παράταξιν, εὐθετωτάτων
ὄντων τῶν περὶ αὐτὴν πεδίων καὶ πολλὴν
εὐρυχωρίαν παρεχομένων τῷ μεγέθει τῶν ἠθροισμένων
ὑπ᾿ αὐτοῦ δυνάμεων. καταστρατοπεδεύσας
δὲ περὶ κώμην τὴν ὀνομαζομένην Ἄρβηλα τὰς δυνάμεις
ἐνταῦθα καθ᾿ ἡμέραν ἐξέταττε καὶ τῇ
συνεχεῖ διατάξει καὶ μελέτῃ κατεσκεύασεν εὐπειθεῖς·
σφόδρα γὰρ ἠγωνία μήποτε πολλῶν καὶ
ἀσυμφώνων ἐθνῶν ἠθροισμένων ταῖς διαλέκτοις
ταραχή τις γένηται κατὰ τὴν παράταξιν.
54. Περὶ δὲ διαλύσεως καὶ πρότερον μὲν ἐξέπεμψε
πρεσβευτὰς πρὸς Ἀλέξανδρον, ἐκχωρῶν αὐτῷ
τῆς ἐντὸς Ἅλυος ποταμοῦ χώρας, καὶ προσεπηγγέλλετο
δώσειν ἀργυρίου τάλαντα δισμύρια.1
2ὡς δ᾿ οὐ προσεῖχεν αὐτῷ, πάλιν ἐξέπεμψεν ἄλλους
πρέσβεις, ἐπαινῶν μὲν αὐτὸν ἐπὶ τῷ καλῶς κεχρῆσθαι
τῇ τε μητρὶ καὶ τοῖς ἄλλοις αἰχμαλώτοις,
ἀξιῶν δὲ φίλον γενέσθαι καὶ λαβεῖν τὴν ἐντὸς
Εὐφράτου χώραν καὶ τάλαντ᾿ ἀργυρίου τρισμύρια2
καὶ τὴν ἑτέραν τῶν ἑαυτοῦ θυγατέρων γυναῖκα, καθόλου
δὲ γενόμενον γαμβρὸν καὶ τάξιν υἱοῦ λαβόντα
3καθάπερ κοινωνὸν γενέσθαι τῆς ὅλης βασιλείας, ὁ
δ᾿ Ἀλέξανδρος εἰς τὸ συνέδριον παραλαβὼν πάντας




1δισμύρια Fischer; δισχίλια R; πεντακισχίλια F.2τρισμύρια F (in first hand); τρισχίλια RX and F (second hand).272Book XVII

many soldiers.1 He had in mind to deploy for battle 331/0 b.c. in the vicinity of Nineveh, since the plains there were well suited to his purpose and afforded ample manœuvre room for the huge forces at his disposal. Pitching camp at a village named Arbela, he drilled his troops daily and made them well disciplined by continued training and practice. He was most concerned lest some confusion should arise in the battle from the numerous peoples assembled who differed in speech.
54. On the other hand, just as he had previously2 sent envoys to Alexander to treat for peace, offering to concede to him the land west of the Halys River, and also to give him twenty thousand talents of silver, but Alexander would not agree, so now again Dareius sent other envoys praising Alexander for his generous treatment of Dareius’s mother and the other captives and inviting him to become a friend. He offered him all the territory west of the Euphrates, thirty thousand talents of silver,3 and the hand of one of his daughters. Alexander would become Dareius’s son-in-law and occupy the place of a son. while sharing in the rule of the whole empire.4 Alexander brought together all his Friends into a council and laid before




1In Curtius also (4. 9. 6), Dareius started his march from
the left bank of the Euphrates at Babylon and crossed over
to the left bank of the Tigris at some unspecified point upstream.
Arrian suggests (3. 8. 3–6) that Dareius’s army mustered east of the Tigris, perhaps not far from the actual battlefield.2The diplomatic exchanges between Dareius and Alexander are discussed above on chap. 39, p. 228, note 1.3These figures are variously reported in the manuscripts; see notes 1 and 2 on the opposite page.4It was a common practice among the Persians as later among the Seleucids for the king to share the administration of his huge realm with the crown prince. According to this offer, Dareius would rule the east, Alexander the west, but the kingdom would remain a unit. The territory offered to Alexander was approximately that which later became a part of the Roman Empire.273