Diodorus of Sicily

φιλίαν συνέθετο πρὸς αὐτοὺς ὑπὲρ Ἀντιγόνου
καὶ Πολυπέρχοντα μὲν στρατηγὸν ἀπέδειξε
τῆς Πελοποννήσου, τὸν δὲ Ἀλέξανδρον ἔπεισεν εἰς
2τὴν Ἀσίαν πλεῦσαι πρὸς Ἀντίγονον. ὁ δ᾿ ἕτερος
τῶν στρατηγῶν Πτολεμαῖος1 πορευθεὶς μετὰ τῆς δυνάμεως
εἰς Καππαδοκίαν καὶ καταλαβὼν Ἀμισσὸν
πολιορκουμένην ὑπ᾿ Ἀσκληπιοδώρου τοῦ Κασάνδρου
στρατηγοῦ τὴν μὲν πόλιν ἐκ τῶν κινδύνων
ἐρρύσατο, τοὺς δέ περὶ τὸν Ἀσκληπιόδωρον
ὑποσπόνδους ἀφεὶς ἀνεκτήσατο τὴν σατραπείαν.
3μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα πορευθεὶς διὰ Βιθυνίας καὶ Ζιβύτην
τὸν βασιλέα τῶν Βιθυνῶν καταλαβὼν πολιορκοῦντα
τήν τε τῶν Ἀστακηνῶν καὶ Χαλκηδονίων πόλιν
συνηνάγκασε λῦσαι τὴν πολιορκίαν. ποιησάμενος
δὲ συμμαχίαν πρός τε τὰς πόλεις ταύτας καὶ πρὸς
τὸν Ζιβύτην ἔτι δὲ λαβὼν ὁμήρους, προῆγεν ἐπὶ
Ἰωνίας καὶ Λυδίας· ἐγεγράφει γὰρ Ἀντίγονος
αὐτῷ βοηθεῖν τῇ παραλίῳ κατὰ τάχος, ὡς τοῦ
4Σελεύκου τὸν πλοῦν ἐνταῦθα ποιησομένου. ὡς δέ
ποθ᾿ ἧκε πλησίον τῶν προειρημένων τόπων, Σέλευκος
ἔτυχε μὲν πολιορκῶν Ἐρυθράς, πυθόμενος
δὲ τὴν τῶν πολεμίων δύναμιν πλησίον οὖσαν
ἀπέπλευσεν ἄπρακτος.
61. Ἀντίγονος δὲ παραγενομένου πρὸς αὐτὸν
Ἀλεξάνδρου τοῦ Πολυπέρχοντος πρὸς μὲν τοῦτον
συνέθετο φιλίαν, αὐτὸς δὲ συναγαγὼν τῶν τε
στρατιωτῶν καὶ τῶν παρεπιδημόντων κοινὴν ἐκκλησίαν
κατηγόρησε Κασάνδρου, προφερόμενος τήν
τε Ὀλυμπιάδος ἀναίρεσιν καὶ τὰ συμβάντα περὶ
2Ῥωξάνην καὶ τὸν βασιλέα. πρὸς δὲ τούτοις ἔλεγεν

1Cp. chap. 57. 4.396Book XIX

he established friendship between them and 315 b.c. Antigonus. He appointed Polyperchon general of the Peloponnesus, and he persuaded Alexander to sail to Antigonus in Asia. The other general, Ptolemy, proceeded with his army to Cappadocia where he found Amisus under siege by Asclepiodorus, a general of Cassander. He delivered the city from danger and recovered the satrapy after dismissing Asclepiodorus and his men under a truce. Thereafter advancing through Bithynia and finding Zibytes, the king of the Bithynians, laying siege to the city of the Astacenians1 and the Chalcedonians, he forced him to abandon the siege. After making alliances with these cities and with Zibytes and also taking hostages from them, he proceeded toward Ionia and Lydia; for Antigonus had written ordering him to go quickly to the support of the coast, since Seleucus was about to make a naval expedition into that region. It so happened that, as he finally drew near to this area, Seleucus was laying siege to Erythrae,2 but when he heard that the hostile force was near, he sailed away with nothing accomplished.
61. Antigonus, after Polyperchon’s son Alexander had come to him, made a pact of friendship with him, and then, calling a general assembly of the soldiers and of the aliens who were dwelling there,3 laid charges against Cassander, bringing forward the murder of Olympias and the treatment of Roxanê and the king.4 Moreover, he said that Cassander had




1The city called Astacus on the bay of the same name is about 30 miles south-east of Chalcedon.2An Ionian city on the peninsula opposite Chios.3i.e. Macedonians not in the army. In chap. 62. 1 the decree passed by this assembly is described as the “decree of the Macedonians.’’4Cp. chaps. 51. 6, 52. 4.397