Diodorus of Sicily

τετραπέδων ξύλων ἐπικαθηλωμένων,1 ὅπως προπλέων2
οὗτος κωλύῃ τοὺς πολεμίους ἐπιπλέοντας
ἐμβολὰς διδόναι τοῖς φέρουσι τὰς μηχανὰς πλοίοις.
3ἐν ὅσῳ δὲ ταῦτα τὴν συντέλειαν ἐλάμβανεν, ἀθροίσας
τοὺς ἁδροτάτους τῶν λέμβων καὶ τούτους καταφράξας
σανίσι καὶ θυρίδας κλειστὰς κατασκευάσας
ἐνέθετο μὲν τῶν τρισπιθάμων ὀξυβελῶν τοὺς πορρωτάτω
βάλλοντας καὶ τοὺς τούτοις κατὰ τρόπον
χρησομένους, ἔτι δὲ τοξότας Κρῆτας, τὰς δὲ ναῦς
προσαγαγὼν ἐντὸς βέλους κατετίτρωσκε τοὺς κατὰ
τὴν πόλιν ὑψηλότερα τὰ παρὰ τὸν λιμένα τείχη
κατασκευάζοντας.
4Οἱ δὲ Ῥόδιοι θεωροῦντες τοῦ Δημητρίου τὴν
πᾶσαν ἐπιβολὴν οὖσαν ἐπὶ τὸν λιμένα καὶ αὐτοὶ τὰ
πρὸς τὴν ἀσφάλειαν τούτου παρεσκευάζοντο. δύο
μὲν οὖν ἔστησαν μηχανὰς ἐπὶ τοῦ χώματος, τρεῖς
δ᾿ ἐπὶ φορτηγῶν πλοίων πλησίον τῶν κλείθρων
τοῦ μικροῦ λιμένος· ἐν δὲ ταύταις ἔθηκαν πλῆθος
ὀξυβελῶν καὶ πετροβόλων παντοίων τοῖς μεγέθεσιν,
ὅπως, ἐάν τε ἀποβιβάζωσιν οἱ πολέμιοι πρὸς
τὸ χῶμα στρατιώτας ἄν τε τὰς μηχανὰς προσάγωσι,
διὰ τούτων αὐτοὺς εἴργεσθαι τῆς ἐπιβολῆς.
ἐπέστησαν δὲ καὶ τοῖς ὁρμοῦσι τῶν φορτηγῶν
πλοίων ἐν τῷ λιμένι βελοστάσεις οἰκείας τοῖς
ἐπιτίθεσθαι μέλλουσι καταπέλταις.3
86. Ἀμφοτέρων δὲ τοῦτον τὸν τρόπον παρεσκευασμένων
ὁ Δημήτριος τὸ μὲν πρῶτον ἐπιβαλόμενος
προσάγειν τὰς μηχανὰς τοῖς λιμέσιν
ἐκωλύθη κλύδωνος ἐπιγενομένου τραχυτέρου· μετὰ


1τετραπέδων ξύλων ἐπικαθηλωμένων Geer, ἐπὶ τετρ. ξύ.
καθηλωμένον Fischer: ἐπὶ τετρ. ξύ. καθηλωμένων.2προπλέων Dindorf: προσπλέων.3καταπέλταις Rhodoman: καταπέλτας.366Book XX

a floating boom of squared logs studded with spikes,1 305 b.c. in order that as this was floated forward it might prevent the enemy from sailing up and ramming the ships that were carrying the engines of war. In the interval while these were receiving their finishing touches, he collected the strongest of the light craft, fortified them with planks, provided them with ports that could be closed, and placed upon them those of the catapults for bolts three palms long which had the longest range and the men to work them properly, and also Cretan archers; then, sending the boats within range, he shot down the men of the city who were building higher the walls along the harbour.
When the Rhodians saw that the entire attack of Demetrius was aimed against the harbour, they themselves also took measures for its security. They placed two machines2 on the mole and three upon freighters near the boom of the small harbour; in these they mounted a large number of catapults and ballistae of all sizes, in order that if the enemy should disembark soldiers on the mole or should advance his machines, he might be thwarted in his design by this means. They also placed on such cargo ships as were at anchor in the harbour platforms suitable for the catapults that were to be mounted on them. 86. After both sides had made their preparations in this way, Demetrius at first endeavoured to bring his engines of war against the harbour, but he was prevented when too rough a sea arose; later on,




1Or, reading ἐπὶ τετραπέδον ξύλον καθηλωμένον: “a floating palisade fastened with spikes to squared logs.”2Probably penthouses or sheds.367