Diodorus of Sicily

τὰς οἰκείας πόλεις ἐπάνοδον ἐποιήσαντο, Λακεδαιμόνιοι
δ᾿ εἰς τὴν Ἀρκαδίαν ἐμβαλόντες καὶ πόλιν
Ἑλισσοῦντα κατὰ κράτος ἑλόντες καὶ διαρπάσαντες
6ἐπανῆλθον εἰς τὴν Σπάρτην. μετὰ δὲ τινα χρόνον
οἱ Θηβαῖοι μετὰ τῶν συμμάχων ἐνίκησαν τοὺς
πολεμίους περὶ Τέλφουσαν καὶ συχνοὺς ἀνελόντες
ἐζώγρησαν Ἀνάξανδρόν τε τὸν ἡγούμενον καὶ τῶν
ἄλλων πλείους τῶν ἑξήκοντα. μετ᾿ ὀλίγον δὲ
χρόνον ἄλλαις δυσὶ μάχαις προετέρησαν καὶ τῶν
7ἐναντίων οὐκ ὀλίγους κατέβαλον. τὸ δὲ τελευταῖον
τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων ἀξιολόγῳ μάχῃ νικησάντων,
αἱ δυνάμεις ἀμφοτέρων εἰς τὰς οἰκείας πόλεις
ἐπανῆλθον. ἔπειτα τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων ποιησαμένων
ἀνοχὰς πρὸς τοὺς Μεγαλοπολίτας ἐπανῆλθον
8εἰς τὴν Βοιωτίαν οἱ Θηβαῖοι. Φάλαικος δὲ περὶ
τὴν Βοιωτίαν διατρίβων Χαιρώνειαν εἷλε καὶ τῶν
Θηβαίων ἐπιβοηθησάντων ἐξέπεσεν ἐκ τῆς πόλεως.
ἔπειθ᾿ οἱ μὲν Βοιωτοὶ πολλῇ δυνάμει στρατεύσαντες
εἰς τὴν Φωκίδα τὴν πλείστην αὐτῆς ἐπόρθησαν
καὶ τὰς κατὰ τὴν χώραν κτήσεις ἐδῄωσαν· ἔνια
δὲ καὶ τῶν μικρῶν πολισμάτων ἑλόντες καὶ λαφύρων
πλῆθος ἀθροίσαντες ἐπανῆλθον εἰς τὴν
Βοιωτίαν.
40. Ἐπ᾿ ἄρχοντος δ᾿ Ἀθήνησι Θεέλλου1 Ῥωμαῖοι
κατέστησαν ὑπάτους Μάρκον Φάβιον καὶ
Τίτον Κοΐντιον. ἐπὶ δὲ τούτων Θηβαῖοι κάμνοντες
τῷ πρὸς Φωκεῖς πολέμῳ καὶ χρημάτων ἀπορούμενοι
πρέσβεις ἐξέπεμψαν πρὸς τὸν τῶν Περσῶν
βασιλέα παρακαλοῦντες εἰσευπορῆσαι τῇ πόλει χρήματα·

1Cp. Kirchner, Pros. Att. no. 6641: Θεσσαλοῦ MSS. except PX Θεσσάλου. All Attic inscriptions give Θέελλος as archon; also Dionysius of Halicarnassus. Epistle to Ammaeus, i. 4, p. 726. 1; Θέλλος Dionysius, Deinarchus, 11, p. 655. 1; Θεσσαλός Dionysius, Deinarchus, 9, p. 648. 5 and 11, p. 656. 7; [Θε]σσαλός Oxyrhynchus Papyri in Philologus
58. 559 (col. i. 11).346Book XVI

to their own cities, while the Lacedaemonians, after invading 352/1 b.c. Arcadia and taking the city Helissus1 by storm and plundering it, returned to Sparta. Some time after this the Thebans with their allies conquered the enemy near Telphusa1 and after slaying many took captive Anaxander, who was in command, along with more than sixty others. A short time later they had the advantage in two other battles and felled a considerable number of their opponents. Finally, when the Lacedaemonians proved victorious in an important battle, the armies on both sides withdrew to their own cities. Then when the Lacedaemonians made an armistice with the Megalopolitans the Thebans went back to Boeotia. But Phalaecus, who was lingering in Boeotia, seized Chaeroneia and when the Thebans came to its rescue, was expelled from that city. Then the Boeotians, who now with a large army invaded Phocis, sacked the greater portion of it and plundered the farms throughout the countryside; and having taken also some of the small towns and gathered an abundance of booty, they returned to Boeotia.
40. When Theellus was archon in Athens, the 351/0 b.c. Romans elected as consuls Marcus Fabius and Titus Quintius. During their term of office the Thebans, growing weary of the war against the Phocians and finding themselves short of funds, sent ambassadors to the King of the Persians urging him to furnish the



1For these Arcadian cities see Pausanias, 8. 3. 3 (Ἑλισσών) and 8. 25. 1–3 (Θέλπουσα).347