Diodorus of Sicily

βαρβάρων συμπλακέντων οἱ περὶ τὸν Ἀγαθοκλέα
προετέρουν, τὸ τῶν στρατιωτῶν ἔχοντες πλῆθος.
εἶθ᾿ οἱ μὲν Καρχηδόνιοι πρύμναν ἀνακρουσάμενοι
μικρὸν ἔξω βέλους ἐφώρμουν, ὁ δ᾿ Ἀγαθοκλῆς
ἀποβιβάσας τὴν δύναμιν πρὸς τὰς καλουμένας
Λατομίας καὶ χάρακα βαλόμενος ἐκ θαλάττης εἰς
θάλατταν ἐνεώλκησε τὰς ναῦς.
7. Οὕτω δὲ παράβολον ἐπιτελεσάμενος πρᾶξιν,
ἄλλην ἐτόλμησε ταύτης μᾶλλον κεκινδυνευμένην.
παραστησάμενος γὰρ τοὺς ἐν ἡγεμονίαις ὄντας
εὐπειθεῖς πρὸς τὴν ἰδίαν ἐπιβολὴν καὶ θυσίαν ποιησάμενος
Δήμητρι καὶ Κόρῃ συνήγαγεν ἐκκλησίαν·
2κἄπειτα προελθὼν ἐπὶ τὴν δημηγορίαν ἐστεφανωμένος
ἐν ἱματίῳ λαμπρῷ καὶ προδιαλεχθεὶς οἰκείως
τοῖς ἐγχειρουμένοις ἔφησε ταῖς κατεχούσαις Σικελίαν
θεαῖς Δήμητρι καὶ Κόρῃ πεποιῆσθαι, καθ᾿ ὃν
καιρὸν ἐδιώχθησαν ὑπὸ Καρχηδονίων, εὐχὰς λαμπαδεύσειν
3ἁπάσας τὰς ναῦς. καλῶς οὖν ἔχειν
τετευχότας τῆς σωτηρίας ἀποδιδόναι τὰς εὐχάς.
ἀντὶ δὲ τούτων ἐπηγγέλλετο πολλαπλασίους ἀποδώσειν
προθύμως αὐτῶν ἀγωνισαμένων· καὶ γὰρ
τὰς θεὰς διὰ τῶν ἱερῶν προσημαίνειν νίκην τοῦ
4σύμπαντος πολέμου. ἅμα δὲ ταῦτα λέγοντος αὐτοῦ
τῶν ὑπηρετῶν τις προσήνεγκεν ἡμμένην δᾷδα· ἣν
δεξάμενος καὶ τοῖς τριηράρχοις ὁμοίως ἅπασι
προστάξας ἀναδοῦναι τάς τε θεὰς ἐπεκαλέσατο καὶ
πρῶτος ὥρμησεν ἐπὶ τὴν ναυαρχίδα τριήρη· στὰς
δ᾿ ἐπὶ τὴν πρύμναν καὶ τοῖς ἄλλοις τὸ παραπλήσιον
ποιεῖν παρεκελεύετο. ἔνθα δὴ τῶν τριηράρχων


158Book XX

ships, Agathocles got the upper hand since he had 310 b.c. his complement of soldiers. At this the Carthaginians withdrew and lay offshore a little beyond bowshot; but Agathocles, having disembarked his soldiers at the place called Latomiae1 and constructed a palisade from sea to sea, beached his ships.
7. When he had thus carried through a perilous enterprise, Agathocles ventured upon another even more hazardous. For after surrounding himself with those among the leaders who were ready to follow his proposal and after making sacrifice to Demeter and Corê, he summoned an assembly; next he came forward to speak, crowned and clad in a splendid himation, and when he had made prefatory remarks of a nature appropriate to the undertaking,2 he declared that to Demeter and Core, the goddesses who protected Sicily, he had at the very moment when they were pursued by the Carthaginians vowed to offer all the ships as a burnt offering. Therefore it was well, since they had succeeded in gaining safety, that they should pay the vow. In place of these ships he promised to restore many times the number if they would but fight boldly; and in truth, he added, the goddesses by omens from the victims had foretold victory in the entire war. While he was saying this, one of his attendants brought forward a lighted torch. When he had taken this and had given orders to distribute torches likewise to all the ship captains, he invoked the goddesses and himself first set out to the trireme of the commander. Standing by the stern, he bade the others also to follow his example. Then as all the captains threw in the fire

1i.e. the Quarries; probably near Cape Bon, the ancient
Promuntorium Mercurii, cp. Strabo, 17. 3. 16.2Justin, 22. 5–6, gives the substance of a long oration, which he ascribes to Agathocles on this occasion.159