Diodorus of Sicily

δὲ τὰς ἁλούσας πόλεις οἱ μὲν στρατιῶται
διαφυλάττειν ἠβούλοντο καὶ τὰς ὠφελείας εἰς αὐτὰς
ἀπετίθεντο· ὁ δ᾿ Ἀγαθοκλῆς ἀκόλουθα τοῖς προπεπραγμένοις
διανοηθεὶς καὶ διδάξας τὸ πλῆθος ὡς
οὐδεμίαν συμφέρει καταφυγὴν ἀπολιπεῖν ἕως ἂν
παρατάξει νικήσωσι, κατέστρεψέ τε τὰς πόλεις
καὶ κατεστρατοπέδευσεν ἐν ὑπαίθρῳ.
9. Οἱ δ᾿ ἐφορμοῦντες1 Καρχηδόνιοι τῷ ναυστάθμῳ
τῶν Σικελιωτῶν τὸ μὲν πρῶτον ὁρῶντες
καομένας τὰς ναῦς περιχαρεῖς ἦσαν, ὡς διὰ τὸν
ἀπ᾿ αὐτῶν φόβον ἠναγκασμένων τῶν πολεμίων
διαφθεῖραι τὰ σκάφη· ὡς δ᾿ ἴδον εἰς τὴν χώραν
προάγουσαν2 τὴν τῶν ἐναντίων δύναμιν, συλλογιζόμενοι
περὶ τῶν ἀποβησομένων συμφορὰν ἰδίαν
ἡγοῦντο τὴν τῶν νεῶν ἀπώλειαν. διὸ καὶ ταῖς
πρῴραις δέρρεις κατεπέτασαν, ὅπερ ἀεὶ ποιεῖν εἰώθασιν
ὅταν τι κακὸν δημοσίᾳ συμβεβηκέναι δόξῃ
2τῇ Καρχηδονίων πόλει,3 ἔλαβόν τε καὶ τὰ χαλκώματα
τῶν Ἀγαθοκλέους νεῶν εἰς τὰς ἰδίας τριήρεις
καὶ τοὺς ἀπαγγελοῦντας ὑπὲρ τῶν συμβεβηκότων
τἀκριβὲς ἐξαπέστειλαν εἰς τὴν Καρχηδόνα. πρὶν
δὲ τούτους δηλῶσαι τὸ γεγονός, ἀπὸ τῆς χώρας
τινὲς αἰσθόμενοι τὸν κατάπλουν τὸν Ἀγαθοκλέους
3ἀπήγγειλαν κατὰ σπουδὴν τοῖς Καρχηδονίοις. οἱ
δ᾿ ἐκπλαγέντες διὰ τὸ παράδοξον ὑπέλαβον ἀπολωλέναι
τὰς ἰδίας δυνάμεις ἐν Σικελίᾳ καὶ τὰς
πεζικὰς καὶ τὰς ναυτικάς· οὐ γὰρ ἄν ποτε τὸν
Ἀγαθοκλέα μὴ νενικηκότα τολμῆσαι καταλιπεῖν
ἐρήμους βοηθείας τὰς Συρακούσσας οὐδ᾿ ἂν ἐπιβαλέσθαι
περαιοῦν δύναμιν θαλαττοκρατούντων4
1ἐφορμοῦντες editors: ἐφορμῶντες.2προάγουσαν Rhodoman: προσάγουσαν.3πόλει added by editors.4θαλασσοκρατούντων MSS.164Book XX

The soldiers wished to garrison both of the captured 310 b.c. cities and deposit the booty in them; but Agathocles, meditating actions conforming to those that had already been accomplished and telling the crowd that it was advantageous to leave behind them no places of refuge until they should have been victorious in battle, destroyed the cities and camped in the open.
9. When the Carthaginians who lay at anchor off the station where the Sicilian fleet was beached saw the ships burning, they were delighted, thinking that it was through fear of themselves that the enemy had been forced to destroy his ships; but when they saw that the army of their opponents was moving into the country, as they reckoned up the consequences, they concluded that the destruction of the fleet was their own misfortune. Therefore they spread hides over the prows of their ships as they were in the habit of doing whenever it seemed that any public misfortune had befallen the city of Carthage; and, after taking the bronze beaks of the ships of Agathocles on board their own triremes, they sent to Carthage messengers to report exactly what had happened. But before these had explained the situation, the country folk who had seen the landing of Agathocles, reported it quickly to the Carthaginians. Panic-stricken at the unexpected event, they supposed that their own forces in Sicily, both army and navy, had been destroyed; for Agathocles, they believed, would never have ventured to leave Syracuse stripped of defenders unless he had been victorious, nor to transport an army across the straits



165