Diodorus of Sicily

μείζους ἐποιοῦντο πρὸς τὴν τῶν ὅλων
ἐπίθεσιν.1
Λεοννάτος δέ, παραγενομένου πρὸς αὐτὸν Ἑκαταίου
πρεσβευτοῦ καὶ δεομένου βοηθῆσαι τὴν
ταχίστην Ἀντιπάτρῳ καὶ Μακεδόσιν, ἐπηγγείλατο
5συμμαχήσειν. διαβὰς οὖν εἰς τὴν Εὐρώπην καὶ
καταντήσας εἰς Μακεδονίαν προσελάβετο πολλοὺς
στρατιώτας Μακεδόνας· ἀθροίσας δὲ τοὺς ἅπαντας
πεζοὺς μὲν πλείους τῶν δισμυρίων, ἱππεῖς δὲ
χιλίους καὶ πεντακοσίους προῆγεν διὰ τῆς Θετταλίας
ἐπὶ τοὺς πολεμίους.
15. Οἱ δὲ Ἕλληνες λύσαντες τὴν πολιορκίαν καὶ
τὴν στρατοπεδείαν ἐμπρήσαντες τὸν μὲν ἀχρεῖον εἰς
παράταξιν ὄχλον καὶ τὰς παρασκευὰς εἰς Μελιτίαν
πόλιν ἐξέπεμψαν, αὐτοὶ δ᾿ εὔζωνοι καὶ πρὸς μάχην
ὄντες ἕτοιμοι προῆγον, ἀπαντήσοντες τοῖς περὶ
Λεοννάτον πρὸ τοῦ τὸν Ἀντίπατρον συμμίξαι καὶ
τὰς δυνάμεις ἀμφοτέρας εἰς ἕνα τόπον συνελθεῖν.
2εἶχον δὲ τοὺς σύμπαντας πεζοὺς μὲν δισμυρίους καὶ
δισχιλίους· οἱ γὰρ Αἰτωλοὶ πάντες προαπηλλαχότες
ἦσαν εἰς τὴν οἰκείαν καὶ τῶν ἄλλων Ἑλλήνων οὐκ
ὀλίγοι κατ᾿ ἐκεῖνον τὸν καιρὸν ὑπῆρχον εἰς τὰς
πατρίδας κεχωρισμένοι· ἱππεῖς δὲ συνεστρατεύοντο
πλείους τῶν τρισχιλίων καὶ πεντακοσίων, ὧν ἦσαν
Θετταλοὶ δισχίλιοι διάφοροι ταῖς ἀρεταῖς, ἐν οἷς
3εἶχον μάλιστα τὰς τῆς νίκης ἐλπίδας. γενομένης
δ᾿ ἱππομαχίας ἰσχυρᾶς ἐπὶ πολὺν χρόνον καὶ τῶν
Θετταλῶν διὰ τὰς ἀρετὰς ἐπικρατούντων, ὁ μὲν
Λεοννάτος λαμπρῶς ἀγωνισάμενος καὶ διακλεισθεὶς

1ἐπίθεσιν Wurm, διάκρισιν Madvig: διάθεσιν.52Book XVIII

themselves with greater preparations for the final 323 b.c. conflict.1
As for Leonnatus, when Hecataeus came to him as envoy and begged him to aid Antipater and the Macedonians with all speed, he promised to give military aid. He crossed over, therefore, into Europe and went on to Macedonia, where he enlisted many additional Macedonian soldiers. When he had gathered together in all more than twenty thousand infantry and fifteen hundred cavalry, he led them through Thessaly against the enemy.
15. The Greeks, giving up the siege2 and burning 322 b.c. their camp, sent away to the town of Melitia the camp followers, who were useless in a pitched battle, and the baggage train, while they themselves went forward with light equipment and ready for battle in order to engage the forces of Leonnatus before Antipater joined him and both armies came together in one place. They had in all twenty-two thousand foot soldiers, for all the Aetolians had previously departed to their own country and not a few of the other Greeks had at that time scattered to their native states. More than thirty-five hundred horsemen took part in the campaign, two thousand being Thessalians exceptional for their courage. In these especially the Greeks trusted for victory. Now when a fierce cavalry battle had gone on for some time and the Thessalians, thanks to their valour, were gaining the upper hand, Leonnatus, after fighting


1We have no account of the immediate sequel. Seuthes retained his title, but seems to have become an unwilling ally of Lysimachus, whom he deserted in 313 (Book 19. 73. 8).2i.e. of Lamia (chap. 13. 6), which had continued through the winter of 323/2. Melitia is north of Lamia in southern Thessaly.53