Diodorus of Sicily

γὰρ οὐ μόνον τῶν ὁμοεθνούντων ἀλλὰ καὶ πάντων
Ἑλλήνων πολὺ προέσχεν ἀνδρείᾳ τε καὶ στρατηγικῇ
συνέσει. μετέσχε γὰρ ἐπὶ πολὺ πάσης παιδείας,
καὶ μάλιστα τῆς Πυθαγορικῆς φιλοσοφίας·
πρὸς δὲ τούτοις φυσικοῖς προτερήμασι κεχορηγημένος,
εἰκότως καὶ πράξεις ἐπιφανεστάτας συνετέλεσεν.
διὸ καὶ συναναγκασθεὶς ὀλίγοις πολιτικοῖς
στρατιώταις πρὸς πάσας τὰς τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων
καὶ τῶν συμμάχων δυνάμεις ἀγωνίσασθαι, τοσοῦτον
ὑπερέσχε τῶν ἀνικήτων στρατιωτῶν, ὥστε τὸν
βασιλέα τῶν Σπαρτιατῶν1 Κλεόμβροτον ἀνελεῖν τὸ
δὲ πλῆθος τῶν ἀντιταχθέντων ἄρδην σχεδὸν κατακόψαι.
3καὶ τὰ τηλικαῦτα παραδόξως διεπράξατο
διὰ τὴν ἀγχίνοιαν καὶ τὴν ἐκ παιδείας αὐτῷ περιγεγενημένην
ἀρετήν.
Ἀλλὰ περὶ μὲν τούτων μικρὸν ὕστερον ἐν τοῖς
κατὰ μέρος ἐκτεθεῖσι2 σαφέστερον δηλώσομεν, νῦν
δ᾿ ἐπὶ τὸ συνεχὲς τῆς ἱστορίας τρεψόμεθα.
40. Μετὰ γὰρ τὴν συγχωρηθεῖσαν τοῖς δήμοις
αὐτονομίαν αἱ πόλεις ἐνέπιπτον εἰς ταραχὰς μεγάλας
καὶ στάσεις, μάλιστα δὲ αἱ κατὰ τὴν Πελοπόννησον.
ὀλιγαρχικοῖς γὰρ πολιτεύμασι κεχρημέναι
καὶ ταῖς τῆς δημοκρατίας ἐξουσίαις ἀπειραγάθως
χρώμεναι, πολλοὺς τῶν ἀγαθῶν ἀνδρῶν ἐφυγάδευον
καὶ κρίσεις ἐπιβάλλουσαι συκοφαντώδεις




1Σπαρτιατῶν] Λακεδαιμονίων AHJK.2ἐκτεθεῖσι PAJK] ἐκτεθησομένοις cet.56Book XV

and Epameinondas. Epameinondas,2 indeed, far 375/4 b.c. excelled not merely those of his own race but even all Greeks in valour and shrewdness in the art of war. He had a broad general education, being particularly interested in the philosophy of Pythagoras.3 Besides this, being well endowed with physical advantages, it is natural that he contributed very distinguished achievements. Hence even when compelled with a very few citizen soldiers to fight against all the armies of the Lacedaemonians and their allies, he was so far superior to these heretofore invincible warriors that he slew the Spartan king Cleombrotus, and almost completely annihilated the multitude of his opponents.4 Such were the remarkable deeds which he unexpectedly performed because of his astuteness and the moral excellence he had derived from his education.
However, we shall somewhat later5 explain these matters more fully in a special chapter; at present we shall turn to the thread of our narrative.
40. After autonomy had been conceded to the various peoples,6 the cities fell into great disturbances and internal strife, particularly in the Peloponnese. For having been used to oligarchic institutions and now taking foolish advantage of the liberties which democracy allows itself, they exiled many of their good7 citizens, and, trumping up charges against them,






1Though Diodorus has Gorgias in two places, all other
writers mentioning the Theban general of this period give
only Gorgidas (see P.-W. Realencyclopädie, s.v. “Gorgidas”).2See his life by Nepos, and Plutarch, Pelopidas, 3, 4.3His Pythagorean instructor was Lysis of Tarentum (Nepos, Epameinondas, 2. 2).4At Leuctra, see chaps. 53 ff.5See chap. 88.6See chap. 38. 2.7“Good” is used in the political sense: “conservative,”
though doubtless Diodorus thought they were really good.57