Diodorus of Sicily

βασιλέων ἐπιμέλειαν καὶ συνεδρεύσας μετὰ τῶν
φίλων Ὀλυμπιάδα μὲν σὺν τῇ τῶν συνέδρων γνώμῃ
μετεπέμπετο, παρακαλῶν τὴν ἐπιμέλειαν τοῦ
Ἀλεξάνδρου υἱοῦ παιδὸς ὄντος παραλαβεῖν καὶ
διατρίβειν ἐν Μακεδονίᾳ τὴν βασιλικὴν ἔχουσαν
προστασίαν· ἡ δ᾿ Ὀλυμπιὰς ἐν τοῖς ἐπάνω χρόνοις
ἐτύγχανεν εἰς Ἤπειρον πεφευγυῖα διὰ τὴν πρὸς
Ἀντίπατρον ἀλλοτριότητα.
Καὶ τὰ μὲν κατὰ τὴν Μακεδονίαν ἐν τούτοις ἦν.
50. Κατὰ δὲ τὴν Ἀσίαν διαβοηθείσης τῆς Ἀντιπάτρου
τελευτῆς ἀρχὴ πραγμάτων καινῶν ἐγίνετο
καὶ κίνησις, τῶν ἐν ἐξουσίαις ὄντων ἰδιοπραγεῖν
ἐπιβαλομένων. τούτων δὲ πρῶτος μὲν Ἀντίγονος
προνενικηκὼς Εὐμενῆ περὶ Καππαδοκίαν καὶ τὰς
μετ᾿ αὐτοῦ δυνάμεις παρειληφώς, καταπεπολεμηκὼς
δ᾿ Ἀλκέταν καὶ Ἄτταλον περὶ τὴν Πισιδικὴν
καὶ τὰς δυνάμεις τὰς μετ᾿ αὐτῶν ἀνειληφώς, πρὸς
δὲ τούτοις ὑπ᾿ Ἀντιπάτρου τῆς Ἀσίας στρατηγὸς
αὐτοκράτωρ ᾑρημένος, ἅμα δὲ καὶ μεγάλης δυνάμεως
ἡγεμὼν ἀποδεδειγμένος πλήρης ἦν ὄγκου καὶ
2φρονήματος. περιβαλλόμενος δὲ ταῖς ἐλπίσι τὴν
τῶν ὅλων ἡγεμονίαν ἔγνω μὴ προσέχειν μήτε τοῖς
βασιλεῦσι μήτε τοῖς ἐπιμεληταῖς αὐτῶν· ὑπελάμβανε
γὰρ αὑτὸν κρείττω δύναμιν ἔχοντα τῶν κατὰ
τὴν Ἀσίαν θησαυρῶν κύριον ἔσεσθαι, μηδενὸς ὄντος
3τοῦ δυναμένου πρὸς αὐτὸν ἀντιτάξεσθαι. εἶχε γὰρ
κατ᾿ ἐκεῖνον τὸν χρόνον στρατιώτας πεζοὺς μὲν
ἑξακισμυρίους, ἱππεῖς δὲ μυρίους, ἐλέφαντας δὲ
τριάκοντα· χωρὶς δὲ τούτων ἑτοίμας ποιήσασθαι
καὶ ἄλλας δυνάμεις ἤλπιζεν, ἂν ᾖ χρεία, δυναμένης
τῆς Ἀσίας χορηγεῖν ἀνεκλείπτως τοῖς στρατολογουμένοις
4ξένοις τὰς μισθοφορίας. ταῦτα δὲ διανοηθεὶς
148Book XVIII

kings and had consulted with his friends, with
their 319 b.c. approval he summoned Olympias, asking her to assume the care of Alexander’s son, who was still
a child, and to live in Macedonia with regal dignity. It so happened that some time before this
Olympias had fled to Epirus as an exile because of her quarrel with Antipater.
This was the state of affairs in Macedonia.1
50. In Asia,2 as soon as the death of Antipater was noised abroad, there was a first stirring of
revolution, since each of those in power undertook to work for his own ends. Antigonus, who was foremost of these, had already won a victory over Eumenes in
Cappadocia and had taken over his army, and he had also completely defeated Alcetas and Attalus in Pisidia and had annexed their troops.3 Moreover, he had been chosen supreme commander of Asia by Antipater, and at the same time he had been appointed general of a great army,4 for which reasons he was filled with pride and haughtiness. Already hopefully aspiring to the supreme power, he decided to take orders neither from the kings nor from their guardians;
for he took it for granted that he himself, since he had a better army, would gain possession of the
treasures of all Asia, there being no one able to stand against him. For at that time he had sixty thousand foot-soldiers, ten thousand horsemen, and thirty
elephants; and in addition to these he expected to make ready other forces also if there should be need, since
Asia could provide pay without end for the mercenaries he might muster. With these plans in mind he




1Continued and in part repeated in chap. 54.2Continued from chap. 47. 5.3Cp. chaps. 40, 44–45.4Cp. chap. 39. 7.149