Diodorus of Sicily

δ᾿ ἀναζεύξας προῆγεν δι᾿ ὄρους ὑψηλοῦ παρήκοντος
ἐπὶ σταδίους διακοσίους, πλήρους δ᾿ ὄντος αἰλούρων,
ἐν ᾧ συνέβαινε μηδὲν ὅλως πτηνὸν νεοττεύειν μήτε
ἐπὶ τοῖς δένδρεσι μήτε ἐν1 ταῖς φάραγξι διὰ τὴν
3ἀλλοτριότητα τῶν προειρημένων ζῴων. διελθὼν
δὲ τὴν ὀρεινὴν ταύτην ἐνέβαλεν εἰς χώραν ἔχουσαν
πλῆθος πιθήκων καὶ πόλεις τρεῖς τὰς ἀπὸ τούτων
τῶν ζῴων ὀνομαζομένας εἰς τὸν Ἑλληνικὸν τρόπον
4τῆς διαλέκτου μεθερμηνευομένας Πιθηκούσσας. ἐν
δὲ ταύταις οὐκ ὀλίγα τῶν νομίμων πολὺ παρήλλαττε
τῶν παρ᾿ ἡμῖν. τάς τε γὰρ αὐτὰς οἰκίας οἱ
πίθηκοι κατῴκουν τοῖς ἀνθρώποις, θεοὶ παρ᾿ αὐτοῖς
νομιζόμενοι καθάπερ παρ᾿ Αἰγυπτίοις οἱ κύνες,
ἔκ τε τῶν παρεσκευασμένων ἐν τοῖς ταμιείοις τὰ
ζῷα τὰς τροφὰς ἐλάμβανον ἀκωλύτως ὁπότε βούλοιντο.
καὶ τὰς προσηγορίας δ᾿ ἐτίθεσαν οἱ γονεῖς
τοῖς παισὶ κατὰ τὸ πλεῖστον ἀπὸ τῶν πιθήκων,
5ὥσπερ παρ᾿ ἡμῖν ἀπὸ τῶν θεῶν. τοῖς δ᾿ ἀποκτείνασι
τοῦτο τὸ ζῷον ὡς ἠσεβηκόσι τὰ μέγιστα
θάνατος ὥριστο πρόστιμον· διὸ δὴ καὶ παρά τισιν
ἐνίσχυσεν ἐν παροιμίας μέρει λεγόμενον ἐπὶ τῶν
ἀνατεὶ κτεινομένων ὅτι πιθήκου αἷμ᾿ ἀποτίσειαν.
6ὁ δ᾿ οὖν Εὔμαχος μίαν μὲν τούτων τῶν πόλεων
ἑλὼν κατὰ κράτος διήρπασε, τὰς δὲ δύο προσηγάγετο.
πυνθανόμενος δὲ τοὺς περιοικοῦντας βαρβάρους
ἀθροίζειν ἐπ᾿ αὐτὸν μεγάλας δυνάμεις
προῆγε συντονώτερον, διεγνωκὼς ἐπανιέναι πρὸς
τοὺς ἐπὶ θαλάττῃ τόπους.
59. Μέχρι μὲν δὴ τούτων τῶν καιρῶν ἐν τῇ

1ἐν Reiske: ἐπὶ.302Book XX

a high mountain range that extended for about two 307 b.c. hundred stades1 and was full of wildcats,2 in which, accordingly, no birds whatever nested either among the trees or the ravines because of the rapacity of the aforementioned beasts. Crossing this range, he came out into a country containing a large number of apes and to three cities called from these beasts Pithecusae,3 if the name is translated into the Greek language. In these cities many of the customs were very different from those current among us. For the apes lived in the same houses as the men, being regarded among them as gods, just as the dogs are among the Egyptians,4 and from the provisions laid up in the storerooms the beasts took their food without hindrance whenever they wished. Parents usually gave their children names taken from the apes, just as we do from the gods. For any who killed this animal, as if he had committed the greatest sacrilege, death was established as the penalty. For this reason, among some there was current a proverbial saying about those slain with impunity that they were paying the penalty for a monkey’s blood. However this may be, Eumachus, after taking one of these cities by storm, destroyed it, but the other two he won over by persuasion. When, however, he heard that the neighbouring barbarians were collecting great forces against him, he pushed on more vigorously, having decided to go back to the regions by the sea.
59. Up to this time all the campaign in Libya had




303