Diodorus of Sicily

ἀπὸ τῶν ἀρχαιοτάτων χρόνων τὰς πράξεις τάς τε
τῶν Ἑλλήνων καὶ βαρβάρων ἕως ἐπὶ τὸν προηγούμενον
ἐνιαυτὸν τῆς Ἀγαθοκλέους στρατείας εἰς
τὴν Λιβύην, εἰς ἣν ἀπὸ Τροίας ἁλώσεως ἔτη συνάγεται
τρισὶ πλείω τῶν ὀκτακοσίων ὀγδοήκοντα·
ἐν ταύτῃ δὲ τὸ συνεχὲς προστιθέντες τῆς ἱστορίας
ἀρξόμεθα μὲν ἀπὸ τῆς εἰς Λιβύην διαβάσεως Ἀγαθοκλέους,
καταλήξομεν δ᾿ εἰς τὸν ἐνιαυτὸν καθ᾿
ὃν οἱ βασιλεῖς συμφρονήσαντες κοινῇ διαπολεμεῖν
ἤρξαντο πρὸς Ἀντίγονον τὸν Φιλίππου, περιλαβόντες
ἔτη ἐννέα.
3. Ἐπ᾿ ἄρχοντος γὰρ Ἀθήνησιν Ἱερομνήμονος
Ῥωμαῖοι μὲν ὑπάτους κατέστησαν Γάιον Ἰούλιον
καὶ Κόιντον Αἰμίλιον, κατὰ δὲ τὴν Σικελίαν
Ἀγαθοκλῆς ἡττημένος ὑπὸ Καρχηδονίων τῇ περὶ
τὸν Ἱμέραν μάχῃ καὶ τὸ πλεῖστον καὶ κράτιστον
τῆς δυνάμεως ἀποβεβληκὼς συνέφυγεν εἰς τὰς
2Συρακούσσας. ὁρῶν δὲ τούς τε συμμάχους ἅπαντας
μεταβεβλημένους καὶ τοὺς βαρβάρους πλὴν Συρακουσσῶν
ἁπάσης σχεδὸν Σικελίας κυριεύοντας καὶ
πολὺ προέχοντας ταῖς τε πεζικαῖς καὶ ναυτικαῖς
δυνάμεσιν ἐπετελέσατο πρᾶξιν ἀνέλπιστον καὶ παραβολωτάτην.
3πάντων γὰρ διειληφότων μηδ᾿ ἐγχειρήσειν
αὐτὸν τοῖς Καρχηδονίοις ἀντιταχθῆναι,
διενοήσατο τῆς μὲν πόλεως ἀπολιπεῖν τὴν ἱκανὴν
φυλακήν, τῶν δὲ στρατιωτῶν τοὺς εὐθέτους ἐπιλέξαι
καὶ μετὰ τούτων εἰς τὴν Λιβύην διακομισθῆναι·
τοῦτο γὰρ πράξας ἤλπιζε τοὺς μὲν ἐν τῇ
Καρχηδόνι τετρυφηκότας ἐν εἰρήνῃ πολυχρονίῳ καὶ
διὰ τοῦτ᾿ ἀπείρους ὄντας τῶν ἐν ταῖς μάχαις


148Book XX

deeds of both the Greeks and the barbarians from the earliest times down to the year before Agathocles’ Libyan campaign; the years from the sack of Troy to that event total eight hundred and eighty-three.1 In this Book, adding what comes next in the account, we shall begin with Agathocles’ crossing into Libya, and end with the year in which the kings, after reaching an agreement with each other, began joint operations against Antigonus, son of Philip, embracing a period of nine years.
3. When Hieromnemon was archon in Athens, the 310 b.c. Romans elected to the consulship Gaius Julius and Quintus Aemilius2; and in Sicily Agathocles, who had been defeated by the Carthaginians in the battle at the Himeras River and had lost the largest and strongest part of his army, took refuge in Syracuse. When he saw that all his allies had changed sides and that the barbarians were masters of almost all Sicily except Syracuse and were far superior in both land and sea forces, he carried out an undertaking that was unexpected and most reckless. For when all had concluded that he would not even try to take the field against the Carthaginians, he determined to leave an adequate garrison for the city, to select those of the soldiers who were fit, and with these to cross over into Libya. For he hoped that, if he did this, those in Carthage, who had been living luxuriously in long-continued peace and were therefore without experience in the dangers of battle, would

1An error for 873. Cp. Book 19. 1. 10.2Hieromnemon was archon in 310/09 b.c. In the Fasti the consuls of 311 b.c. are C. Iunius Bubulcus Brutus for the third time and Q. Aemilius Barbula for the second (CIL, 1, p. 130; cp. Livy, 9. 30. 1). The narrative is continued from Book 19. 110. 5. For the first part of the African campaign, cp. Justin, 22. 4–6; Orosius, 4. 6. 23–29.149