Diodorus of Sicily
5οἱ δ᾿ ἐπὶ τῶν τειχῶν ἑστῶτες τὸ μὲν πρῶτον
ὤκνουν τοῖς βέλεσι χρήσασθαι, προκειμένων αὐτοῖς
σκοπῶν πολιτικῶν ἀνδρῶν, ὧν ἦσάν τινες καὶ τῶν
ἐπιφανεστάτων· ἐπικειμένων δὲ τῶν πολεμίων βαρύτερον
ἠναγκάζοντο τοὺς ἐπὶ τῆς μηχανῆς ὄντας
6ἀμύνεσθαι. ἔνθα δὴ συνέβαινε γίνεσθαι παράλογα
πάθη τοῖς Ἰτυκαίοις καὶ τύχης ἐπηρεασμὸν ἐν
ἀνάγκαις κειμένοις ἀνεκφεύκτοις1· προβεβλημένων
γὰρ τῶν Ἑλλήνων τοὺς ἡλωκότας τῶν ἐξ Ἰτύκης
ἀναγκαῖον ἦν ἢ τούτων φειδομένους περιορᾶν ὑποχείριον
τοῖς πολεμίοις γινομένην τὴν πατρίδα ἢ τῇ
πόλει βοηθοῦντας ἀνηλεῶς φονεῦσαι πλῆθος πολιτῶν
7ἠτυχηκότων. ὅπερ καὶ συνέβη γενέσθαι· ἀμυνόμενοι
γὰρ τοὺς πολεμίους καὶ παντοίοις βέλεσι
χρώμενοι καί τινας τῶν ἐφεστηκότων τῇ μηχανῇ
κατηκόντισαν καὶ τὰ μὲν τῶν κρεμαμένων πολιτῶν
σώματα κατῃκίσαντο, τὰ2 δὲ τοῖς ὀξυβελέσι πρὸς
τῇ μηχανῇ προσκαθήλωσαν καθ᾿ οὕς ποτε τύχοι
τοῦ σώματος τόπους, ὥστε σταυρῷ παραπλησίαν
εἶναι τὴν ὕβριν ἅμα καὶ τὴν τιμωρίαν. καὶ ταῦτ᾿
ἐγίνετό τισιν ὑπὸ συγγενῶν ἢ φίλων, εἰ τύχοι, τῆς
ἀνάγκης οὐ πολυπραγμονούσης τι τῶν παρ᾿ ἀνθρώποις
ὁσίων.
55. Ὁ δ᾿ Ἀγαθοκλῆς, ὁρῶν αὐτοὺς ἀπαθῶς
ὡρμηκότας πρὸς τὸν κίνδυνον, περιστήσας πανταχόθεν
τὴν δύναμιν καὶ κατά τινα τόπον φαύλως
ᾠκοδομημένον βιασάμενος εἰσέπεσεν εἰς τὴν πόλιν.
2τῶν δ᾿ Ἰτυκαίων τῶν μὲν εἰς τὰς οἰκίας, τῶν δ᾿ εἰς


1κειμένοις ἀνεκφεύκτοις Reiske: κείμενον ἀνέκφευκτον.2τινας τῶν ἐφ. τῇ μη. κατηκόντισαν καὶ τὰ μὲν τῶν κρ. πολ.
σώματα κατῃκίσαντο, τὰ Geer: τὰ τῶν ἐφ. τῇ μη. σώματα κατῃκίσαντο καὶ τινὰς μὲν τῶν κρ. πολ. κατηκόντισαν, τινὰς.292Book XX

those within the city. Those standing on the walls 307 b.c. at first hesitated to use their missiles since the targets presented to them were their own fellow-countrymen, of whom some were indeed the most distinguished of their citizens; but when the enemy pressed on more heavily, they were forced to defend themselves against those who manned the engine. As a result there came unparalleled suffering and despiteful treatment of fortune to the men of Utica, placed as they were in dire straits from which there was no escape; for since the Greeks had set up before them as shields the men of Utica who had been captured, it was necessary either to spare these and idly watch the fatherland fall into the hands of the enemy or, in protecting the city, to slaughter mercilessly a large number of unfortunate fellow citizens. And this, indeed, is what took place; for as they resisted the enemy and employed missiles of every kind, they shot down some of the men who were stationed on the engine, and they also mangled some of their fellow citizens who were hanging there, and others they nailed to the engine with their bolts at whatever places on the body the missiles chanced to strike, so that the wanton violence and the punishment almost amounted to crucifixion. And this fate befell some at the hands of kinsmen and friends, if so it chanced, since necessity is not curiously concerned for what is holy among men.
55. But when Agathocles saw that they were cold-bloodedly intent on fighting, he put his army in position to attack from every side and, forcing an entrance at a point where the wall had been poorly constructed, broke into the city. As some of the Uticans fled into their houses, others into temples,
293