Diodorus of Sicily

δ᾿ εἰς τὴν πόλιν αὐτοῦ νυκτὸς οἱ προεστῶτες
τῆς φρουρᾶς αἰσθόμενοι τὸ γεγονὸς αὐτόν τε τὸν
Νυμφόδωρον ἀνεῖλον καὶ τοὺς βιαζομένους ἐντὸς
4τοῦ τείχους. ταύτης δὲ τῆς ἀφορμῆς λαβόμενος
Ἀγαθοκλῆς ἐνεκάλεσέ τε τοῖς Κεντοριπίνοις καὶ
τοὺς δόξαντας αἰτίους γεγονέναι τοῦ νεωτερισμοῦ
πάντας ἀπέσφαξε. περὶ ταῦτα δ᾿ ὄντος τοῦ δυνάστου
Καρχηδόνιοι καταπλεύσαντες εἰς τὸν μέγαν
λιμένα τῶν Συρακοσίων πεντήκοντα σκάφεσιν ἄλλο
μὲν οὐδὲν ἠδυνήθησαν πρᾶξαι, δυσὶ δὲ περιπεσόντες
φορτηγοῖς πλοίοις ἐξ Ἀθηνῶν, τὰ μὲν1
κατέδυσαν, τῶν δ᾿ ἐπιπλεόντων τὰς χεῖρας ἀπέκοψαν.
5δοξάντων δ᾿ αὐτῶν ὠμῶς κεχρῆσθαι μηδ᾿
ὁτιοῦν ἀδικοῦσι ταχὺ τὸ δαιμόνιον αὐτοῖς ἐπεσήμαινεν·
εὐθὺ γὰρ τοῦ στόλου τινὲς νῆες ἀποσχισθεῖσαι
περὶ τὴν Βρεττίαν ἑάλωσαν ὑπὸ τῶν
Ἀγαθοκλέους στρατηγῶν καὶ τὸ παραπλήσιον οἱ
ζωγρηθέντες τῶν Φοινίκων ἔπαθον οἷς2 ἔπραξαν εἰς
τοὺς ἁλόντας.
104. Οἱ δὲ περὶ τὸν Δεινοκράτην φυγάδες,
ἔχοντες πεζοὺς μὲν ὑπὲρ τοὺς τρισχιλίους, ἱππεῖς
δὲ οὐκ ἐλάττους δισχιλίων, τὴν καλουμένην Γαλερίαν
κατελάβοντο, τῶν πολιτῶν ἑκουσίως ἐπικαλεσαμένων,
καὶ τοὺς μὲν Ἀγαθοκλέους ἐξέβαλον,
2αὐτοὶ δὲ πρὸ τῆς πόλεως ἐστρατοπέδευσαν. Ἀγαθοκλέους
δὲ ταχέως ἀποστείλαντος ἐπ᾿ αὐτοὺς
Πασίφιλον καὶ Δημόφιλον μετὰ στρατιωτῶν πεντακισχιλίων
ἐγένετο μάχη πρὸς τοὺς φυγάδας, ὧν
ἡγεῖτο Δεινοκράτης καὶ Φιλωνίδης, τὰ κέρατα


1ἐξ Ἀθηνῶν, τὰ μὲν Geer, τὴν μὲν <ἀγορὰν κομίζουσιν> ἐξ
Ἀθηνῶν Fischer in apparatus: τὴν μὲν ἐξ Ἀθηνῶν.2οἷς Hertlein: οἷα.114Book XIX

city by night, the commanders of the garrison, perceiving 312 b.c. what had taken place, slew both the man himself and those who pressed fiercely on within the walls. Seizing upon this opportunity, Agathocles brought accusations against the Centoripini and slaughtered all who were thought to have been guilty of the sedition. While the dynast was thus engaged, the Carthaginians sailed into the great harbour of Syracuse with fifty light boats. They were able to do nothing more, but falling upon two merchant ships from Athens, they sank the ships themselves and cut off the hands of the crews. They had clearly treated with cruelty men who had done them no harm at all, and the gods quickly gave them a sign of this; for immediately, when some of the ships were separated from the fleet in the vicinity of Brettia, they were captured by the generals of Agathocles, and those of the Phoenicians who were taken alive suffered a fate similar to that which they had inflicted upon their captives.
104.The exiles who were with Deinocrates, having more than three thousand foot-soldiers and not less than two thousand mounted men, occupied the place called Galeria,1 the citizens of their own free will inviting them; and they exiled the followers of Agathocles, but they themselves encamped before the city. When, however, Agathocles quickly dispatched against them Pasiphilus2 and Demophilus with five thousand soldiers, a battle was fought with the exiles, who were led by Deinocrates and Philonides,


1The exact location is not known.2For his later treachery and death cp. Book 20. 77. 2; 90. 2.115