Diodorus of Sicily

τι τῶν κατωρθωμένων τούτῳ τῷ βασιλεῖ·
αὐταὶ γὰρ αἱ κατὰ μέρος πράξεις ἱκανῶς μηνύσουσι
5τὸ μέγεθος τῆς δόξης αὐτοῦ. Ἀλέξανδρος οὖν
γεγονὼς κατὰ πατέρα μὲν ἀφ᾿ Ἡρακλέους, κατὰ
δὲ μητέρα τῶν Αἰακιδῶν οἰκείαν ἔσχε τὴν φύσιν
καὶ τὴν ἀρετὴν τῆς τῶν προγόνων εὐδοξίας. ἡμεῖς
δὲ τοὺς ἁρμόττοντας τῇ γραφῇ χρόνους παραθέντες
ἐπὶ τὰς οἰκείας τῆς ὑποκειμένης ἱστορίας πράξεις
τρεψόμεθα.
2. Ἐπ᾿ ἄρχοντος γὰρ Ἀθήνησιν Εὐαινέτου Ῥωμαῖοι
κατέστησαν ὑπάτους Λεύκιον Φούριον καὶ
Γάιον Μάνιον. ἐπὶ δὲ τούτων Ἀλέξανδρος διαδεξάμενος
τὴν βασιλείαν πρῶτον μὲν τοὺς φονεῖς τοῦ
πατρὸς τῆς ἁρμοζούσης τιμωρίας ἠξίωσε, μετὰ
δὲ ταῦτα τῆς ταφῆς τοῦ γονέως τὴν ἐνδεχομένην
ἐπιμέλειαν ποιησάμενος κατέστησε τὰ κατὰ τὴν
2ἀρχὴν πολὺ κάλλιον ἢ πάντες προσεδόκησαν. νέος
γὰρ ὢν παντελῶς καὶ διὰ τὴν ἡλικίαν ὑπό τινων
καταφρονούμενος πρῶτον μὲν τὰ πλήθη οἰκείοις
λόγοις παρεστήσατο πρὸς εὔνοιαν· ἔφη γὰρ ὄνομα
μόνον διηλλάχθαι βασιλέως, τὰς δὲ πράξεις χειρισθήσεσθαι
μηδὲν καταδεέστερον τῆς ἐπὶ τοῦ πατρὸς
γενομένης οἰκονομίας· ἔπειτα ταῖς πρεσβείαις χρηματίσας




120Book XVII

in the introduction any of the accomplishments of this king; his deeds reported one by one will attest sufficiently the greatness of his glory. On his father’s side Alexander was a descendant of Heracles and on his mother’s he could claim the blood of the Aeacids, so that from his ancestors on both sides he inherited the physical and moral qualities of greatness.1 Pointing out as we proceed the chronology of events, we shall pass on to the happenings which concern our history.
2. When Evaenetus was archon at Athens, the 335/4 b.c. Romans elected as consuls Lucius Furius and Gaius Manius.2 In this year Alexander, succeeding to the throne, first inflicted due punishment on his father’s murderers,3 and then devoted himself to the funeral of his father. He established his authority far more firmly than any did in fact suppose possible, for he was quite young and for this reason not uniformly respected, but first he promptly won over the Macedonians to his support by tactful statements.4 He declared that the king was changed only in name and that the state would be run on principles no less effective than those of his father’s administration. Then he addressed himself to the embassies which were


1Plutarch, Alexander, 2. 1. Alexander’s most prominent
ancestor on his mother’s side was Achilles. Both the Aeacids
and the Argeads traced their ancestry back to Zeus.2Evaenetus was archon from July 335 to June 334 b.c.
Broughton (1. 138) gives the consuls of 338 b.c. as L. Furius
Camillus and C. Maenius.3Diodorus has not previously suggested that any others
knew of the plans of Pausanias, who was killed immediately
and so could not reveal any accomplices (Book 16. 94. 4).
Alexander himself was the principal beneficiary of the murder, and he has been suspected of complicity, especially because, as only half of Macedonian blood, he was not universally popular. At all events, the known victims of this purge were Alexander’s own rivals: his older cousin Amyntas, son of King Perdiccas III; the family of Alexander of Lyncestis, although he himself was spared; and Philip’s wife Cleopatra and her infant daughter, killed by Olympias. These murders were not forgotten (Plutarch, Alexander, 10. 4; On the Fortune of Alexander, 1. 3. 327 c; Curtius, 6. 9. 17 and 10. 24; Justin, 11.2. 1–3 and 12. 6. 14). These events are ignored by Arrian, and Curtius’s preserved narrative begins only when Alexander was in Phrygia.4Justin, 11. 1. 8.121