Diodorus of Sicily

καὶ αὐτὸν ἀσχολεῖσθαι περὶ τὴν ταφὴν τοῦ
πατρός, Εὐπόλεμον ἀπέστειλαν ἐνεδρεῦσαι τοῖς πολεμίοις
περὶ Κάπριμα τῆς Καρίας· συνεξέπεμψαν
δ᾿ αὐτῷ πεζοὺς μὲν ὀκτακισχιλίους, ἱππεῖς δὲ
6διακοσίους. καθ᾿ ὃν δὴ χρόνον Πτολεμαῖος παρά
τινων αὐτομόλων ἀκούσας τὴν προαίρεσιν τῶν πολεμίων
ἤθροισε μὲν τῶν πλησίον χειμαζόντων στρατιωτῶν
πεζοὺς μὲν ὀκτακισχιλίους τριακοσίους,
7ἱππεῖς δ᾿ ἑξακοσίους. ἀνελπίστως δὲ περὶ μέσας
νύκτας ἐπιβαλὼν τῷ χάρακι τῶν ἐναντίων καὶ
καταλαβὼν ἀφυλάκτους καὶ κοιμωμένους αὐτόν τε
τὸν Εὐπόλεμον ἐζώγρησε καὶ τοὺς στρατιώτας
συνηνάγκασε παραδοῦναι σφᾶς αὐτούς.
Τὰ μὲν οὖν συμβάντα περὶ τοὺς ἀποσταλέντας
ὑπὸ Κασάνδρου στρατηγοὺς εἰς τὴν Ἀσίαν τοιαῦτ᾿
ἦν.
69. Ἀντίγονος δ᾿ ὁρῶν τὸν Κάσανδρον ἀντεχόμενον
τῆς Ἀσίας Δημήτριον μὲν τὸν υἱὸν ἀπέλιπεν
ἐν τῇ Συρίᾳ, προστάξας ἐνεδρεύειν τοὺς περὶ
Πτολεμαῖον, οὓς ὑπώπτευεν ἐκ τῆς Αἰγύπτου
προάξειν μετὰ δυνάμεως ἐπὶ Συρίας, συναπέλιπε δ᾿
αὐτῷ πεζοὺς μὲν ξένους μυρίους, Μακεδόνας δὲ
δισχιλίους, Λυκίους δὲ καὶ Παμφυλίους πεντακοσίους,
Πέρσας δὲ τοξότας καὶ σφενδονήτας τετρακοσίους,
ἱππεῖς δὲ πεντακισχιλίους, ἐλέφαντας δὲ
τρεῖς1 πλείους τῶν τεσσαράκοντα. παρακατέστησε
δ᾿ αὐτῷ καὶ συμβούλους τέσσαρας, Νέαρχόν τε τὸν
Κρῆτα καὶ Πίθωνα τὸν Ἀγήνορος, ὃς καταβεβήκει





1τρεῖς omitted by Fischer.18Book XIX

and was himself engaged in burying his father, they 314 b.c. dispatched Eupolemus to lie in wait for the enemy near Caprima1 in Caria, sending with him eight thousand foot soldiers and two hundred horse. But at this time Ptolemaeus, who had heard from some deserters of the plan of the enemy, gathered from the troops who were wintering near by eight thousand three hundred foot soldiers and six hundred horse. Falling unexpectedly upon the fortified camp of the enemy about midnight and catching them off guard and asleep, he captured Eupolemus himself alive and forced the soldiers to give themselves up.
This, then, is what befell the generals who were sent by Cassander into Asia.
69. When Antigonus perceived that Cassander was trying to win Asia for himself, he left his son Demetrius in Syria,2 ordering him to lie in wait for Ptolemy, whom he suspected of intending to advance from Egypt with an army against Syria; with Demetrius he left an infantry force consisting of ten thousand mercenaries, two thousand Macedonians, five hundred Lycians and Pamphylians, and four hundred Persian archers and slingers, a cavalry force of five thousand, and forty-three elephants. He assigned to him four counsellors: Nearchus of Crete,3 Pithon, son of Agenor,4 who had returned


1Caprima in Caria is otherwise unknown.2Cp. Plutarch, Demetrius, 5. 2; Appian, Syrian Wars, 54.3Nearchus was a boyhood friend of Alexander (Arrian, Anabasis, 3. 6. 5; Plutarch, Alexander, 10. 3), who had accompanied him on the march eastward and commanded the fleet on the return. In 323 b.c. he was appointed to command a voyage of exploration around Arabia, but this was abandoned on Alexander’s death (Arrian, Anabasis, 7. 25. 4; Plutarch, Alexander, 68). He served under Antigonus in 317 b.c. (chap. 19, 4) and joined Demetrius in urging that Eumenes be spared (Plutarch, Eumenes, 18. 3).4there (Book 18. 3. 3; 39. 6) until recalled by Antigonus in
316 b.c. to become satrap of Babylonia (chap. 56. 4). He
is not to be confused with Pithon of the Bodyguard, who
had been put to death by Antigonus in 316 b.c. (chap. 46. 3–4),
or with the Pithon who was satrap of Media (Book 18. 3. 1;
39. 6). This Pithon had been left by Alexander as satrap of lower India (Arrian, Anabasis, 6. 15. 4) and had remained19