Diodorus of Sicily

τούτων μετενόησε καὶ μετακαλεσάμενος τοὺς ὑπηρέτας
ἀφεῖναι προσέταξε καὶ τὴν δεξιὰν ἔδωκε τῷ
Θετταλίωνι· ἔστι δ᾿ ἡ πίστις αὕτη βεβαιοτάτη παρὰ
τοῖς Πέρσαις. οὗτος μὲν οὖν παρελθὼν εἰς Σιδῶνα
τὰ πεπραγμένα τῷ Τέννῃ1 λάθρᾳ τῶν Σιδωνίων
ἀπήγγειλεν.
44. Ὁ δὲ βασιλεὺς ἐν μεγάλῳ τιθέμενος τὸ
κρατῆσαι τῆς Αἰγύπτου διὰ τὸ πρότερον ἐλάττωμα
πρεσβευτὰς ἀπέστειλε πρὸς τὰς μεγίστας τῶν κατὰ
τὴν Ἑλλάδα πόλεων, ἀξιῶν συστρατεῦσαι τοῖς
Πέρσαις ἐπ᾿ Αἰγυπτίους. Ἀθηναῖοι μὲν οὖν καὶ
Λακεδαιμόνιοι τὴν φιλίαν ἔφασαν τὴν πρὸς Πέρσας
τηρεῖν, συμμαχίαν δὲ ἀποστέλλειν ἀντεῖπαν.
2Θηβαῖοι δὲ στρατηγὸν ἑλόμενοι Λακράτην ἐξαπέστειλαν
μετὰ χιλίων ὁπλιτῶν. Ἀργεῖοι δὲ τρισχιλίους
στρατιώτας ἐξέπεμψαν, στρατηγὸν δὲ αὐτοὶ
μὲν οὐχ εἵλαντο, τοῦ δὲ βασιλέως κατ᾿ ὄνομα τὸν
Νικόστρατον στρατηγὸν αἰτησαμένου συνεχώρησαν.
3ἦν γὰρ ὁ ἀνὴρ οὗτος ἀγαθὸς καὶ πρᾶξαι καὶ βουλεύσασθαι,
μεμιγμένην δ᾿2 ἔχων τῇ φρονήσει
μανίαν· τῇ γὰρ τοῦ σώματος ῥώμῃ διαφέρων ἐμιμεῖτο
τὸν Ἡρακλέα κατὰ τὰς στρατείας καὶ λεοντῆν
4ἐφόρει καὶ ῥόπαλον ἐν ταῖς μάχαις. ὁμοίως δὲ
τούτοις οἱ τὴν παραθαλάττιον τῆς Ἀσίας οἰκοῦντες
Ἕλληνες ἀπέστειλαν στρατιώτας ἑξακισχιλίους,
ὥστε τοὺς πάντας Ἕλληνας γενέσθαι συμμάχους
μυρίους. πρὸ δὲ τῆς τούτων παρουσίας ὁ μὲν
βασιλεὺς διεληλυθὼς τὴν Συρίαν καὶ παραγενόμενος




1Τέννῃ edd.: Μέντορι.2δ᾿ suggested by Fischer: μεμιγμένην ἔχων.358Book XVI

King, hearing what he said, again changed his mind 351/0 b.c. and recalling the attendants directed them to release Thettalion, and then he gave him his right hand, which is the surest pledge amongst the Persians. Thettalion accordingly returned to Sidon and reported what had happened to Tennes without the knowledge of the people of Sidon.
44. The Persian King, accounting it a matter of great importance, in view of his former defeat,1 to overthrow Egypt, dispatched envoys to the greatest cities of Greece requesting them to join the Persians in the campaign against the Egyptians.2 Now the Athenians and the Lacedaemonians replied that they continued to observe their friendship for the Persians, but were opposed to sending troops as allies. But the Thebans, choosing Lacrates as general, dispatched him with a thousand hoplites. And the Argives sent three thousand men; they did not, however, choose a general themselves, but when the King requested Nicostratus specifically as general, they concurred. Now Nicostratus was good both in action and in counsel, but there was madness mingled with his intelligence; for since he excelled in bodily strength, he would imitate Heracles when on a campaign by wearing a lion’s skin and carrying a club in battle. Following the example of these states, the Greeks who inhabited the sea-coast of Asia Minor dispatched six thousand men, making the total number of Greeks who served as allies ten thousand. Before their arrival the Persian King, after he had traversed Syria

1See p. 348. note 2 and p. 349, note 3.2Cp. Isocrates, Panegyric, 161; Demosthenes, 10. 34 and Didymus, 8. 9 ff. on the passage; Philip’s Letter to Demosthenes
(Demosthenes, 12. 6). See also Beloch, Griechische Geschichte2, 3. 1. 535 and Hall, Cambridge Ancient History, 6. 152.359