Diodorus of Sicily

τὴν γενομένην λοιδορίαν καὶ διὰ τὸ μὴ βεβουλῆσθαι
τὴν Τύρον παραδοῦναι· οὐ μὴν ὅ γε Πτολεμαῖος
ἐμνησικάκησεν, ἀλλὰ τοὐναντίον δοὺς δωρεὰς εἶχε
περὶ αὑτόν, ἕνα τῶν φίλων ποιησάμενος καὶ προάγων
3ἐντίμως. ἦν γὰρ ὁ δυνάστης οὗτος καθ᾿
ὑπερβολὴν ἐπιεικὴς καὶ συγγνωμονικός, ἔτι δ᾿
εὐεργετικός. ὅπερ καὶ μάλιστ᾿ αὐτὸν ηὔξησε καὶ
4πολλοὺς ἐποίησεν ἐπιθυμεῖν κοινωνῆσαι τῆς φιλίας.
καὶ γὰρ τὸν Σέλευκον ἐκ τῆς Βαβυλωνίας ἐκπεσόντα
φιλοτίμως ὑπεδέξατο καὶ κοινὴν παρείχετο
τούτῳ τε καὶ τοῖς ἄλλοις φίλοις τὴν περὶ αὑτὸν1
5εὐδαιμονίαν. διὸ καὶ τότε παρακαλοῦντος αὐτὸν
Σελεύκου δοῦναι στρατιώτας τοὺς ἀναβησομένους
εἰς Βαβυλῶνα προθύμως ὡμολόγησε καὶ προσεπηγγείλατο
πάντα συμπράξειν μέχρι ἀνακτήσαιτο
τὴν προϋπάρχουσαν σατραπείαν.
Καὶ τὰ μὲν κατὰ τὴν Ἀσίαν ἐν τούτοις ἦν.
87. Κατὰ δὲ τὴν Εὐρώπην Τελεσφόρος μὲν ὁ
Ἀντιγόνου ναύαρχος διατρίβων περὶ Κόρινθον,
ἐπειδὴ Πτολεμαῖον ἑώρα μᾶλλον ἑαυτοῦ προαγόμενον
καὶ τῶν κατὰ τὴν Ἑλλάδα πραγμάτων πιστευόμενον
ἁπάντων, ἐγκαλέσας Ἀντιγόνῳ περὶ
τούτων τὰς μὲν ναῦς ἃς εἶχεν ἀπέδοτο, τῶν δὲ
στρατιωτῶν τοὺς βουλομένους κοινωνεῖν τῆς προαιρέσεως
2ἀναλαβὼν ἴδια πράγματα συνίστατο. παρελθὼν
γὰρ εἰς Ἦλιν ὡς ἔτι φυλάττων τὴν
πρὸς Ἀντίγονον φιλίαν, τὴν ἀκρόπολιν ἐνετείχισε
καὶ τὴν πόλιν κατεδουλώσατο. ἐσύλησεν δὲ καὶ τὸ
ἱερὸν τὸ κατὰ τὴν Ὀλυμπίαν καὶ συναγαγὼν ἀργυρίου
πλείω τῶν πεντήκοντα ταλάντων ξένους
3ἐμισθοῦτο. Τελεσφόρος μὲν οὖν ζηλοτυπήσας τὴν

1αὑτὸν editors: αὐτὸν Fischer, MSS.70Book XIX

for the insults and for his unwillingness to surrender 312 b.c. Tyre. But in truth Ptolemy bore no malice; on the contrary, he gave him gifts and kept him in his court, making him one of his friends and advancing him in honour. For indeed, that prince was exceptionally gentle and forgiving and inclined toward deeds of kindness. It was this very thing that most increased his power and made many men desire to share his friendship.1 For example, when Seleucus had been driven from Babylonia, he received him with friendship2; and he used to share his own prosperity with him and with his other friends. Therefore on this occasion also, when Seleucus asked him to give him soldiers for an expedition into Babylonia, he readily consented; and in addition, he promised to aid him in every way until he should regain the satrapy that had formerly been his.
Such was the situation of affairs in Asia.3
87. In Europe,4 Antigonus’ admiral Telesphorus, who was tarrying near Corinth, when he saw Ptolemaeus
preferred to himself and entrusted with all affairs throughout Greece, charged Antigonus with this, sold what ships he had, enlisted such of the soldiers as volunteered to join his cause, and organized an enterprise of his own. Entering Elis as if still preserving his friendship for Antigonus, he fortified the citadel and enslaved the city. He even plundered the sacred precinct at Olympia and, after collecting more than five hundred talents of silver, began hiring mercenaries. In this manner then, Telesphorus,




1Cp. Book 18. 28. 5–6.2Cp. chap. 55. 5.3Continued in chap. 90. 1.4Continued from chap. 78. Telesphorus was probably a nephew of Antigonus (chap. 74. 1), and Ptolemaeus certainly was (chap. 68. 5).71