Diodorus of Sicily

τῆς θαλάττης ἀλλὰ καὶ τῆς χώρας κυριευόντων,
σιτοδείᾳ τε συνέβαινε συνέχεσθαι τοὺς Ἕλληνας
καὶ τῷ φόβῳ πάντοθεν κατείχοντο.
5Ἐν ἀθυμίᾳ δὲ δεινῇ πάντων ὄντων Ἀγαθοκλῆς
ὡς ἐπύθετο τὰ κατὰ τὴν Λιβύην ἐλαττώματα, παρεσκευάσατο
ναῦς1 μακρὰς ἑπτακαίδεκα, διανοούμενος
βοηθεῖν τοῖς περὶ τὸν Ἀρχάγαθον. καὶ τῶν
κατὰ Σικελίαν δὲ πραγμάτων ἐπὶ τὸ χεῖρον αὐτῷ
μεταβεβληκότων διὰ τὸ τοὺς περὶ Δεινοκράτην
φυγάδας ηὐξῆσθαι ἐπὶ πλεῖον, τὸν μὲν ἐν τῇ νήσῳ
πόλεμον τοῖς περὶ Λεπτίνην στρατηγοῖς ἐνεχείρισεν,
αὐτὸς δὲ πληρώσας τὰς ναῦς ἐπετήρει τὸν τοῦ πλοῦ
καιρόν, ἐφορμούντων τῶν Καρχηδονίων τριάκοντα
6ναυσί. καθ᾿ ὃν δὴ χρόνον ἐκ Τυρρηνίας αὐτῷ
κατέπλευσαν ὀκτωκαίδεκα ναῦς ἐπὶ βοήθειαν, αἳ
διὰ νυκτὸς εἰς τὸν λιμένα εἰσπεσοῦσαι τοὺς Καρχηδονίους
ἔλαθον. ὁ δ᾿ Ἀγαθοκλῆς ταύτης τυχὼν
τῆς ἀφορμῆς κατεστρατήγησε τοὺς πολεμίους, τοῖς
μὲν συμμάχοις μένειν παραγγείλας μέχρι ἂν αὐτὸς
ἐκπλεύσας ἐπισπάσηται τοὺς Φοίνικας πρὸς τὸν
διωγμόν, αὐτὸς δέ, καθάπερ ἦν συντεθειμένος, ἐκ
τοῦ λιμένος ἀνήχθη κατὰ σπουδὴν τοῖς ἑπτακαίδεκα
7σκάφεσιν. εἶθ᾿ οἱ μὲν ἐφορμοῦντες ἐδίωκον, οἱ δὲ
περὶ τὸν Ἀγαθοκλέα κατανοήσαντες τοὺς Τυρρηνοὺς
παραφαινομένους ἐκ τοῦ λιμένος ἄφνω τὰς
ναῦς ἐπέστρεψαν καὶ καταστάντες εἰς ἐμβολὴν διεναυμάχουν
τοῖς βαρβάροις. οἱ δὲ Καρχηδόνιοι
διά τε τὸ παράδοξον καὶ διὰ τὸ τῶν πολεμίων εἰς
μέσον ἀπολαμβάνεσθαι τὰς ἰδίας τριήρεις καταπλαγέντες
8ἔφυγον. εἶθ᾿ οἱ μὲν Ἕλληνες πέντε
νεῶν αὐτάνδρων ἐκυρίευσαν, ὁ δὲ τῶν Καρχηδονίων
στρατηγὸς ἁλισκομένης ἤδη τῆς ναυαρχίδος ἀπέσφαξεν
1τε after ναῦς omitted by Dindorf.310Book XX

controlled not only the sea but also the land, the 307 b.c. Greeks both suffered from famine and were beset by fear on every side.
While all were in deep despair, Agathocles, when he learned of the reverses in Libya, made ready seventeen warships intending to go to the aid of Archagathus. Although affairs in Sicily had also shifted to his disadvantage because of the increase in the strength of the exiles who followed Deinocrates, he entrusted the war on the island to Leptines as general; and he himself, manning his ships, watched for a chance to set sail, since the Carthaginians were blockading the harbour with thirty ships. Now at this very time eighteen ships arrived from Etruria as a reinforcement for him, slipping into the harbour at night without the knowledge of the Carthaginians. Gaining this resource, Agathocles outgeneralled his enemies; ordering the allies to remain until he should have sailed out and drawn the Carthaginians into the chase, he himself, just as he had planned, put to sea from the harbour at top speed with his seventeen ships. The ships on guard pursued, but Agathocles, on seeing the Etruscans appearing from the harbour, suddenly turned his ships, took position for ramming, and pitted his ships against the barbarians. The Carthaginians, terror-stricken by the surprise and because their own triremes were cut off between the enemy fleets, fled. Thereupon the Greeks captured five ships with their crews; and the commander of the Carthaginians, when his flagship was on the point of being captured, lulled


311