Diodorus of Sicily

δὲ κλίναντες προῆγον ἐπ᾿ ἀκέραια1 μέρη τῆς οἰκουμένης
χώρας, βουλόμενοι τὴν δύναμιν ἐκ τῆς
κακοπαθείας ἀναλαβεῖν.
39. Εὐμενὴς δὲ τὸν προειρημένον τρόπον καταστρατηγήσας
τοὺς πολεμίους μετεπέμπετο πανταχόθεν
τοὺς διερριμμένους τῶν στρατιωτῶν καὶ
χειμάζοντας ἐν ταῖς κώμαις. βαλόμενος δὲ χάρακα
καὶ τάφρῳ βαθείᾳ τὴν παρεμβολὴν ὀχυρώσας ὑπεδέχετο
μὲν τοὺς ἀεὶ καταντῶντας τῶν συμμάχων,
ἐπλήρωσε δὲ τὴν στρατοπεδείαν πάντων τῶν ἐπιτηδείων.
2ὁ δ᾿ Ἀντίγονος διελθὼν τὴν ἔρημον καὶ
πυθόμενος παρὰ τῶν ἐγχωρίων σχεδὸν τὴν μὲν
ἄλλην δύναμιν ἅπασαν συνεληλυθέναι τοῖς περὶ τὸν
Εὐμενῆ, τοὺς δ᾿ ἐλέφαντας μέλλειν ἀναζευγνύειν ἐκ
τῆς χειμασίας καὶ πλησίον εἶναι μεμονωμένους
πάσης βοηθείας, ἀπέστειλεν ἐπ᾿ αὐτοὺς ἱππεῖς
λογχοφόρους μὲν Μήδους δισχιλίους, Ταραντίνους
δὲ διακοσίους, τῶν δὲ πεζῶν τοὺς ψιλοὺς ἅπαντας·
3ἤλπιζε γὰρ μεμονωμένοις τοῖς θηρίοις τὴν ἐπίθεσιν
ποιησάμενος τούτων τε ῥᾳδίως κυριεύσειν καὶ τῶν
πολεμίων παρελεῖσθαι τὸ κράτιστον μέρος τῆς
δυνάμεως. ὁ δ᾿ Εὐμενὴς καταστοχασάμενος τὸ
μέλλον ἀπέστειλεν ἐπὶ τὴν βοήθειαν ἱππεῖς μὲν
τοὺς κρατίστους χιλίους καὶ πεντακοσίους, πεζοὺς
4δὲ ψιλοὺς τρισχιλίους. ἐπιφανέντων δὲ πρότερον
τῶν Ἀντιγόνου στρατιωτῶν οἱ τῶν ἐλεφάντων
ἡγεμόνες τάξαντες εἰς πλινθίον τὰ θηρία προῆγον,
ἐν μέσῳ μὲν ἀπειληφότες τὰ σκευοφόρα, κατὰ δὲ
τὴν οὐραγίαν ἔχοντες συναγωνιζομένους ἱππεῖς οὐ
5πλείους τετρακοσίων. ἐπιπεσόντων δ᾿ αὐτοῖς τῶν
πολεμίων παντὶ τῷ βάρει καὶ βιαιότερον ἐπικειμένων
οἱ μὲν ἱππεῖς ἐτράπησαν ὑπὸ τοῦ πλήθους
1ἐπ᾿ ἀκέραια Fischer in apparatus: ἐφ᾿ ἑκάτερα.336Book XIX

unplundered parts of the inhabited country, since 317/16 b.c. they wished to refresh the army after its hardships.
39. When Eumenes had outgeneralled the enemy in the manner described, he called together from all sides those of his soldiers who had been widely scattered while wintering in the villages. After building a palisade as a protection and strengthening the encampment by a deep ditch, he received those of the allies who came down from time to time, and he filled the camp with all the necessary supplies. But Antigonus, having got across the desert, learned from the inhabitants that, although almost all the rest of Eumenes’ army had assembled, the elephants were slow in leaving their winter quarters and were near at hand, cut off from all assistance. He sent cavalry against them—two thousand Median lancers and two hundred Tarentines—and all his light infantry, for he hoped that, by attacking the elephants when they were isolated, he could easily gain control of them and deprive the enemy of the strongest element in his army. Eumenes, however, guessing what was on foot, sent to the rescue fifteen hundred of the strongest cavalry and three thousand light infantry. Since the soldiers of Antigonus arrived first, the commanders of the elephants arranged them in a square and advanced, placing the baggage train in the centre and in the rear the cavalry that accompanied the elephants, consisting of a force of not more than four hundred men. As the enemy fell upon them with all its weight and pressed ever more heavily, the cavalry was routed, overwhelmed by


337