Diodorus of Sicily

τριακοσίων Ἀμαζονίδων κεκοσμημένων πολεμικοῖς
2ὅπλοις παραγενομένη.1 τοῦ δὲ βασιλέως θαυμάζοντος
τό τε παράδοξον τῆς παρουσίας καὶ τὸ
ἀξίωμα τῶν γυναικῶν καὶ τὴν Θάλληστριν ἐρομένου
τίνα χρείαν ἔχουσα πάρεστιν, ἀπεφαίνετο παιδοποιίας
3ἕνεκεν ἥκειν. ἐκεῖνον μὲν γὰρ τῶν ἁπάντων
ἀνδρῶν διὰ τὰς πράξεις ἄριστον ὑπάρχειν, αὐτὴν δὲ
τῶν γυναικῶν ἀλκῇ τε καὶ ἀνδρείᾳ διαφέρειν· εἰκὸς
οὖν τὸ γεννηθὲν ἐκ δυεῖν γονέων πρωτευόντων ὑπερέξειν
ἀρετῇ τῶν ἄλλων ἀνθρώπων. καὶ πέρας
ἡσθεὶς ὁ βασιλεὺς καὶ προσδεξάμενος τὴν ἔντευξιν
αὐτῆς καὶ συμπεριενεχθεὶς ἡμέρας τρεισκαίδεκα
τιμήσας τε ἀξιολόγοις δώροις ἐξαπέστειλεν εἰς τὴν
οἰκείαν.
4Μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα δόξας ἤδη κεκρατηκέναι τῆς ἐπιβολῆς
καὶ τὴν βασιλείαν ἀδήριτον ἔχειν ἤρξατο
ζηλοῦν τὴν Περσικὴν τρυφὴν καὶ τὴν πολυτέλειαν
τῶν Ἀσιανῶν Βασιλέων. καὶ πρῶτον μὲν περὶ τὴν
αὐλὴν εἶχε ῥαβδούχους Ἀσιαγενεῖς, ἔπειτα τοὺς
ἐπιφανεστάτους τῶν ἀνδρῶν δορυφορεῖν ἔταξεν, ἐν
5οἷς ἦν καὶ ὁ Δαρείου ἀδελφὸς Ὀξάθρης. εἶτα τό
τε Περσικὸν διάδημα περιέθετο καὶ τὸν διάλευκον
ἐνεδύσατο χιτῶνα καὶ τὴν Περσικὴν ζώνην καὶ
τἄλλα πλὴν τῶν ἀναξυρίδων καὶ τοῦ κάνδυος.



1παραγεγενημένη F.340Book XVII

arrived with an escort of three hundred Amazons in 329/8 b.c. full armour. The king marvelled at the unexpected arrival and the dignity of the women. When he asked Thallestris why she had come, she replied that it was for the purpose of getting a child. He had shown himself the greatest of all men in his achievements, and she was superior to all women in strength and courage, so that presumably the offspring of such outstanding parents would surpass all other mortals in excellence. At this the king was delighted and granted her request and consorted with her for thirteen days, after which he honoured her with fine gifts and sent her home.1
It seemed to Alexander that he had accomplished his objective and now held his kingdom without contest, and he began to imitate the Persian luxury and the extravagant display of the kings of Asia.2 First he installed ushers of Asiatic race in his court, and then he ordered the most distinguished persons to act as his guards; among these was Dareius’s brother Oxathres.3 Then he put on the Persian diadem4 and dressed himself in the white robe and the Persian sash and everything else except the trousers and the




1This Amazon visit was a part of the Alexander tradition
which Diodorus followed; cp. Curtius, 6. 5. 24–32, and
Justin, 12. 3. 5–7, both of whom give also the length of the
queen’s stay as thirteen days. (Justin explains, “ut est visa
contexts (4. 15. 4; 7. 13. 2–6) and expresses the doubt
that any still existed—especially since they were not mentioned by Aristobulus or Ptolemy. Plutarch, Alexander, 46, 1, gives a full list of authorities in favour of or opposed to the visit, but doubts the story (46. 2) because it is poorly attested, not because Amazons did not exist. Disbelief in Amazons as such is a modern phenomenon.2Curtius, 6. 6. 1–11; Justin, 12. 3. 8–12; Plutarch, Alexander, 45. 47.3He had distinguished himself at Issus (chap. 34. 2) and gone over to Alexander after Dareius’s death (Curtius, 6. 2. 11; Berve, Alexanderreich, 2, no. 586).4The Great Kings wore an upright tiara with a fillet about i; Alexander and the Hellenistic kings wore typically the fillet alone.341