Diodorus of Sicily

δὲ βάρβαροι διὰ τὸν τοῦ στρατηγοῦ θάνατον καταπλαγέντες
καὶ λαβόντες τὴν ἀσφάλειαν παρέδωκαν
ἑαυτοὺς τῷ βασιλεῖ.
7Βῆσσος δ᾿ ἑαυτὸν ἀναδεδειχὼς βασιλέα τοῖς θεοῖς
ἔθυσε καὶ τοὺς φίλους παραλαβὼν εἰς τὴν εὐωχίαν
κατὰ τὸν πότον διηνέχθη πρός τινα τῶν ἑταίρων,
ὄνομα Βαγωδάραν. τῆς δὲ φιλοτιμίας ἐπὶ πλέον
προελθούσης ὁ μὲν Βῆσσος παροξυνθεὶς1 ἐπεβάλετο
τὸν Βαγωδάραν ἀνελεῖν καὶ ὑπὸ τῶν φίλων πεισθεὶς
8μετενόησεν. ὁ δὲ τὸν κίνδυνον ἐκφυγὼν νυκτὸς ἔφυγε
πρὸς τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον. τῇ δὲ τούτου σωτηρίᾳ
καὶ ταῖς δοθησομέναις ὑπ᾿ Ἀλεξάνδρου δωρεαῖς
προκληθέντες οἱ μέγιστοι τῶν ἡγεμόνων συνεφρόνησαν
καὶ συλλαβόντες τὸν Βῆσσον ἀπήγαγον
9πρὸς τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον. ὁ δὲ βασιλεὺς τούτους μὲν
ἐτίμησεν ἀξιολόγοις δωρεαῖς, τὸν δὲ Βῆσσον
παρέδωκε τῷ ἀδελφῷ τοῦ Δαρείου καὶ τοῖς ἄλλοις
συγγενέσιν εἰς τιμωρίαν. οἱ δὲ πᾶσαν ὕβριν
καὶ αἰκίαν προσενεγκάμενοι καὶ τὸ σῶμα κατὰ
λεπτὸν συγκόψαντες τὰ μέλη διεσφενδόνησαν.
84. Ἐπὶ δὲ τούτοις γενομένων τῶν ὅρκων ἡ μὲν
βασίλισσα τὴν μεγαλοψυχίαν τοῦ Ἀλεξάνδρου θαυμάσασα
δῶρά τε κράτιστα ἐξέπεμψε καὶ πᾶν τὸ
προσταττόμενον ποιήσειν ἐπηγγείλατο.
1παρορμηθεὶς F.360Book XVII

Disheartened at the death of their commander, the 328/7 b.c. Iranians sought their safety in surrender, and gave themselves up to Alexander.
Bessus proclaimed himself king, sacrificed to the gods, and invited his friends to a banquet.1 In the course of the drinking, he fell into an argument with one of them, Bagodaras2 by name. As the quarrel increased, Bessus lost his temper and proposed to put Bagodaras to death, but was persuaded by his friends to think better of it. Bagodaras, however, saved from this danger, escaped by night to Alexander. His safe reception and the gifts promised by Alexander attracted Bessus’s leading generals. They banded together, seized Bessus, and carried him off to Alexander.3 The king gave them substantial gifts, and turned Bessus over to Dareius’s brother4 and his other relatives for punishment. They inflicted upon him every humiliation and abuse, and cutting his body up into little pieces they scattered them abroad.
84. A truce was concluded on these terms, and 327/6 b.c. the queen, impressed by Alexander’s generosity, sent him valuable gifts and promised to follow his orders in everything.5
1Curtius, 7. 4. 1–19.2Curtius names this man Gobares (as corrected from the
Cobares of the manuscripts).3Curtius, 7. 5. 19–26. This is the account of Aristobulus;
Ptolemy’s version was that he himself had captured Bessus (Arrian, 3.29.8–30.5). Bessus was executed later in Ecbatana (Curtius, 7. 10. 10; Arrian, 4. 7. 3; cp. Plutarch, Alexander, 43. 3).5tents, pp. 111–113). Alexander is on his way down the Cabul
valley toward India. In the city of Mazagae (Curtius, 8. 10.
22) or Massaga (Arrian, 4. 26. 1) in the country of the As- The end of Diodorus’s year 328/7 and the beginning of 327/6 b.c. have been lost in a long break in the manuscript from which our text derives; it is now the autumn of 327. The Scythian, Bactrian, and Sogdian campaigns are over, with such familiar incidents as the quarrel with Cleitus, the arrest of Callisthenes in connection with the introduction of proscynesis and the Pages’ Conspiracy, and the marriage with Roxanê (cp. the subject headings in the Table of Consacenians (modern Swat) he captured the beautiful queen Cteophis and reinstated her in her kingdom. The more romantic say that he had a son by her (Curtius, 8. 10. 22–36; Justin, 12. 7. 9–11).4Presumably the Oxathres named in chap. 77. 4.361