Diodorus of Sicily

θαλάττῃ σατράπας βοηθεῖν Περινθίοις παντὶ σθένει.
2διόπερ οἱ σατράπαι συμφρονήσαντες ἐξέπεμψαν εἰς
τὴν Πέρινθον μισθοφόρων πλῆθος καὶ χρήματα δαψιλῆ
καὶ σῖτον ἱκανὸν καὶ βέλη καὶ τἄλλα πάντα
πρὸς τὴν τοῦ πολέμου χρείαν.
Ὁμοίως δὲ καὶ Βυζάντιοι τοὺς ἀρίστους τῶν παρ᾿
ἑαυτοῖς ἡγεμόνων καὶ στρατιωτῶν ἐξαπέστειλαν.
ἐφαμίλλων δὲ τῶν δυνάμεων γενομένων καὶ τοῦ
πολέμου καινοποιηθέντος πάλιν ἡ πολιορκία φιλοτιμίαν
3ἐλάμβανεν ἀνυπέρβλητον. ὁ μὲν γὰρ
Φίλιππος τοῖς κριοῖς τύπτων τὰ τείχη συνεχῶς
κατέβαλλε καὶ διὰ τῶν ὀξυβελῶν ἀνείργων τοὺς ἐπὶ
τῶν ἐπάλξεων ἅμα μὲν διὰ τῶν πεπτωκότων τειχῶν
ἀθρόως1 τοῖς στρατιώταις εἰσέπιπτεν, ἅμα δὲ
διὰ τῶν κλιμάκων πρὸς τὰ γεγυμνωμένα τῶν τειχῶν
προσέβαινε· διὸ καὶ τῆς μάχης ἐκ χειρὸς
οὔσης οἱ μὲν ἀπέθνησκον οἱ δὲ τραύμασι πολλοῖς
περιέπιπτον. τὰ δὲ τῆς νίκης ἔπαθλα προεκαλεῖτο
4τὰς τῶν ἀγωνιζομένων ἀνδραγαθίας· οἱ μὲν γὰρ
Μακεδόνες ἐλπίζοντες εὐδαίμονα πόλιν διαρπάσειν
καὶ δωρεαῖς ὑπὸ τοῦ Φιλίππου τιμηθήσεσθαι διὰ
τὴν τοῦ λυσιτελοῦς ἐλπίδα τοῖς δεινοῖς ἐνεκαρτέρουν,
οἱ δὲ πολιορκούμενοι τὰ τῆς ἁλώσεως δεινὰ
πρὸ ὀφθαλμῶν ἔχοντες ὑπέμενον εὐψύχως τὸν ὑπὲρ
τῆς σωτηρίας κίνδυνον.
76. Συνεβάλλετο δὲ τοῖς πολιορκουμένοις ἡ φύσις
τῆς πόλεως πολλὰ πρὸς τὴν ὑπὲρ τῶν ὅλων νίκην.2
ἡ γὰρ Πέρινθος κεῖται μὲν παρὰ θάλατταν ἐπί
τινος αὐχένος ὑψηλοῦ3 χερρονήσου σταδιαῖον ἐχούσης
τὸν αὐχένα, τὰς δ᾿ οἰκίας ἔχει πεπυκνωμένας
2καὶ τοῖς ὕψεσι διαφερούσας. αὗται δὲ ταῖς οἰκοδομαῖς
1Poppo suggested ἀθρόοις.2νίκην] φιλονεικίαν Fischer (cp. Books 13. 60. 1; 14. 12. 2); Dindorf omits ὑπὲρ.3ἐπί τινος ὑψηλῆς Sherman. Fischer suggests ἀναστήματος for αὐχένος, which he believes arose from the following αὐχένα.48Book XVI

coast to give all possible assistance to the Perinthians. 341/0 b.c. They consequently took counsel and sent off to Perinthus a force of mercenaries, ample funds, and sufficient stocks of food, missiles, and other materials required for operations.
Similarly the people of Byzantium also sent them their best officers and soldiers. So the armies were again well matched, and as the fighting was resumed, the siege was waged with supreme determination. Philip constantly battered the walls with his rams, making breaches in them, and as his catapults cleared the battlements of defenders, he would at the same moment drive through the breached walls with his soldiers in close formation and assail with scaling ladders the portions of the walls which he had cleared. Then hand-to-hand combat ensued and some were slain outright, others fell under many wounds. The rewards of victory challenged the daring of the contestants, for the Macedonians hoped to have a wealthy city to sack and to be rewarded by Philip with gifts, the hope of profit steeling them against danger, while the Perinthians had before their eyes the horrors of capture and sustained with great courage the battle for their deliverance.
76. The natural setting of the city greatly aided the besieged Perinthians towards a decisive victory. It lies by the sea on a sort of high peninsula with an isthmus one furlong across, and its houses are packed close together and very high. In their construction




49