Diodorus of Sicily

ἄφνω δὲ καθ᾿ ἕτερον μέρος τῆς πόλεως ἐκχυθείσης
τῆς δυνάμεως κατεσκευασμένης καὶ πλήθους ἱκανοῦ
πρὸς ἓν παρακέλευσμα συναλαλάξαντος κατεπλάγησαν.
7ἐμβαλόντων οὖν τῶν βαρβάρων εἰς ἀσυντάκτους
καὶ πεφοβημένους διὰ τὸ παράδοξον, ταχὺ
τροπὴν συνέβη γενέσθαι τῶν Ἑλλήνων. ὑποτεμομένων
δὲ τῶν Καρχηδονίων τὴν εἰς τὴν στρατοπεδείαν
ἀποχώρησιν τῶν πολεμίων ἠναγκάσθησαν
οἱ περὶ τὸν Εὔμαχον καταφυγεῖν ἐπὶ τὸν πλησίον
8λόφον ὕδατος σπανίζοντα. περιστρατοπεδευσάντων
δὲ τὸν τόπον τῶν Φοινίκων ἅμα μὲν ὑπὸ τοῦ δίψους
καταπονηθέντες, ἅμα δ᾿ ὑπὸ τῶν πολεμίων κρατούμενοι
σχεδὸν ἅπαντες ἀνῃρέθησαν· ἀπὸ μὲν γὰρ
πεζῶν ὀκτακισχιλίων τριάκοντα μόνον διεσώθησαν,
ἀπὸ δ᾿ ἱππέων ὀκτακοσίων τετταράκοντα διέφυγον
τὸν κίνδυνον.
61. Ὁ δ᾿ Ἀρχάγαθος τηλικαύτῃ συμφορᾷ περιπεσὼν
ἐπανῆλθεν εἰς Τύνητα. καὶ τῶν μὲν ἐκπεμφθέντων
στρατιωτῶν τοὺς περιλειπομένους
μετεπέμπετο πανταχόθεν, εἰς δὲ τὴν Σικελίαν
ἐξέπεμψε τοὺς δηλώσοντας τῷ πατρὶ τὰ συμβεβηκότα
καὶ παρακαλέσοντας βοηθεῖν τὴν ταχίστην.
2τοῖς δὲ προγεγονόσιν ἀτυχήμασιν ἑτέρα τοῖς Ἕλλησιν
ἐλάττωσις ἐπεγένετο· ἀπέστησαν μὲν γὰρ
ἀπ᾿ αὐτῶν πλὴν ὀλίγων ἅπαντες οἱ σύμμαχοι, συνεστράφησαν
δὲ αἱ τῶν πολεμίων δυνάμεις καὶ
3πλησίον ποιησάμενοι παρεμβολὰς ἐφήδρευον. Ἰμίλκων
μὲν γὰρ κατελάβετο τὰ στενὰ καὶ τῶν ἀπὸ
τῆς χώρας ἐκβολῶν1 ἀπέκλεισε τοὺς ἐναντίους,
ἀπέχοντας σταδίους ἑκατόν· ἐκ δὲ θατέρου μέρους
ἐστρατοπέδευσεν Ἀτάρβας ἀπὸ τεσσαράκοντα σταδίων
4τοῦ Τύνητος. διόπερ τῶν πολεμίων οὐ μόνον
1ἐκβολῶν Post: εἰσβολῶν.308Book XX

suddenly from another part of the city there poured 307 b.c. forth the army all ready for battle and when a great host shouted at a single command, they became panic-stricken. Accordingly, when the barbarians fell upon an enemy who had been thrown into disorder and frightened by the sudden onslaught, the immediate result was the rout of the Greeks. Since the Carthaginians cut off the enemy’s return to his camp, Eumachus was forced to withdraw to the nearby hill, which was ill supplied with water. When the Phoenicians invested the place, the Greeks, who had become weak from thirst and were being overpowered by the enemy, were almost all killed. In fact, of eight thousand foot-soldiers only thirty were saved, and of eight hundred horsemen forty escaped from the battle.
61. After meeting with so great a disaster Archagathus returned to Tunis. He summoned from all sides the survivors of the soldiers who had been sent out; and he sent messengers to Sicily to report to his father what had happened and to urge him to come to his aid with all possible speed. In addition to the preceding disasters, another loss befell the Greeks; for all their allies except a few deserted them, and the armies of the enemy gathered together and, pitching camp near by, lay in wait for them. Himilco occupied the passes and shut off his opponents, who were at a distance of a hundred stades,1 from the routes leading from the region; and on the other side Atarbas camped at a distance of forty stades2 from Tunis. Therefore, since the enemy




1About 11½ miles.2About 4½ miles.309