Diodorus of Sicily

παραδόξως ἑτοίμην ἔσχε πρὸς τὰς πράξεις ἀξιόλογον
δύναμιν· ἐστρατευμένοι γὰρ κατὰ τὴν Ἀσίαν
πολὺν χρόνον καὶ πολλῶν καὶ μεγάλων ἀγώνων
μετεσχηκότες ἀθληταὶ τῶν κατὰ πόλεμον ἔργων
ἐγεγένηντο.
4Ταῦτα μὲν οὖν οὕτως ἐπράττετο μήπω καλῶς
ἐγνωσμένης τῆς Ἀλεξάνδρου τελευτῆς· ἐπεὶ δέ
τινες ἐκ Βαβυλῶνος ἧκον αὐτόπται γεγονότες τῆς
τοῦ βασιλέως μεταλλαγῆς, τότε φανερῶς ὁ δῆμος
ἀπεκαλύψατο πρὸς τὸν πόλεμον καὶ τῶν μὲν Ἁρπάλου
χρημάτων μέρος ἐξέπεμψε τῷ Λεωσθένει
καὶ πανοπλίας οὐκ ὀλίγας καὶ παρήγγειλε μηκέτι
παρακρύπτειν, ἀλλὰ φανερῶς πράττειν τι τῶν
5συμφερόντων. ὁ δὲ διαδοὺς τοῖς μισθοφόροις τὰς
συντάξεις καὶ καθοπλίσας τοὺς ἀνόπλους παρῆλθεν
εἰς Αἰτωλίαν, συνθησόμενος κοινοπραγίαν. ἀσμένως
δὲ τῶν Αἰτωλῶν συνυπακουσάντων καὶ
διδόντων αὐτῷ στρατιώτας ἑπτακισχιλίους ὁ μὲν
Λεωσθένης διαπεμπόμενος πρός τε τοὺς Λοκροὺς
καὶ Φωκεῖς καὶ τοὺς ἄλλους τοὺς πλησιοχώρους
παρεκάλει τῆς αὐτονομίας ἀντέχεσθαι καὶ τῆς τῶν
Μακεδόνων δεσποτείας ἐλευθερῶσαι τὴν Ἑλλάδα.
10. Ὁ δὲ δῆμος τῶν Ἀθηναίων, τῶν μὲν κτηματικῶν
συμβουλευόντων τὴν ἡσυχίαν ἄγειν, τῶν
δὲ δημοκόπων ἀνασειόντων τὰ πλήθη καὶ παρακαλούντων
ἐρρωμένως ἔχεσθαι τοῦ πολέμου, πολὺ
τοῖς πλήθεσιν ὑπερεῖχον οἱ τὸν πόλεμον αἱρούμενοι
καὶ τὰς τροφὰς εἰωθότες ἔχειν ἐκ τοῦ μισθοφορεῖν·
οἷς ποτ᾿ ἔφησεν ὁ Φίλιππος τὸν μὲν πόλεμον εἰρήνην
2ὑπάρχειν, τὴν δὲ εἰρήνην πόλεμον. εὐθὺς οὖν
οἱ μὲν ῥήτορες τὰς τῶν δημοτικῶν ὁρμὰς σωματοποιοῦντες
ἔγραψαν ψήφισμα τῆς κοινῆς τῶν Ἑλλήνων
38Book XVIII

had secured a considerable number of men ready 323 b.c. for action; for these men, who had campaigned throughout Asia for a long time and had taken part in many great conflicts, had become masters of warfare.
Now these things were being done while the death of Alexander was not yet certainly known; but when some came from Babylon who had been eyewitnesses of the king’s death, then the popular government openly disclosed its intention of war and sent Leosthenes part of the money of Harpalus and many suits of armour, bidding him no longer act in secret but do openly whatever was advantageous. After Leosthenes had distributed their pay to the mercenaries and had fully armed those who lacked armour, he went to Aetolia to arrange for common action. When the Aetolians listened to him gladly and gave him seven thousand soldiers, he sent to the Locrians and the Phocians and the other neighbouring peoples and urged them to assert their freedom and rid Greece of the Macedonian despotism.
10. In the Assembly at Athens, while the men of property were advising that no action be taken and the demagogues were rousing the people and urging them to prosecute the war vigorously, those who preferred war and were accustomed to make their living from paid military service were far superior in numbers. These were the men of whom Philip once said that war was peace and peace was war for them. Straightway, then, the orators gave shape to the wishes of the commons by writing a decree to the effect that the people should assume responsibility
39