Diodorus of Sicily

παρελεῖσθαι τὰς σατραπείας αὐτῶν καὶ
ἀντικαταστήσειν ἐκ τῶν αὑτοῦ φίλων, Εὐμενῆ δὲ
ξένον ὄντα μηδέποτ᾿ ἰδιοπραγῆσαι τολμήσειν, ἀλλὰ
στρατηγὸν ὄντα φίλοις αὐτοῖς χρήσεσθαι καὶ συμπράξασι
φυλάξειν αὐτοῖς τὰς σατραπείας, τάχα δὲ
καὶ ἄλλας προσδώσειν. οἱ μὲν οὖν τὰς κατ᾿ Εὐμενοῦς
ἐπιβουλὰς κατασκευάζοντες ἀπέτυχον τὸν
προειρημένον τρόπον.
63. Τοῦ δὲ Φιλώτου τὴν κοινὴν ἐπιστολὴν ἀναδόντος
τοῖς ἡγεμόσι συνήχθησαν οἵ τε ἀργυράσπιδες
καὶ οἱ ἄλλοι Μακεδόνες κατ᾿ ἰδίαν ἄνευ
τοῦ Εὐμενοῦς καὶ τὴν ἐπιστολὴν προσέταξαν ἀναγνωσθῆναι.
2ἦν δ᾿ ἐν αὐτῇ γεγραμμένη κατηγορία
μὲν τοῦ Εὐμενοῦς, παράκλησις δὲ τῶν Μακεδόνων
συλλαβεῖν τὸν Εὐμενῆ ταχέως καὶ ἀποκτεῖναι·
ἐὰν δὲ ταῦτα μὴ πράξωσιν, ὅτι μετὰ πάσης τῆς
δυνάμεως ἥξει πολεμήσων αὐτοῖς καὶ τοῖς μὴ
πειθαρχοῦσι τὴν προσήκουσαν ἐπιθήσει τιμωρίαν.
3ἀναγνωσθείσης δὲ τῆς ἐπιστολῆς εἰς πολλὴν
ἀπορίαν ἐνέπεσον οἵ τε ἡγεμόνες καὶ οἱ Μακεδόνες
πάντες· ἀναγκαῖον γὰρ ἦν αὐτοῖς ἢ πρὸς τοὺς
βασιλεῖς ἀποκλίναντας ὑπ᾿ Ἀντιγόνου τιμωρίας
τυχεῖν ἢ πειθαρχήσαντας Ἀντιγόνῳ ὑπὸ Πολυπέρχοντος
4καὶ τῶν βασιλέων κολασθῆναι. τοιαύτης δὲ
συγχύσεως ἐπεχούσης τὰ πλήθη ἧκεν ὁ Εὐμενὴς
καὶ τὴν ἐπιστολὴν ἀναγνοὺς παρεκάλεσε τοὺς
Μακεδόνας πράττειν τὰ τοῖς βασιλεῦσι δεδογμένα,
5τῷ δὲ ἀποστάτῃ γεγονότι μὴ προσέχειν. πολλὰ
δὲ διαλεχθεὶς οἰκεῖα τῆς ὑποθέσεως οὐ μόνον αὐτὸς
ἀπελύθη τῶν ἐνεστώτων κινδύνων, ἀλλὰ καὶ τὸ
πλῆθος εἰς εὔνοιαν μείζονα τῆς προϋπαρχούσης
6παρεστήσατο. οὗτος μὲν οὖν πάλιν εἰς ἀνελπίστους
184Book XVIII

powerful, would take away their satrapies and set up 318 b.c. some of his friends in their places; Eumenes, however, since he was a foreigner, would never dare to advance his own interests, but, remaining a general, would treat them as friends and, if they co-operated with him, would protect their satrapies for them and perhaps give them others also. So those who were contriving plots against Eumenes met with failure in the way described.
63. When, however, Philotas gave the commanders the letter that had been addressed to all in common, the Silver Shields and the other Macedonians came together privately without Eumenes and ordered the letter to be read. In it Antigonus had written an accusation against Eumenes and had exhorted the Macedonians to seize Eumenes quickly and put him to death. If they should not do this, he said that he would come with his whole army to wage war against them, and that upon those who refused to obey he would inflict suitable punishment. At the reading of this letter the commanders and all the Macedonians found themselves in great perplexity, for it was necessary for them either to side with the kings and receive punishment from Antigonus, or to obey Antigonus and be chastised by Polyperchon and the kings. While the troops were in this confused state, Eumenes entered and, after reading the letter, urged the Macedonians to follow the decrees of the kings and not listen to one who had become a rebel. He discussed many matters pertinent to the subject and not only freed himself from the imminent danger but also gained greater favour with the crowd than before. Thus once more Eumenes, after falling
185