Diodorus of Sicily
4ἀγωνίας αὐτόν· μιᾷ γὰρ ἡμέρᾳ κριθέντα περὶ τῶν
ὅλων παύσεσθαι τῶν πόνων καὶ πολυχρονίων κινδύνων.
οὐ μὴν ἀλλὰ παρακαλέσας τοὺς ἡγεμόνας τοῖς
οἰκείοις λόγοις καὶ πρὸς τοὺς ἐπιφερομένους κινδύνους
εὐθαρσεῖς καταστήσας προῆγε τὴν δύναμιν
συντεταγμένην ἐπὶ τοὺς βαρβάρους, τῆς τῶν πεζῶν
φάλαγγος τὰς τῶν ἱππέων εἴλας προτάξας.
57. Ἐπὶ μὲν οὖν τὸ δεξιὸν κέρας ἔταξε τὴν
βασιλικὴν εἴλην, ἧς εἶχε τὴν ἡγεμονίαν Κλεῖτος ὁ
μέλας ὀνομαζόμενος, ἐχομένους δὲ ταύτης τοὺς
ἄλλους φίλους,1 ὧν ἡγεῖτο Φιλώτας ὁ Παρμενίωνος,
ἑξῆς δὲ τὰς ἄλλας ἱππαρχίας ἑπτὰ τεταγμένας ὑπὸ
2τὸν αὐτὸν ἡγεμόνα. ὄπισθεν δὲ τούτων ὑπετάγη
τὸ τῶν ἀργυρασπίδων πεζῶν τάγμα, διαφέρον τῇ
τε τῶν ὅπλων λαμπρότητι καὶ τῇ τῶν ἀνδρῶν ἀρετῇ·
καὶ τούτων ἡγεῖτο Νικάνωρ ὁ Παρμενίωνος. ἐχομένην
δὲ τούτων ἔστησε τὴν Ἐλιμιῶτιν καλουμένην
στρατηγίαν,2 ἧς Κοῖνος ἡγεῖτο, ἑξῆς δὲ τὴν τῶν
Ὀρεστῶν καὶ Λυγκηστῶν τάξιν ἔστησε, Περδίκκου
τὴν στρατηγίαν ἔχοντος. καὶ τὴν μὲν ἐχομένην
στρατηγίαν Μελέαγρος εἶχε, τὴν δὲ συνεχῆ ταύτης
Πολυπέρχων,3 τεταγμένων ὑπ᾿ αὐτὸν τῶν ὀνομαζομένων
3Στυμφαίων. Φίλιππος δ᾿ ὁ Βαλάκρου τὴν
συνεχῆ ταύτης στρατηγίαν ἐπλήρου καὶ τῆς μετὰ





1φίλους codd.; ἑταίρους F.2στρατηγίαν Fischer; στρατιάν codd.3Πολυπέρχων RX; Πολυσπέρχων F.280Book XVII

all his forces into one place. Now in one day the 331/0 b.c. decision would be reached on all issues, and they would be saved toils and dangers extending over a long period of time. Nevertheless, Alexander summoned his officers and encouraged them for the battle which they faced with suitable words, and then led out his army deployed for battle against the Persians, ordering the cavalry squadrons to ride ahead of the infantry phalanx.
57. On the right wing Alexander stationed the royal squadron under the command of Cleitus the Black (as he was called), and next to this the other Friends1 under the command of Parmenion’s son Philotas, then in succession the other seven squadrons under the same commander. Behind these was stationed the infantry battalion of the Silver Shields,2 distinguished for the brilliance of their armour and the valour of the men; they were led by Nicanor, the son of Parmenion. Next to them was the battalion from Elimiotis,3 as it was called, under the command of Coenus; next he stationed the battalion of the Orestae and the Lyncestae, of which Perdiccas held the command. Meleager commanded the next battalion and Polyperchon the one after that, the people called Stymphaeans being under him. Philip the son of Balacrus held the next command and, after him,



1This term is somewhat unexpectedly used instead of the
usual term “Companions” (Arrian, 3. 11. 8). Cp. note 1,
p. 14. The full accounts of the Battle of Gaugemela are those of Curtius (4. 12–16) and Arrian (3. 11–15); cp. also Justin, 11. 13–14. 3; Plutarch, Alexander, 32–33.2These were the infantry of the guard, the hypaspistae, called by the name which came into use only in the period of the Successors (Tarn, Alexander the Great, 2, p. 116; cp. p. 14, note 1). Curtius (8. 5. 4) writes of the introduction of silver and gold trappings in 327.3The battalions of the Macedonian phalanx were organized on a territorial basis and known by the names of their component elements.281