Diodorus of Sicily

Εὔμηλον προτερεῖν περὶ τὸ δεξιὸν κέρας καὶ τοὺς
παρ᾿ αὑτῷ μισθοφόρους τετράφθαι τοῦ μὲν διώκειν
ἀπέστη, παραβοηθήσας δὲ τοῖς ἡττημένοις καὶ τὸ
δεύτερον αἴτιος γενόμενος τῆς νίκης ἅπαν ἐτρέψατο
τῶν πολεμίων τὸ στρατόπεδον, ὥστε πᾶσι γενέσθαι
φανερὸν ὅτι καὶ κατὰ γένος καὶ κατ᾿ ἀρετὴν προσῆκον
ἦν αὐτῷ διαδέχεσθαι τὴν πατρῴαν βασιλείαν.
23. Οἱ δὲ περὶ τὸν Ἀριφάρνην καὶ τὸν Εὔμηλον
λειφθέντες ἐν τῇ μάχῃ συνέφυγον εἰς τὰ βασίλεια.
ταῦτα δ᾿ ἔκειτο μὲν παρὰ τὸν Θάτην ποταμόν, ὃς
περιρρέων αὐτὰ καὶ βάθος ἔχων ἱκανὸν ἐποίει δυσπρόσιτα,
περιείχετο δὲ κρημνοῖς μεγάλοις, ἔτι
δ᾿ ὕλης πλήθει, τὰς πάσας εἰσβολὰς δύο ἔχοντα1
χειροποιήτους, ὧν ἡ μὲν ἦν ἐν αὐτοῖς τοῖς βασιλείοις,
ὠχυρωμένη πύργοις ὑψηλοῖς καὶ προτειχίσμασιν,
ἡ δ᾿ ἐκ θατέρου2 μέρους ἐν ἕλεσιν ὑπῆρχε,
φρουρουμένη ξυλίνοις ἐρύμασι, διεστύλωτο δὲ δοκοῖς,3
ὑπεράνω δὲ τῶν ὑδάτων εἶχε τὰς οἰκήσεις.
τοιαύτης δ᾿ οὔσης τῆς περὶ τὸν τόπον ὀχυρότητος
τὸ μὲν πρῶτον ὁ Σάτυρος τήν τε χώραν τῶν
πολεμίων ἐδῄωσε καὶ τὰς κώμας ἐνεπύρισεν, ἐξ
ὧν αἰχμάλωτα σώματα καὶ λείας πλῆθος ἤθροισε.
2μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα ἐγχειρήσας διὰ τῶν παρόδων βιάζεσθαι,
κατὰ μὲν τὸ προτείχισμα καὶ τοὺς πύργους
πολλοὺς ἀποβαλὼν τῶν στρατιωτῶν ἀπεχώρησε,
κατὰ δὲ τὰ ἕλη βιασάμενος ἐκράτησε τῶν ξυλίνων



1ἔχοντα Dindorf: ἔχοντι.2ἡ δ᾿ ἐκ θατέρου Dindorf: ἡ δὲ καθ᾿ ἑτέρου.3δὲ δοκοῖς Reiske, Madvig, δ᾿ υ΄ δοκοῖς Bekker: δ᾿ οἴκοις
RX, δ᾿ εὖ κίοσιν 2nd hand in R. In F the passage reads as
follows: . . . ὑπῆρχε φρουρουμένη· ξυλίνοις δὲ πείσμασι διεστύλωτο·
ὑπεράνω . . .200Book XX

the upper hand on the right wing and that his own 310 b.c. mercenaries had been turned to flight, he gave up the pursuit. Going to the aid of those who had been worsted and for the second time becoming the author of victory, he routed the entire army of the enemy, so that it became clear to all that, by reason both of his birth and of his valour, it was proper that he should succeed to the throne of his fathers.
23. Aripharnes and Eumelus, however, after having been defeated in the battle, escaped to the capital city.1 This was situated on the Thates River, which made the city rather difficult of access since the river encircled it and was of considerable depth. The city was surrounded also by great cliffs and thick woods, and had only two entrances, both artificial, of which one was within the royal castle itself and was strengthened with high towers and outworks, and the other was on the opposite side in swampy land, fortified by wooden palisades, and it rested upon piles at intervals and supported houses above the water. Since the strength of the position was so great, Satyrus at first plundered the country of the enemy and fired the villages, from which he collected prisoners and much booty. Afterwards, however, he attempted to make his way by force through the approaches. At the outworks and towers he lost many of his soldiers and withdrew, but he forced a passage through the swamp and captured the wooden

1i.e. the capital city of King Aripharnes.201