Diodorus of Sicily

φρούραρχον καὶ τῶν ἄλλων τῶν ἀλλοτρίως διατεθέντων
πρὸς αὐτὸν εἰς ὀγδοήκοντα πρὸ τῆς πόλεως
ἀνεσταύρωσε, τῶν δ᾿ ἄλλων μισθοφόρων ἑλὼν
εἰς δισχιλίους κατέμιξε τοῖς ἰδίοις στρατιώταις.
7μετὰ δὲ τὴν ἅλωσιν ταύτης τῆς πόλεως οἱ σύνεγγυς
τὰ φρούρια κατέχοντες, ὑπολαμβάνοντες ἀδύνατον
ὑπάρχειν τὸ διαφυγεῖν τὴν βίαν τοῦ βασιλέως, παρέδωκαν
αὐτῷ τὰ χωρία. ὁμοίως δὲ τούτοις καὶ οἱ
τὰς πόλεις φρουροῦντες, τῶν μὲν περὶ Κάσανδρον
καὶ Πρεπέλαον καὶ Πολυπέρχοντα μὴ βοηθούντων
τοῦ δὲ Δημητρίου μετὰ μεγάλης δυνάμεως καὶ
μηχανῶν ὑπεραγουσῶν προσιόντος, ἑκουσίως
ἐξεχώρουν.
Καὶ τὰ μὲν περὶ Δημήτριον ἐν τούτοις ἦν.
104. Κατὰ δὲ τὴν Ἰταλίαν Ταραντῖνοι πόλεμον
ἔχοντες πρὸς Λευκανοὺς καὶ Ῥωμαίους ἐξέπεμψαν
πρεσβευτὰς εἰς τὴν Σπάρτην, αἰτούμενοι βοήθειαν
2καὶ στρατηγὸν Κλεώνυμον. τῶν δὲ Λακεδαιμονίων
προθύμως ἡγεμόνα δόντων τὸν αἰτούμενον καὶ τῶν
Ταραντίνων χρήματα καὶ ναῦς ἀποστειλάντων ὁ
μὲν Κλεώνυμος ἐπὶ Ταινάρῳ τῆς Λακωνικῆς ξενολογήσας
στρατιώτας πεντακισχιλίους συντόμως
κατέπλευσεν εἰς Τάραντα. ἐνταῦθα δὲ μισθοφόρους
ἀθροίσας ἄλλους οὐκ ἐλάττους τῶν προτέρων κατέγραφε
καὶ τοὺς πολιτικοὺς πεζοὺς μὲν πλείους
τῶν δισμυρίων, ἱππεῖς δὲ δισχιλίους. προσελάβετο
δὲ τῶν τε κατ᾿ Ἰταλίαν Ἑλλήνων τοὺς πλείστους
3καὶ τὸ τῶν Μεσσαπίων ἔθνος. ἁδρᾶς οὖν δυνάμεως




418Book XX

and at least eighty of the others who were hostile to 303 b.c. him, Demetrius crucified them in front of the city, but having captured at least two thousand of the other mercenaries, he incorporated them with his own men. After the capture of this city, those who commanded the forts in the vicinity, assuming that it was impossible to escape the might of the king, surrendered the strongholds to him. In like fashion those also who guarded the cities withdrew of their own accord, since Cassander, Prepelaüs, and Polyperchon failed to come to their aid but Demetrius was approaching with a great army and with overwhelming engines of war.
This was the situation of Demetrius.1
104. In Italy2 the people of Tarentum were waging war with the Lucanians and the Romans; and they sent envoys to Sparta asking for assistance and for Cleonymus as general.3 When the Lacedaemonians willingly granted them the leader whom they requested and the Tarentines sent money and ships, Cleonymus enrolled five thousand mercenaries at Taenarum in Laconia4 and sailed at once to Tarentum. After collecting there other mercenaries no less in number than those previously enrolled, he also enlisted more than twenty thousand citizens as foot-soldiers and two thousand as mounted troops. He won the support also of most, of the Greeks in Italy and of the tribe of the Messapians.5 Then, since



1Continued in chap. 106. 1.2Continued from chap. 101. 5.3Son of King Cleomenes II, but passed over in favour of
Areus I because of his violent and tyrannical character. Cp. Plutarch, Pyrrhus, 26, 8; Pausanias, 3. 6. 2. Originally Tarentum was a colony of Sparta.4For Taenarum as a recruiting ground for mercenaries cp. Book 18. 21. 1–3.5The Messapians, an Italic tribe occupying the heel of the Italian peninsula, were the closest neighbours of the Tarentines.419