Diodorus of Sicily

τὴν ὅλην1 τάξιν τοῖς μὲν ψιλοῖς καὶ τοῖς ἐλαφροτάτοις
τῶν ἱππέων εἰσέβαλεν εἰς τοὺς ἐναντίους,
ἐπακολουθούντων δὲ καὶ τῶν θηρίων ῥᾳδίως τρεψάμενος
τοὺς περὶ τὸν Πίθωνα κατεδίωξε μέχρι
5τῆς ὑπωρίας. ἅμα δὲ τούτοις πραττομένοις συνέβη
καὶ τοὺς πεζοὺς ἐφ᾿ ἱκανὸν μὲν χρόνον φαλαγγομαχεῖν
πρὸς ἀλλήλους, τὸ δὲ τελευταῖον πολλῶν
πεσόντων παρ᾿ ἀμφοτέροις ἐπικρατῆσαι τοὺς παρ᾿
Εὐμενεῖ τεταγμένους διὰ τὰς τῶν ἀργυρασπίδων
6Μακεδόνων ἀρετάς· οὗτοι γὰρ ταῖς μὲν ἡλικίαις
ἤδη προεβεβήκεισαν, διὰ δὲ τὸ πλῆθος τῶν κινδύνων
διέφερον ταῖς τόλμαις καὶ ταῖς εὐχειρίαις,
ὥστε μηδένα δύνασθαι κατὰ στόμα τὴν βίαν ὑποστῆναι.
διὸ καὶ τότε τρισχίλιοι μὲν ὄντες οἱονεὶ
στόμωμα καθειστήκεισαν πάσης τῆς δυνάμεως.
7Ἀντίγονος δ᾿ ὁρῶν τό τε εὐώνυμον κέρας τῶν
ἰδίων πεφευγότας καὶ τὴν φάλαγγα πᾶσαν τετραμμένην
τοῖς μὲν συμβουλεύουσιν ἀποχωρεῖν πρὸς τὴν
ὀρεινὴν καὶ τοὺς ἀπὸ τῆς φυγῆς σωζομένους ἀναλαμβάνειν,
ἄθραυστον ἔχοντα τὸ περὶ αὐτὸν μέρος
τῆς δυνάμεως, οὐ προσέσχε, τῷ δὲ παρὰ τοῦ καιροῦ
δοθέντι προτερήματι δεξιῶς χρησάμενος καὶ τοὺς
φεύγοντας τῶν ἰδίων ἔσωσε καὶ τῆς νίκης ἔτυχεν.
8οἱ μὲν γὰρ ἀργυράσπιδες οἱ παρ᾿ Εὐμενεῖ καὶ τὸ λοιπὸν
πλῆθος τῶν πεζῶν ὡς τάχιστα ἐτρέψατο τοὺς
ἀντιτεταγμένους, ἐπεδίωκεν μέχρι τῆς ἐγγυτέρας2
9ὑπωρίας· ὁ δ᾿ Ἀντίγονος γενομένου διαστήματος
ἐν τῇ τῶν πολεμίων τάξει διιππεύσας μέρει τῶν
ἱππέων ἐνέβαλεν εἰς πλαγίους τοὺς περὶ τὸν Εὔδαμον


1ὅλην Wesseling: ὀλίγην.2ἐγγυτέρας F, πρότερον RX, Fischer (who obelizes it and
suggests πορρώτερον).312Book XIX

opponents with light armed soldiers and the most 317 b.c. lightly equipped of the cavalry. Since the elephants also followed, he easily routed the forces of Pithon, and pursued them to the foothills. At the same time that this was going on, it so happened that the infantry for a considerable time had been engaged in a battle of phalanxes, but finally, after many had fallen on both sides, Eumenes’ men were victorious because of the valour of the Macedonian Silver Shields. These warriors were already well on in years,1 but because of the great number of battles they had fought they were outstanding in hardihood and skill, so that no one confronting them was able to withstand their might. Therefore, although there were then only three thousand of them, they had become, so to speak, the spearhead of the whole army.
Although Antigonus saw that his own left wing had been put to flight and that the entire phalanx had been defeated, he did not heed those who advised him to retire to the mountains and furnish a rallying point for those who escaped from the rout, while keeping the part of the army under his immediate command an unbroken unit; but rather, by cleverly taking advantage of the opportunities offered by the situation, he both saved the fugitives and gained the victory. For as soon as Eumenes’ Silver Shields and the remaining body of his infantry had routed those who opposed them, they pursued them as far as the nearer hills; but Antigonus, now that a break was thus caused in the line of his enemy, charged through with a detachment of cavalry, striking on the flank the troops who had been stationed with Eudamus on

1None were less than sixty years of age (chap. 41. 2).313