Diodorus of Sicily

οὖν τοὺς ἀπὸ τῶν πόλεων παρόντας πρεσβευτὰς
προσκαλεσάμενοι καὶ θαρρεῖν παρακαλέσαντες ἐπηγγείλαντο
τὰς δημοκρατίας ἀποκαταστήσειν ταῖς
πόλεσι καὶ τὸ κυρωθὲν δόγμα γράψαντες ἔδωκαν
τοῖς πρεσβευταῖς, ὅπως κατὰ τάχος εἰς τὰς πατρίδας
ἐπανελθόντες ἀπαγγείλωσι τοῖς δήμοις τὴν τῶν
βασιλέων καὶ τῶν ἡγεμόνων εἰς τοὺς Ἕλληνας
εὔνοιαν. ἦν δὲ τὸ διάγραμμα τοιοῦτον.
56. “Ἐπειδὴ συμβέβηκε τοῖς προγόνοις ἡμῶν
πολλὰ τοὺς Ἕλληνας εὐεργετηκέναι, βουλόμεθα
διαφυλάττειν τὴν ἐκείνων προαίρεσιν καὶ πᾶσι φανερὰν
ποιῆσαι τὴν ἡμετέραν εὔνοιαν ἣν ἔχοντες διατελοῦμεν
2πρὸς τοὺς Ἕλληνας. πρότερον μὲν οὖν
Ἀλεξάνδρου μεταλλάξαντος ἐξ ἀνθρώπων καὶ τῆς
βασιλείας εἰς ἡμᾶς καθηκούσης, ἡγούμενοι δεῖν
ἐπαναγαγεῖν πάντας ἐπὶ τὴν εἰρήνην καὶ τὰς
πολιτείας ἃς Φίλιππος ὁ ἡμέτερος πατὴρ κατέστησεν,
ἐπεστείλαμεν εἰς ἁπάσας τὰς πόλεις περὶ τούτων.
3ἐπεὶ δὲ συνέβη, μακρὰν ἀπόντων ἡμῶν, τῶν
Ἑλλήνων τινὰς μὴ ὀρθῶς γινώσκοντας πόλεμον
ἐξενεγκεῖν πρὸς Μακεδόνας καὶ κρατηθῆναι ὑπὸ
τῶν ἡμετέρων στρατηγῶν καὶ πολλὰ καὶ δυσχερῆ
ταῖς πόλεσι συμβῆναι, τούτων μὲν τοὺς στρατηγοὺς
αἰτίους ὑπολάβετε γεγενῆσθαι, ἡμεῖς δὲ τιμῶντες
τὴν ἐξ ἀρχῆς προαίρεσιν κατασκευάζομεν ὑμῖν
εἰρήνην, πολιτείας δὲ τὰς ἐπὶ Φιλίππου καὶ Ἀλεξάνδρου,
καὶ τἄλλα πράττειν κατὰ τὰ διαγράμματα
4τὰ πρότερον ὑπ᾿ ἐκείνων γραφέντα. καὶ τοὺς
μεταστάντας ἢ φυγόντας ὑπὸ τῶν ἡμετέρων στρατηγῶν
ἐκ τῶν πόλεων ἀφ᾿ ὧν χρόνων Ἀλέξανδρος
εἰς τὴν Ἀσίαν διέβη κατάγομεν· καὶ τοὺς ὑφ᾿
ἡμῶν κατελθόντας πάντα τὰ αὑτῶν ἔχοντας καὶ
164Book XVIII

called together the envoys who were present from the 319 b.c. cities, and after bidding them be of good cheer, they promised to re-establish democratic governments in the cities. As soon as they had drafted the decree that had been adopted, they gave it to the envoys, in order that they might quickly return to their native cities and report to their assemblies the goodwill that the kings and the generals entertained for the Greeks. The edict was in such terms as these:
56. “Inasmuch as it has fallen to the lot of our ancestors to perform many acts of kindness to the Greeks, we wish to maintain their policy and to make evident to all the goodwill which we continue to have for that people. Formerly, indeed, when Alexander departed from among men and the kingship descended upon us, since we believed it necessary to restore all to peace and to the forms of government that Philip our sire established, we sent letters to all the cities in regard to these matters. But whereas it happened that, while we were far away, certain of the Greeks, being ill advised, waged war against the Macedonians and were defeated by our generals,1 and many bitter things befell the cities, know ye that the generals have been responsible for these hardships, but that we, holding fast to the original policy, are preparing peace for you and such governments as you enjoyed under Philip and Alexander, and that we permit you to act in all other matters according to the decrees formerly issued by them. Moreover, we restore those who have been driven out or exiled from the cities by our generals from the time when Alexander crossed into Asia; and we decree that those who are restored by us, in full possession of

1For the Lamian War cp. chaps. 8–18.165