Diodorus of Sicily

πρότερον ὀλίγαις ἡμέραις ἐκ Βαβυλῶνος, πρὸς δὲ
τούτοις Ἀνδρόνικόν τε τὸν Ὀλύνθιον καὶ Φίλιππον,
ἄνδρας πρεσβυτέρους καὶ συνεστρατευκότας Ἀλεξάνδρῳ
πᾶσαν τὴν στρατείαν· ἦν γὰρ Δημήτριος
ἔτι νέος τὴν ἡλικίαν, ὡς ἂν γεγονὼς ἔτη δύο πρὸς
2τοῖς εἴκοσιν. αὐτὸς δὲ τὴν ἄλλην δύναμιν ἀνέλαβε1
καὶ τὸ μὲν πρῶτον ὑπερβάλλων τὸν Ταῦρον καὶ
περιπεσὼν χιόνι πολλῇ συχνοὺς ἀπέβαλε τῶν
στρατιωτῶν. διὸ καὶ πάλιν ἀναστρέψας εἰς τὴν
Κιλικίαν καὶ μεταλαβὼν ἕτερον καιρὸν διεξῆλθε
μὲν ἀσφαλέστερον τὸ προειρημένον ὄρος, παραγενόμενος
δ᾿ εἰς Κελαινὰς τῆς Φρυγίας διεῖλε τὸ
3στρατόπεδον εἰς χειμασίαν. μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα τὸν
στόλον ἐκ Φοινίκης μετεπέμψατο Μηδίου ναυαρχοῦντος,
ὃς περιτυχὼν ταῖς Πυδναίων2 ναυσίν,
οὔσαις τριάκοντα ἕξ, καὶ καταναυμαχήσας αὐτάνδρων
τῶν σκαφῶν ἐκυρίευσεν.
Καὶ τὰ μὲν περὶ τὴν Ἑλλάδα καὶ τὴν Ἀσίαν ἐν
τούτοις ἦν.
Κατὰ δὲ τὴν Σικελίαν οἱ τῶν Συρακοσίων
φυγάδες διατρίβοντες ἐν Ἀκράγαντι παρεκάλουν
τοὺς προεστηκότας τῆς πόλεως μὴ περιορᾶν Ἀγαθοκλέα





1ἀνέλαβε Fischer: ἔλαβε.2For the meaningless Πυδναίων Fischer suggests Πτολεμαίου
or Πολυκλείτου, cp. chap. 64. 4.20Book XIX

a few days before from Babylon, also Andronicus 314 b.c. of Olynthus1 and Philip,2 men advanced in years who had accompanied Alexander on his whole campaign; for Demetrius was still youthful, being twenty-two years of age. Antigonus himself, taking the rest of the army, first tried to cross the Taurus Range, where he encountered deep snow and lost large numbers of his soldiers. Turning back therefore into Cilicia and seizing another opportunity, he crossed the aforesaid range in greater safety; and, on reaching Celaenae in Phrygia, he divided his army for wintering.3 Thereafter he summoned from Phoenicia his fleet under the command of Medius,4 who fell in with the ships of the Pydnaeans,5 thirty-six in number, defeated them in an engagement, and captured the vessels together with their crews.
This was the situation in Greece and in Asia.6
70. In Sicily7 those of the Syracusan exiles who were tarrying in Acragas urged the rulers of that city not to watch complacently while Agathocles






1Nothing is known of his service under Alexander. He
served under Antigonus at the siege of Tyre in 315 b.c. (chap.
59. 2).2Nothing is known of his earlier career, but he may be the Philip who received Bactrianê and Sogdianê in 323 b.c. (Book 18. 3. 3). Ten years later he is still faithfully serving Antigonus (Book 20. 107. 5).3This is the winter of 314/13 b.c.4Medius served under Alexander, playing a more important part after the death of Hephaestion (Book 17. 117. 1). He was accused of poisoning Alexander (Arrian, Anabasis, 7. 27. 2), and after Alexander’s death served Perdiccas (Arrian, Successors, 24. 6) and then joined Antigonus.5“Pydnaeans” is certainly wrong. Possibly we should read “of Ptolemy,” or “of Polyclitus,” who was an admiral of Ptolemy.6Continued in chap. 73.7Continued from chap. 65. 6. The invitation to Acrotatus is probably to be dated in the preceding year.21