Diodorus of Sicily

τῷ πατρὶ τῆς κόρης ὑπὲρ τοῦ γάμου, τὸν
δὲ πατέρα λέγειν ὡς ἕτοιμος μέν ἐστιν αὐτῷ
δοῦναι, δεδοικέναι δὲ τοὺς ὄνυχας καὶ τοὺς ὀδόντας,
μήποτε γήμας καὶ παροξυνθεὶς διά τινα αἰτίαν
6προσενέγκηται τῇ παρθένῳ θηριωδῶς. τοῦ δὲ
λέοντος ἐξελόντος τούς τε ὄνυχας καὶ τοὺς ὀδόντας
τὸν πατέρα, θεωρήσαντα πάντα δι᾿ ὧν ἦν φοβερὸς
ἀποβεβληκότα, τύπτοντα τῷ ξύλῳ ῥᾳδίως ἀποκτεῖναι.
τὸ παραπλήσιον οὖν ποιεῖν καὶ τὸν Ἀντίγονον·
7μέχρι τούτου γὰρ ποιεῖσθαι τὰς ἐπαγγελίας
ἕως ἂν τῆς δυνάμεως κυριεύσῃ καὶ κολάσῃ τηνικαῦτα
τοὺς ἀφηγουμένους. ἐπισημαινομένου δὲ
τοῦ πλήθους καὶ1 ὀρθῶς λέγοντος, τότε μὲν ἔλυσε
τὴν ἐκκλησίαν.
26. Νυκτὸς δὲ ἐπιγενομένης ἧκόν τινες ηὐτομοληκότες
μὲν ἐκ τῆς Ἀντιγόνου στρατοπεδείας,
λέγοντες δ᾿ ὅτι παρήγγειλε τοῖς στρατιώταις Ἀντίγονος
ἀναζευγνύειν περὶ δευτέραν φυλακήν. ὁ δ᾿
Εὐμενὴς συλλογιζόμενος ἀληθῶς ὑπέλαβε2 τοὺς
2πολεμίους ἀποχωρήσειν εἰς τὴν Γαβηνήν· αὕτη γὰρ
ἀπέχουσα τριῶν ἡμερῶν ὁδὸν ἀκέραιος ἦν καὶ
πλήρης καρπῶν καὶ χορτασμάτων καὶ καθόλου τῶν
δυναμένων χορηγῆσαι τὰ ἐπιτήδεια μεγάλαις δυνάμεσι
3δαψιλῶς. πρὸς δὲ τούτοις τοῖς ἀγαθοῖς ὁ
τόπος αὐτὸς συνήργει, ποταμοὺς ἔχων καὶ χαράδρας
δυσεξόδους. σπεύδων οὖν φθάσαι τοὺς πολεμίους
τὸ ὅμοιον ἔπραξε. τῶν μὲν μισθοφόρων τινὰς
χρήμασι πείσας ἐξέπεμψεν ὡς αὐτομόλους, συντάξας
λέγειν ὅτι διέγνωκεν Εὐμενὴς νυκτὸς ἐπιτίθεσθαι
τῷ χάρακι· αὐτὸς δὲ τὴν μὲν ἀποσκευὴν
προαπέστειλε, τοῖς δὲ στρατιώταις παρήγγειλε τὴν


1καὶ Capps: ὡς.2ὑπέλαβε Rhodoman: ὑπέβαλε.298Book XIX

lion, having fallen in love with a maiden, spoke to the 317 b.c. girl’s father about marriage. The father said that he was ready to give her to him, but that he was afraid of the lion’s claws and teeth, fearing that after he had married her he might lose his temper about something and turn on the maiden in the manner of a beast. When, however, the lion had pulled out his claws and his teeth, the father, perceiving that the lion had thrown away everything which had made him formidable, killed him easily by beating him with a club. “It is this same sort of thing,” he added, “that Antigonus is doing now; he will only keep his promises until he becomes master of the army, and in that very moment will execute its leaders.” While the crowd was shouting approval and saying “Right,” he dismissed the assembly.
26. That night, however, there appeared certain deserters from Antigonus’ army with the report that Antigonus had given his soldiers orders to break camp at about the second watch. Eumenes, on considering the matter, concluded rightly that the enemy intended to withdraw into Gabenê, as this place, distant about three days’ march, was unplundered and filled with grain, fodder, and in general with that which could amply supply the provisions for a great army. Furthermore, the terrain itself supplemented these advantages, since it had rivers and ravines that were hard to cross. Being anxious, therefore, to occupy this place before the enemy, he imitated him. He caused certain mercenaries, whose consent he had won by money, to go away as if they were deserting, ordering them to say that Eumenes had decided to attack the camp during that night. He himself, however, sent the baggage on ahead and ordered the
299