Diodorus of Sicily
Ὡς οἱ τῶν Φεραίων τύραννοι παραδόντες Φιλίππῳ τὰς
Φερὰς Φωκέων ἐγένοντο σύμμαχοι.
Μάχη Φωκέων πρὸς Βοιωτοὺς περὶ Ὀρχομενὸν καὶ ἧττα
Φωκέων.
Ἄλλαι μάχαι τοῖς αὐτοῖς παρὰ τὸν Κηφισὸν καὶ
Κορώνειαν καὶ νίκη Βοιωτῶν.
Ὡς Φάυλλος στρατεύσας εἰς τὴν Λοκρίδα πολλὰς πόλεις
ἐχειρώσατο.
Ὡς Φάυλλος νόσῳ περιπεσὼν φθινάδι τὸν βίον ἐπιπόνως
κατέστρεψεν.
Ὡς Φάλαικος διαδεξάμενος τὴν ἀρχὴν καὶ ἀγεννῶς
διοικῶν τὸν πόλεμον ἐξέπεσεν.
Ὡς οἱ κατὰ τὴν Πελοπόννησον ἐστασίασαν.
Ὡς Ἀρταξέρξης ὁ ἐπικληθεὶς Ὦχος ἀνεκτήσατο Αἴγυπτον
καὶ Φοινίκην καὶ Κύπρον.
Ὡς Φίλιππος τὰς Χαλκιδικὰς πόλεις προσαγαγόμενος
τὴν ἐπισημοτάτην πόλιν κατέσκαψεν.
Ζήτησις τῶν ἀναλωθέντων ἱερῶν χρημάτων καὶ κόλασις
τῶν νοσφισαμένων.
Ὡς οἱ καταφυγόντες εἰς τὸ ἱερὸν τοῦ Ἀπόλλωνος
Φωκεῖς ὄντες πεντακόσιοι παραδόξως ἅπαντες ὑπὸ πυρὸς
διεφθάρησαν.
Ὡς ὁ Φωκικὸς πόλεμος κατελύθη.
Ὡς οἱ μετασχόντες τῆς ἱεροσυλίας τοῖς Φωκεῦσιν
ἅπαντες ὑπὸ θείας τινὸς ἐνεργείας ἐκολάσθησαν.
Τιμολέοντος κατάπλους εἰς Σικελίαν καὶ αἱ πράξεις
αὐτοῦ μέχρι τῆς τελευτῆς.
228Book XVI
How the tyrants of the Pheraeans, having betrayed Pherae to Philip, became allies of the Phocians (chap. 37. 3).
Battle of the Phocians with the Boeotians near Orchomenus and defeat of the Phocians (chap. 37. 4–5).
Other battles of the same peoples by the Cephisus and Coroneia and victory of the Boeotians (chap. 37. 5–6).
How Phayllus, having made an expedition into Locris, captured many cities (chap. 38. 1–5).
How Phayllus, having fallen ill of a wasting sickness, died a painful death (chap. 38. 6).
How Phalaecus, having succeeded to the command, conducted the war disgracefully, and was driven into exile (chaps. 38. 6–end and 59).
How the peoples of the Peloponnese broke out in civil strife (chap. 39).
How Artaxerxes, commonly called Ochus, again got possession of Egypt, Phoenicia, and Cyprus (chaps. 40–52. 8).
How Philip, having won the Chalcidian cities to his side, razed their most important one (chaps. 52. 9–55).
Investigation of the expenditure of the sacred monies and punishment of the pillagers (chaps. 56–57).
How those who took refuge at the shrine of Apollo, Phocians all, five hundred in number, were miraculously to the last man burned to death (chap. 58).
How the Phocian war was concluded (chaps. 59–60).
How those who had participated with the Phocians in the pillaging of the shrine were all punished by some sort of divine agency (chaps. 61–64).
The voyage of Timoleon to Sicily and his fortunes up to his death (chaps. 65–90 passim).
229