Diodorus of Sicily

ἀρχὴν τῶν περὶ Φίλιππον ἱστοριῶν ἐντεῦθεν ποιησάμενος
γέγραφεν βύβλους ὀκτὼ πρὸς ταῖς πεντήκοντα,
ἐξ ὧν πέντε διαφωνοῦσιν.
4. Ἐπ᾿ ἄρχοντος δ᾿ Ἀθήνησιν Εὐχαρίστου Ῥωμαῖοι
μὲν κατέστησαν ὑπάτους Κόιντον Σερουίλιον
καὶ Κόιντον1 Γενούκιον. ἐπὶ δὲ τούτων ὁ Φίλιππος
πρέσβεις ἐκπέμψας εἰς Ἀθήνας ἔπεισε τὸν δῆμον
εἰρήνην πρὸς αὐτὸν συνθέσθαι διὰ τὸ μηδὲν ἔτ
2προσποιεῖσθαι τὴν Ἀμφίπολιν. ἀπολυθεὶς δὲ τοῦ
πρὸς Ἀθηναίους πολέμου καὶ πυνθανόμενος τὸν
βασιλέα τῶν Παιόνων Ἆγιν τετελευτηκέναι ὑπέλαβε
καιρὸν ἔχειν ἐπιθέσθαι τοῖς Παίοσιν. στρατεύσας
οὖν εἰς τὴν Παιονίαν καὶ παρατάξει τοὺς
βαρβάρους νικήσας ἠνάγκασε τὸ ἔθνος πειθαρχεῖν
3τοῖς Μακεδόσιν. ὑπολειπομένων δὲ πολεμίων τῶν
Ἰλλυριῶν ἐφιλοτιμεῖτο καὶ τούτους καταπολεμῆσαι
εὐθὺς οὖν συναγαγὼν ἐκκλησίαν καὶ τοὺς στρατιώτας
οίκείοις λόγοις προτρεψάμενος εἰς τὸν πόλεμον
ἐστράτευσεν εἰς τὴν τῶν Ἰλλυριῶν χώραν, πεζοὺς
μὲν ἔχων οὐκ ἐλάττους μυρίων, ἱππεῖς δὲ ἑξακοσίους.
4Βάρδυλις2 δ᾿ ὁ τῶν Ἰλλυριῶν βασιλεὺς
πυθόμενος τὴν παρουσίαν τῶν πολεμίων τὸ μὲν
πρῶτον πρέσβεις ἀπέστειλεν περὶ διαλύσεως ἐφ᾿
ὅτῳ κυρίους ἀμφοτέρους εἶναι τῶν τότε κυριευομένων
πόλεων· τοῦ δὲ Φιλίππου φήσαντος ἐπιθυμεῖν
μὲν τῆς εἰρήνης, μὴ μέντοι γε ταύτην
συγχωρήσειν ἐὰν μὴ τῶν Μακεδονικῶν πόλεων


1So MSS., Λεύκιον Stephanus marg. and Fasti Consulares
followed by Dindorf, Bekker (cp. Livy, 7. 4 L. Genucius).2Βαρδύλις PX, Βάρδυλλις RV (cp. Plutarch, Pyrrhus, 9);
Βαρδύλης Arrian, 1. 5. 1.244Book XVI

Chios1 began his history of Philip at this point and 360/59 b.c. composed fifty-eight books, of which five are lost.
4. When Eucharistus was archon at Athens, the 359/8 b.c
Romans elected as consuls Quintus Servilius and Quintus Genucius. During their term of office Philip sent ambassadors to Athens and persuaded the assembly to make peace with him on the ground that he abandoned for all time any claim to Amphipolis.2 Now that he was relieved of the war with the Athenians and had information that the king of the Paeonians, Agis, was dead, he conceived that he had the opportunity to attack the Paeonians. Accordingly, having conducted an expedition into Peaonia and defeated the barbarians in a battle, he compelled the tribe to acknowledge allegiance to the Macedonians. And since the Illyrians were still left as enemies, he was ambitious to defeat them in war also. So, having quickly called an assembly and exhorted his soldiers for the war in a fitting speech, he led an expedition into the Illyrian territory, having no less than ten thousand foot-soldiers and six hundred horsemen. Bardylis,3 the king of the Illyrians, having learned of the presence of the enemy, first dispatched envoys to arrange for a cessation of hostilities on the condition that both sides remained possessed of the cities which they then controlled. But when Philip said that he indeed desired peace but would not, however, concur in that proposal unless the Illyrians should withdraw



1Of this work, the longest history published till then, two hundred seventeen fragments remain. Theopompus’ admiration for Philip is reflected by Diodorus, who must have relied heavily on his account. For the contents of the Philippica see Beloch, Griechische Geschichte2, 3. 2. 18–24.2See note on chap. 3. 3.3For the power of this king see chap, 2. 5.245