Diodorus of Sicily

τῶν πραγμάτων αὐτῷ προχωρούντων, ἀποικίαν
ἀπέστειλεν εἰς τὴν νῆσον τὴν Ποντίαν καλουμένην.
102. Ἐν δὲ τῇ Σικελίᾳ τῆς εἰρήνης ἄρτι γεγενημένης
Ἀγαθοκλεῖ πρὸς τοὺς Σικελιώτας πλὴν
Μεσσηνίων οἱ μὲν φυγάδες τῶν Συρακοσίων ἠθροίσθησαν
εἰς τὴν Μεσσήνην, ταύτην ὁρῶντες λοιπὴν
οὖσαν τῶν ἀλλοτρίως ἐχουσῶν πρὸς τὸν δυνάστην,
2ὁ δ᾿ Ἀγαθοκλῆς σπεύδων αὐτῶν καταλῦσαι τὸ
σύστημα Πασίφιλον στρατηγὸν ἐξαπέστειλε μετὰ
δυνάμεως εἰς τὴν Μεσσήνην, ἐντειλάμενος ἐν ἀπορρήτοις
3ἃ χρὴ πράττειν. οὗτος δὲ ἀπροσδοκήτως
ἐμβαλὼν εἰς τὴν χώραν καὶ πολλῶν αἰχμαλώτων
καὶ τῆς ἄλλης λείας ἐγκρατὴς γενόμενος ἠξίου τοὺς
Μεσσηνίους βούλεσθαι τὴν φιλίαν καὶ μὴ συναναγκάζεσθαι
4τοῖς πολεμιωτάτοις αὐτοῦ διαλύεσθαι.1
οἱ δὲ Μεσσήνιοι λαβόντες ἐλπίδας τοῦ χωρὶς κινδύνων
ἀπολυθήσεσθαι τοῦ πολέμου τούς τε φυγάδας
τοὺς ἐκ Συρακουσσῶν ἐξέβαλον καὶ τὸν Ἀγαθοκέα
5παραγενόμενον μετὰ δυνάμεως προσεδέξαντο. ὁ
δὲ τὸ μὲν πρῶτον φιλανθρώπως αὐτοῖς προσεφέρετο
καὶ τοὺς φυγάδας ἔπεισεν καταδέξασθαι τοὺς
συστρατευομένους2 μὲν αὐτῷ, πεφυγαδευμένους δὲ
6νόμῳ ὑπὸ τῶν Μεσσηνίων. μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα τοὺς
ἐναντιουμένους ἐν τοῖς ἔμπροσθεν χρόνοις τῇ δυναστείᾳ
μεταπεμψάμενος ἔκ τε Ταυρομενίου καὶ
τῆς Μεσσήνης ἅπαντας ἀπέσφαξεν, οὐκ ἐλάττους
7ὄντας ἑξακοσίων· διανοούμενος γὰρ πόλεμον ἐκφέρειν




1βούλεσθαι . . . διαλύεσθαι. Madvig suggests διαλύεσθαι
τὴν φιλίαν καὶ μὴ συνεξετάζεσθαι τοῖς πολεμιωτάτοις αὐτοῦ.2συστρατευομένους Dindorf: στρατευομένους.110Book XIX

people, since matters were progressing according 312 b.c. to their will, sent a colony to the island that is called Pontia.1
102. In Sicily,2 where peace had just been established between Agathocles and the Sicilians except the Messenians,3 the exiles of Syracuse gathered in Messenê since they saw that this was the only city remaining of those that were hostile to the dynast; but Agathocles, who was eager to break up their group, sent Pasiphilus with an army to Messenê as general, telling him in secret instructions what he should do. Pasiphilus, entering the region unexpectedly and gaining possession of many prisoners and much other booty, urged the Messenians to choose friendship with him and not be forced to seek terms in common with his bitterest foes.4 The Messenians, gaining hope of a bloodless termination of the war, expelled the Syracusan exiles and welcomed Agathocles when he came near with his army. At first he treated them in a friendly manner and persuaded them to receive back the exiles who were in his army, men who had been legally banished by the Messenians. But then he brought together from Tauromenium and Messenê those who had previously been opposed to his rule and put them all to death, being no less than six hundred in number; for his intention was to wage war on the Carthaginians,




1The modern Ponza, one of the group of small islands
off the west coast of Italy opposite the Circeian promontory. Cp. Livy, 9. 28. 7–8. Italian affairs are continued in chap. 105. 5.2Continued from chap. 72. 2.3In chap. 71. 6 Messenê is included among the cities that made peace with Agathocles.4Or, following Madvig’s reading: “urged the Messenians to dissolve their friendship and not to be counted among his bitterest foes.”111