Diodorus of Sicily

στρεβλωθεὶς καὶ πολλοῖς διὰ τὴν ἀτυχίαν γενόμενος
4γνώριμος περιβόητον ἔχῃ τὴν συμφοράν. οὗτος
γὰρ μετὰ τὴν ἐκ τῆς ὁμολογίας1 φυγὴν μετὰ τῶν
μισθοφόρων τὸ μὲν πρῶτον διέτριβεν περὶ τὴν
Πελοπόννησον, συνέχων τοὺς στρατιώτας ἐκ τῶν
ἱεροσυληθέντων λειψάνων, μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα ἐν Κορίνθῳ
μισθωσάμενος πλοῖα φορτηγὰ μεγάλα καὶ
τέσσαρας ἔχων ἡμιολίας παρεσκευάζετο πρὸς τὸν
εἰς Ἰταλίαν καὶ Σικελίαν πλοῦν, νομίζων ἐν τούτοις
τοῖς τόποις ἢ καταλήψεσθαί τινα πόλιν ἢ τεύξεσθαι
μισθοφορίας· ἐτύγχανε γὰρ Λευκανοῖς πρὸς
Ταραντίνους συνεστηκὼς πόλεμος. πρὸς δὲ τοὺς
συμπλέοντας ἔφη μετάπεμπτος πλεῖν ὑπὸ τῶν ἐξ
Ἰταλίας καὶ Σικελίας.
62. Ἐκπλεύσαντος δ᾿ αὐτοῦ καὶ πελαγίου γενομένου
στρατιῶταί τινες τῶν ἐν τῷ μεγίστῳ πλοίῳ
κομιζομένων, ᾧπερ αὐτὸς ὁ Φάλαικος ἐνέπλει,
λόγον ἀλλήλοις ἐδίδοσαν ὑπονοοῦντες μηδένα μεταπέμψασθαι
σφᾶς· οὔτε γὰρ ἡγεμόνας ἑώρων ἀπὸ
τῶν ἐπικαλουμένων συμπλέοντας οὔθ᾿ ὁ πλοῦς ἦν
2ὀλίγος, ἀλλὰ πολὺς ὑπέκειτο2 καὶ χαλεπός. διόπερ
ἀπιστοῦντες ἅμα τοῖς λεγομένοις καὶ φοβούμενοι
τὴν διαπόντιον στρατείαν συνίσταντο καὶ μάλισθ᾿
οἱ τὰς ἡγεμονίας ἔχοντες τῶν μισθοφόρων. τέλος
δὲ σπασάμενοι τὰ ξίφη καὶ καταπληξάμενοι τόν
τε Φάλαικον καὶ τὸν κυβερνήτην ἠνάγκασαν εἰς
τοὐπίσω πάλιν ἀποπλεῖν. τὸ δ᾿ αὐτὸ καὶ τῶν ἐν
τοῖς ἄλλοις πλοίοις κομιζομένων ποιησάντων κατέπλευσαν
1So Sherman (cp. chap. 59. 3); ἐκεχειρίας Capps: αἰχμαλωσίας.2πολὺς ὑπέκειτο Dindorf: πλοῦς ὑπέκειτο μέγας.410Book XVI

by being tortured longer and by becoming known to 6/5 b.c. many for his misfortunes, his sad fate might become notorious. For when he had taken flight with his mercenaries following the agreement,1 he first sojourned in the Peloponnese, supporting his men on the last remnants of the pillaging, but later he hired in Corinth some large freighters and with four light vessels prepared for the voyage to Italy and Sicily, thinking that in these regions he would either seize some city or obtain service for pay, for a war was in progress, as it chanced, between the Lucanians and the Tarentines. To his fellow passengers he said that he was making the voyage because he had been summoned by the people of Italy and Sicily.
62. When he had sailed out of the harbour and was on the high seas, some of the soldiers who were in the largest ship, on which Phalaecus himself was a passenger, conferred with one another because they suspected that no one had sent for them. For they could see on board no officers sent by the peoples who were soliciting aid, and the voyage in prospect was not short, but long and dangerous. Accordingly, since they not only distrusted what they had been told but also feared the overseas campaign, they conspired together, above all those who had commands among the mercenary troops. Finally drawing their swords and menacing Phalaecus and the pilot they forced them to reverse their course. And when those who were sailing in the other boats also did the same, they




1See chap. 59. 3, which hardly justifies the phrase ἐκ τῆς αἰχμαλωσίας.411