Diodorus of Sicily

ἦν ἐξ ἀρχῆς ὡμολογηκώς, ἐξαγαγεῖν τὴν φρουρὰν
δοκοῦντα καλῶς πολιτεύεσθαι τὰ πρὸς τοὺς
Μακεδόνας, ἀξιοῦντες τὸν Ἀντίπατρον, καθάπερ
2ἐκ τῆς Μουνυχίας. ὁ δ᾿ Ἀντίπατρος τὸ μὲν πρῶτον
εὐνοϊκῶς διέκειτο πρὸς τὸν Δημάδην, ὕστερον
δὲ Περδίκκου τελευτήσαντος καί τινων1 ἐπιστολῶν
εὑρεθεισῶν ἐν τοῖς βασιλικοῖς γράμμασιν, ἐν
αἷς2 ἦν ὁ Δημάδης παρακαλῶν τὸν Περδίκκαν
κατὰ τάχος διαβαίνειν εἰς τὴν Εὐρώπην ἐπ᾿ Ἀντίπατρον,
ἀπηλλοτριώθη πρὸς αὐτὸν καὶ κεκρυμμένην
3ἐτήρει τὴν ἔχθραν. διόπερ τοῦ Δημάδου κατὰ
τὰς ὑπὸ τοῦ δήμου δεδομένας ἐντολὰς ἀπαιτοῦντος
τὴν ἐπαγγελίαν καὶ παρρησιωδέστερον ἀπειλήσαντος
περὶ τῆς φρουρᾶς ὁ μὲν Ἀντίπατρος οὐδεμίαν
δοὺς ἀπόκρισιν παρέδωκε τοῖς ἐπὶ τὰς τιμωρίας
τεταγμένοις αὐτόν τε τὸν Δημάδην καὶ τὸν υἱὸν
4Δημέαν συμπρεσβεύοντα τῷ πατρί. οὗτοι μὲν οὖν
ἀπαχθέντες εἴς τι οἴκημα εὐτελὲς ἐθανατώθησαν
διὰ τὰς προειρημένας αἰτίας.
Ὁ δ᾿ Ἀντίπατρος ἐσχάτως ἤδη διακείμενος ἀπέδειξεν
ἐπιμελητὴν τῶν βασιλέων Πολυπέρχοντα
καὶ στρατηγὸν αὐτοκράτορα, πρεσβύτατον σχεδὸν
ὄντα τῶν Ἀλεξάνδρῳ συνεστρατευμένων καὶ τιμώμενον
ὑπὸ τῶν κατὰ τὴν Μακεδονίαν, τὸν δ᾿ υἱὸν
Κάσανδρον χιλίαρχον καὶ δευτερεύοντα κατὰ τὴν




1βασιλικῶν after τινων deleted by Dindorf.2αἷς Wurm: οἷς.144Book XVIII

reputation of serving the city well in relation to 319 b.c. Macedonia.1 They requested Antipater that he, as had been agreed from the beginning, remove the garrison from Munychia. Antipater at first had been well disposed to Demades, but after the death of
Perdiccas certain letters were found in the royal archives in which Demades invited Perdiccas to cross over swiftly into Europe against Antipater. At this Antipater was alienated from him and kept his enmity hidden. Therefore when Demades in accordance with the instructions given him by the people demanded the fulfilment of the promise and indulged rather freely in threats about the garrison, Antipater gave him no answer but delivered Demades himself and his son Demeas, who had accompanied his father as an envoy, to those ministers who were in charge of punishments. They were taken away to a common prison and put to death for the reasons mentioned above.
Antipater, who was already at the point of death, appointed as guardian of the kings and supreme commander, Polyperchon, who was almost the oldest of those who had campaigned with Alexander and was held in honour by the Macedonians.2 Antipater also made his own son Cassander chiliarch and second


1For this mission of Demades cp. Arrian, FGrH, 156. 9.
14; Plutarch, Phocion, 30. 4–6; Demosthenes, 31. 3–4. He
did not leave Athens before the end of June, 319 (IG, 22. 1. 383.b). Antipater’s death, accordingly, may be placed late in that summer.2Polyperchon, one of the original bodyguard, became a commander of one battalion of the phalanx after Issus (Arrian, Anabasis, 2. 12. 2) but did not rise above this rank during Alexander’s life. Just before Alexander’s death, when ten thousand veterans were sent back to Macedonia, Polyperchon accompanied them as lieutenant to Craterus (Arrian, Anabasis, 7. 12. 4). When Antipater went to Asia against Perdiccas, he left Polyperchon in Macedonia as his representative (chap. 38. 6).145