Diodorus of Sicily

καὶ στρατηγῶν τιμωρίας ἠξίωσεν.1 τῆς δ᾿ εἰς τοὺς
παρανενομηκότας ἡγεμόνας μισοπονηρίας διαβοηθείσης
πολλοὶ τῶν στρατηγῶν συνειδότες ἑαυτοῖς
ὕβρεις καὶ παρανομίας εἰς φόβον ἐνέπιπτον καὶ
τινὲς μὲν μισθοφόρους ἔχοντες ἀφίσταντο τοῦ βασιλέως,
τινὲς δὲ χρήματα συσκευασάμενοι δρασμοὺς
3ἐποιοῦντο. ταῦτα δὲ πυνθανόμενος ὁ βασιλεὺς
πρὸς πάντας τοὺς κατὰ τὴν Ἀσίαν στρατηγοὺς καὶ
σατράπας ἔγραψεν, ἐπειδὰν ἀναγνῶσι τὴν ἐπιστολήν,
παραχρῆμα πάντας τοὺς μισθοφόρους ἀπολῦσαι.
4Κατὰ δὲ τοῦτον τὸν καιρὸν τοῦ βασιλέως διατρίβοντος
ἔν τινι παραθαλαττίῳ πόλει ὀνομαζομένῃ
Σαλμοῦντι καὶ σκηνικοὺς ἀγῶνας ἐν τῷ θεάτρῳ
ποιοῦντος κατέπλευσαν οἱ δι᾿ Ὠκεανοῦ πλεῖν τὴν
παραθαλάττιον ἀπεσταλμένοι καὶ παραχρῆμα εἰς
τὸ θέατρον παρελθόντες τόν τε Ἀλέξανδρον ἠσπάσαντο
5καὶ περὶ τῶν πεπραγμένων ἀπήγγειλαν. οἱ
δὲ Μακεδόνες ἡσθέντες τῇ παρουσίᾳ τῶν ἀνδρῶν
κρότῳ μεγάλῳ τὸ γεγονὸς ἐπεσημήναντο καὶ πᾶν
τὸ θέατρον μεστὸν ἦν χαρᾶς ἀνυπερβλήτου.
6Οἱ δὲ καταπεπλευκότες ἀπήγγελλον ἀμπώτεις



1The repetitious and turgid aspect of this sentence has
inclined the editors to emend it, but no suggestions have
proved very convincing.428Book XVII

generals.1 As the word spread of his righteous indignation 326/5 b.c. against his offending subordinates, many of the generals recalled acts of insolence or illegality which they had performed and became alarmed. Some who had mercenary troops revolted against the king’s authority, and others got together sums of money and fled. As news of this was brought to the king, he wrote to all his generals and satraps in Asia, ordering them, as soon as they had read his letter, to disband all their mercenaries instantly.
At this juncture the king was resting in a seaside city called Salmus and was holding a dramatic contest in the theatre, when into the harbour there sailed the fleet which had been ordered to return by way of the Ocean and to explore the coastal waters.2 The officers came immediately into the theatre, greeted Alexander, and reported what they had done. The Macedonians were delighted at their arrival and welcomed their safe return with loud applause, so that the whole theatre was filled with the wildest rejoicing.
The mariners told how they had encountered astonishing 

1For Alexander’s disciplinary measures at this time cp.
Curtius, 9. 10. 20–21; 10. 1. 1–9, 30–42; Justin, 12. 10. 8;
Plutarch, Alexander, 68. 2–3; Arrian, 27. 1–5; 29–30 (Badian,
op. cit.147–150).2Nearchus gave an account of his joining Alexander on two occasions, once, very dramatically, in Carmania (Arrian, 6. 28. 5–6; Indica, 33–36), and again after sailing up the Pasitigris to Susa (Indica, 42). Curtius (10. 1. 10) and Plutarch (Alexander, 68.1) seem to refer only to the former meeting. Neither meeting was on the coast. Salmus is not identified. Reference to the dramatic festival makes it likely that Diodorus is here referring to the reunion at Susa (Pliny, Naturalis Historia, 6. 100, with reference to Nearchus and Onesicritus), but inserting it in the wrong place in his narrative. Pliny states that the voyage of Nearchus took six months, so the time would now be the spring of 324 b.c. B. Niese, Geschichte der griechischen und makedonischen Staaten, 1 (1893), 153, note 5, calculated the length of the voyage as about seventy-five days, which would bring the reunion rather to December of 325.429