Diodorus of Sicily

οἱ στρατηγοὶ καὶ οἱ ἐπιφανέστατοι τῶν ἡγεμόνων.
2ζῶντες δὲ ἄνδρες ἑάλωσαν ὑπὲρ τοὺς ἐννακισχιλίους,
ἐλέφαντες δὲ ὀγδοήκοντα. αὐτὸς δὲ ὁ Πῶρος
ἔμπνους ὢν παρεδόθη τοῖς Ἰνδοῖς πρὸς τὴν θεραπείαν.
3τῶν δὲ Μακεδόνων ἔπεσον μὲν ἱππεῖς διακόσιοι
καὶ ὀγδοήκοντα, πεζοὶ δὲ πλείους τῶν
ἑπτακοσίων. ὁ δὲ βασιλεὺς τοὺς μὲν τετελευτηκότας
ἔθαψε, τοὺς δὲ ἀνδραγαθήσαντας κατὰ τὴν
ἀξίαν ἐτίμησεν, αὐτὸς δὲ Ἡλίῳ ἔθυσεν ὡς δεδωκότι
τὰ πρὸς ἀνατολὴν μέρη καταστρέψασθαι.
4Τῆς δὲ πλησίον ὀρεινῆς ἐχούσης πολλὴν μὲν
ἐλάτην εὔτροφον, οὐκ ὀλίγην δὲ κέδρον καὶ πεύκην,
ἔτι δὲ τῆς ἄλλης ὕλης ναυπηγησίμου πλῆθος ἄφθονον
5κατεσκεύασε ναῦς ἱκανάς· διενοεῖτο γὰρ ἐπὶ τὸ
τέρμα τῆς Ἰνδικῆς παραγενόμενος καὶ πάντας τοὺς
ἐγχωρίους καταστρεψάμενος διὰ τοῦ ποταμοῦ καταπλεῖν
6εἰς τὸν Ὠκεανόν. ἔκτισε δὲ δύο πόλεις, τὴν
μὲν πέραν τοῦ ποταμοῦ καθ᾿ ὃν τόπον αὐτὸς διέβη,
τὴν δὲ ἄλλην ἐν ᾧ τόπῳ τὸν Πῶρον ἐνίκησεν.
ταχὺ δὲ τῶν ἔργων κατασκευασθέντων διὰ τὴν
πολυχειρίαν τὸν μὲν Πῶρον θεραπευθέντα βασιλέα
κατέστησε διὰ τὴν ἀρετὴν ἧς πρότερον ἦρχε χώρας,
τὴν δὲ δύναμιν ἐπὶ τριάκοντα ἡμέρας ἀνέλαβε,
πολλῆς ἀφθονίας οὔσης τῶν ἐπιτηδείων.
90. Ἴδιον δέ τι κατὰ τὴν ὀρεινὴν τὴν πλησίον
ὑπῆρχε. χωρὶς γὰρ τῆς πρὸς ναυπηγίαν ὕλης εἶχεν


378Book XVII

and officers.1 Above nine thousand men were 326/5 b.c. taken alive, together with eighty elephants. Porus himself was still breathing, and was turned over to the Indians for medical attention. On the Macedonian side, the losses were two hundred and eighty cavalry and more than seven hundred infantry.2 The king buried the dead, rewarded those who had distinguished themselves in accordance with their deserts, and sacrificed to Helius who had given him the eastern regions to conquer.
There were mountains not far away where grew thriving firs in quantity, together with no little cedar and pine and an ample supply of other woods suitable for shipbuilding, and Alexander constructed a large number of ships. He intended to reach the borders of India and to subdue all of its inhabitants, and then to sail downstream to the Ocean. He founded two cities, one beyond the river where he had crossed and the other on the spot where he had defeated Porus. These were built quickly because there was a plentiful supply of labour.3 When Porus had recovered, Alexander appointed him, in recognition of his valour, king over the country where he formerly ruled. The Macedonian army rested for thirty days in the midst of a vast plenty of provisions.
90. Odd phenomena were observed in these mountains. In addition to the wood for shipbuilding, the


1Arrian also gives casualty figures (5. 18. 2): nearly
20,000 foot and 3000 horse. He mentions also Porus’s two
sons.2Two hundred and thirty cavalry and eighty infantry (Arrian, 5. 18. 3).3These were Nicaea and Bucephala, the latter named in honour of Alexander’s noble horse, the death of which occurred at this time (chap. 95. 5). Curtius also splits his account of the founding (9. 1.6; 3. 23), but the others deal with it only in this connection (Justin, 12. 8. 8; Plutarch, Alexander, 61; Arrian, 5. 19. 4–6).379