Diodorus of Sicily

αἰεὶ κατὰ τὴν εἰς τὸν λόφον ἀνάβασιν ἀλλήλων
ὑπερέχουσι καὶ τὸ σχῆμα τῆς ὅλης πόλεως θεατροειδὲς
ἀποτελοῦσι. διόπερ τῶν τειχῶν συνεχῶς
καταβαλλομένων οὐδὲν ἠλαττοῦντο· διοικοδομοῦντες
γὰρ τοὺς στενωποὺς ταῖς αἰεὶ κατωτάταις
3οἰκίαις ὥσπερ ὀχυροῖς τισι τείχεσιν ἐχρῶντο. διόπερ
ὁ Φίλιππος μετὰ πολλῶν πόνων καὶ κινδύνων
τοῦ τείχους κρατήσας ἰσχυρότερον εὕρισκε τὸ
τεῖχος τὸ διὰ τῶν οἰκιῶν αὐτομάτως ἡτοιμασμένον.
πρὸς δὲ τούτοις ἐκ τοῦ Βυζαντίου πάντων τῶν πρὸς
τὸν πόλεμον χρησίμων ἑτοίμως χορηγουμένων
ἐμέρισε τὰς δυνάμεις εἰς δύο μέρη καὶ τοὺς μὲν
ἡμίσεις τῶν στρατιωτῶν ἀπέλιπεν ἐπὶ τῆς πολιορκίας,
ἐπιστήσας αὐτοῖς τοὺς ἀρίστους ἡγεμόνας,
τοὺς δ᾿ ἄλλους παραλαβὼν αὐτὸς προσέπεσεν ἄφνω
τῷ Βυζαντίῳ καὶ πολιορκίαν ἰσχυρὰν συνεστήσατο.
4οἱ δὲ Βυζάντιοι τῶν τε στρατιωτῶν καὶ τῶν βελῶν
καὶ τῶν ἄλλων τῶν χρησίμων παρὰ τοῖς Περινθίοις
ὄντων εἰς πολλὴν ἐνέπιπτον ἀμηχανίαν.
Καὶ τὰ μὲν περὶ Περινθίους καὶ Βυζαντίους ἐν
τούτοις ἦν.
5Τῶν δὲ συγγραφέων Ἔφορος μὲν ὁ Κυμαῖος τὴν
ἱστορίαν ἐνθάδε κατέστροφεν εἰς τὴν Περίνθου
πολιορκίαν· περιείληφε δὲ τῇ γραφῇ πράξεις τάς
τε τῶν Ἑλλήνων καὶ βαρβάρων ἀρξάμενος ἀπὸ τῆς
τῶν Ἡρακλειδῶν καθόδου· χρόνον δὲ περιέλαβε
ἐτῶν σχεδὸν ἑπτακοσίων καὶ πεντήκοντα καὶ βύβλους


50Book XVI

along the slope of the hill they overtop one another 341/0 b.c. and thus give the city the general aspect of a theatre. In spite of the constant breaches in the fortifications, consequently, the Perinthians were not defeated, for they blocked up the alley-ways and utilized the lowest tier of houses each time as though it were a wall of defence. When Philip with much labour and hard fighting mastered the city wall, he found that the houses afforded a stronger one, ready made by Fortune. Since, in addition, the city’s every need was promptly met by supplies coming to Perinthus from Byzantium, he split his forces in two, and leaving one division under his best officers to continue the operations before Perinthus, marched himself with the other and, making a sudden attack on Byzantium, enclosed that city also in a tight siege. Since their men and weapons and war equipment were all at Perinthus, the people of Byzantium found themselves seriously embarrassed.
Such was the situation at Perinthus and Byzantium.1
Ephorus of Cymê, the historian, closed his history at this point with the siege of Perinthus, having included in his work the deeds of both the Greeks and the barbarians from the time of the return of the Heracleidae. He covered a period of almost seven hundred and fifty years,2 writing thirty books and

1The sieges were given under the year 340/39 b.c. by
Philochorus (Jacoby, Fragmente der griechischen Historiker,
no. 328, T 54); they may well have extended over more than
one archon year.2Diodorus nowhere mentions the beginning of Ephorus’s history, perhaps because it began as far back as his own. In chap. 14. 3 he referred to its continuation by his son Demophilus. According to Clement of Alexandria (Stromateis, 1. 139. 4), Ephorus reckoned 735 years between the Return of the Heracleidae and the archonship of Evaenetus, 335/4 b.c. On that basis, B. ten Brinck (Philologus, 6 (1851), 589) suggested correcting “fifty” here to “thirty.”51