Diodorus of Sicily

στρατιώτας δισχιλίους. καταλιπὼν δὲ τῶν
ἐν τῇ Λιβύῃ πραγμάτων στρατηγὸν Ἀγάθαρχον
τὸν υἱὸν ἀνήχθη ταῖς ναυσίν, ἐπὶ Σικελίαν τὸν
πλοῦν ποιούμενος.
56. Ἅμα δὲ τούτοις πραττομένοις Ξενόδοκος ὁ
τῶν Ἀκραγαντίνων στρατηγὸς πολλὰς μὲν τῶν πόλεων
ἠλευθερωκώς, ἐλπίδας δὲ μεγάλας παρεσχηκὼς
τοῖς Σικελιώταις τῆς καθ᾿ ὅλην τὴν νῆσον αὐτονομίας
ἐξήγαγε τὴν δύναμιν ἐπὶ τοὺς Ἀγαθοκλέους
στρατηγούς, οὖσαν πεζῶν μὲν πλειόνων ἢ μυρίων,
2ἱππέων δὲ σχεδὸν χιλίων. οἱ δὲ περὶ Λεπτίνην καὶ
Δημόφιλον ἐκ τῶν Συρακουσσῶν καὶ τῶν φρουρίων
ἐπιλέξαντες ὅσους ἠδύναντο πλείστους1 ἀντεστρατοπέδευσαν
πεζοῖς μὲν ὀκτακισχιλίοις καὶ διακοσίοις,
ἱππεῦσι δὲ χιλίοις καὶ διακοσίοις. γενομένης
οὖν παρατάξεως ἰσχυρᾶς ἡττηθεὶς ὁ Ξενόδοκος
ἔφυγεν εἰς τὸν Ἀκράγαντα καὶ τῶν στρατιωτῶν
ἀπέβαλεν οὐκ ἐλάττους τῶν χιλίων καὶ πεντακοσίων.
3οἱ μὲν οὖν Ἀκραγαντῖνοι ταύτῃ τῇ συμφορᾷ
περιπεσόντες διέλυσαν ἑαυτῶν μὲν τὴν καλλίστην
ἐπιβολήν, τῶν δὲ συμμάχων τὰς τῆς ἐλευθερίας
ἐλπίδας· Ἀγαθοκλῆς δὲ τῆς μάχης ἄρτι γεγενημένης
καταπλεύσας τῆς Σικελίας εἰς Σελινοῦντα
Ἡρακλεώτας μὲν ἠλευθερωκότας τὴν πόλιν ἠνάγκασε
πάλιν ὑποτάττεσθαι, παρελθὼν δὲ ἐπὶ θάτερον
μέρος τῆς νήσου Θερμίτας μὲν προσαγαγόμενος
ὑποσπόνδους ἀφῆκε τῶν Καρχηδονίων τοὺς φρουροῦντας2
ταύτην τὴν πόλιν, Κεφαλοίδιον δὲ ἐκπολιορκήσας
Λεπτίνην μὲν ταύτης ἐπιμελητὴν

1ὅσους ἠδύναντο πλείστους Dindorf: οὓς ἠδύναντο πλείους.2τοὺς φρουροῦντας Reiske, Madvig; approved by Fischer in apparatus φρουρούντων.296Book XX

and placed upon them two thousand soldiers.1 Leaving 307 b.c. his son Agatharchus2 in command of affairs in Libya, he put out with his ships and made the voyage to Sicily.
56. While this was happening, Xenodocus,3 the general of the Acragantines, having freed many of the cities and roused in the Sicilians great hopes of autonomy throughout the whole island, led his army against the generals of Agathocles. It consisted of more than ten thousand foot-soldiers and nearly a thousand horsemen. Leptines and Demophilus, assembling from Syracuse and the fortresses as many men as they could, took up a position opposite him with eighty-two hundred foot-soldiers and twelve hundred horse. In a bitter fight that ensued, Xenodocus was defeated and fled to Acragas, losing not less than fifteen hundred of his soldiers. The people of Acragas after meeting with this reverse put an end to their own most noble enterprise and, at the same time, to their allies’ hopes of freedom. Shortly after this battle had taken place, Agathocles put in at Selinus in Sicily and forced the people of Heraclea, who had made their city free, to submit to him once more. Having crossed to the other side of the island, he attached to himself by a treaty the people of Therma, granting safe conduct to the Carthaginian garrison. Then, after taking Cephaloedium and leaving Leptines as its governor, he himself marched





1The fleet was constructed at Hippu Acra, cp. Appian, African Wars, 110.2Usually called Archagathus, cp. chap. 11. 1, and note.3Cp. chap. 31. 4.297