Diodorus of Sicily

μάγον Σμέρδιν, ἀνὴρ ἀνδρείᾳ διαφέρων καὶ τεθραμμένος
3ἐκ παιδὸς στρατιωτικῶς. πρὸ δὲ τοῦ κέρατος
παντὸς ἔταξεν ἐν ἐπικαμπίῳ τοὺς κρατίστους
τῶν ἐλεφάντων ἑξήκοντα καὶ τὰ διαστήματα τοῖς
ψιλοῖς διέλαβε τάγμασι. τῶν δὲ πεζῶν πρώτους
μὲν ἔταξε τοὺς ὑπασπιστάς, εἶτα τοὺς ἀργυράσπιδας,
ἐπὶ πᾶσι δὲ τοὺς ξένους καὶ τῶν ἄλλων τοὺς
εἰς τὰ Μακεδονικὰ καθωπλισμένους, καὶ πρὸ τούτων
4ἐλέφαντας καὶ τῶν ψιλῶν τοὺς ἱκανούς. ἐπὶ
δὲ τὸ δεξιὸν κέρας τάξας τῶν ἱππέων καὶ τῶν
ἐλεφάντων τοὺς ἀσθενεστέρους ἀπέδειξεν ἡγεμόνα
τῶν πάντων Φίλιππον· τούτῳ δὲ διεκελεύσατο
φυγομαχεῖν καὶ τὴν ἀπὸ θατέρου μέρους κρίσιν ἀποθεωρεῖν.
οἱ δὲ σύμπαντες ἦσαν μετ᾿ Εὐμενοῦς
κατὰ τοῦτον τὸν καιρὸν πεζοὶ μὲν τρισμύριοι
ἑξακισχίλιοι ἑπτακόσιοι, ἱππεῖς δὲ ἑξακισχίλιοι,
ἐλέφαντες δὲ ἑκατὸν τεσσαρεσκαίδεκα.
41. Μικρὸν δὲ πρὸ τῆς παρατάξεως Ἀντιγένης
ὁ τῶν ἀργυρασπίδων στρατηγὸς ἔπεμψεν ἕνα τῶν
Μακεδόνων ἱππέων ἐπὶ τὴν φάλαγγα τῶν ἐναντίων,
προστάξας πλησίον παραγενόμενον ἀναβοῆσαι.
οὗτος δὲ προσιππεύσας μόνος εἰς φωνῆς ἀκοήν,
καθ᾿ ὃ μέρος ἡ φάλαγξ ἦν τῶν παρ᾿ Ἀντιγόνου
Μακεδόνων, ἀνεβόησεν “Ἐπὶ τοὺς πατέρας ἁμαρτάνετε,1
ὦ κακαὶ κεφαλαί, τοὺς μετὰ Φιλίππου καὶ
Ἀλεξάνδρου τὰ ὅλα κατειργασμένους;” οὓς μετ᾿



1Wesseling adds ἁμαρτάνετε after πατέρας from Plutarch,
Eumenes, 16. 4.340Book XIX

who slew the Magian Smerdis,1 a man remarkable 317/16 b.c. for courage and trained from childhood as a soldier. In front of the whole wing he drew up in a curved line the sixty strongest of the elephants and screened the intervals with light troops. Of the foot soldiers he placed first2 the hypaspists, then the Silver Shields, and finally the mercenaries and those of the other soldiers who were armed in the Macedonian fashion. In front of the infantry he stationed elephants and an adequate force of his light troops. On the right wing he drew up the weaker of the cavalry and of the elephants, putting all of them under the command of Philip, whom he ordered to avoid battle and to observe the outcome on the other wing. In all there were in Eumenes’ army at this time thirty-six thousand seven hundred foot soldiers, six thousand horsemen and one hundred and fourteen elephants.
41. A short time before the battle Antigenes, the general of the Silver Shields, sent one of the Macedonian horsemen toward the hostile phalanx, ordering him to draw near to it and make proclamation.3 This man, riding up alone to within earshot opposite the place where the phalanx of Antigonus’ Macedonians was stationed, shouted: “Wicked men, are you sinning against your fathers, who conquered the whole world under Philip and Alexander?” and added that in a little while they would see that these



1Shortly before the death of Cambyses in 522 b.c., the
Persian throne was usurped by a certain Magian who claimed
to be Bardiya or Smerdis, a brother of Cambyses, whom the
latter had slain before the Egyptian campaign. After Cambyses’ death the pretender was slain by seven Persians, of whom Darius was one. The romantic account in Herodotus 3. 67 ff.) needs to be corrected by the Behistun Inscription cp. G. B. Gray in Cambridge Ancient History, 4. 173–177).2That is, nearest the left wing. For the hypaspists cp. note on chap. 28. 1.3Cp. Plutarch, Eumenes, 16. 4.341