Diodorus of Sicily

συντετριμμένης, τῆς δὲ τῶν ἱππέων δυνάμεως
7ἐφαμίλλου παρ᾿ ἀμφοτέροις οὔσης. οἱ Μακεδόνες
οὐδετέροις ἔφασαν ὑπακούσεσθαι, τῆς ἀποσκευῆς
αὐτῶν ἡλωκυίας καὶ παρὰ τοῖς πολεμίοις ὄντων
τέκνων καὶ γυναικῶν καὶ πολλῶν ἄλλων ἀναγκαίων
8σωμάτων. τότε μὲν οὖν διελύθησαν οὐδεμίαν
συμπεφωνημένην γνώμην βεβαιώσαντες· μετὰ δὲ
ταῦθ᾿ οἱ Μακεδόνες λάθρᾳ διαπρεσβευσάμενοι πρὸς
Ἀντίγονον τὸν μὲν Εὐμενῆ συναρπάσαντες παρέδωκαν,
τὰς δ᾿ ἀποσκευὰς κομισάμενοι καὶ πίστεις
9λαβόντες κατετάχθησαν εἰς τὸ στρατόπεδον. τὸ
παραπλήσιον δ᾿ οἵ τε σατράπαι καὶ τῶν ἄλλων
ἡγεμόνων τε καὶ στρατιωτῶν οἱ πλεῖστοι, τὸν
στρατηγὸν ἐγκαταλιπόντες, τῆς ἰδίας ἀσφαλείας
μόνον ἐφρόντισαν.
44. Ἀντίγονος δὲ παραδόξως κυριεύσας τοῦ τ᾿
Εὐμενοῦς καὶ πάσης τῆς ἀντιτεταγμένης δυνάμεως
Ἀντιγένην μὲν τὸν τῶν ἀργυρασπίδων ἡγούμενον
συλλαβὼν καὶ καταθέμενος εἰς σειρὸν ζῶντα κατέκαυσεν,
Εὔδαμον1 δὲ τὸν ἐξ Ἰνδῶν καταγαγόντα
τοὺς ἐλέφαντας καὶ Κελβανὸν2 καί τινας ἄλλους
τῶν ἀλλοτρίως ἀεὶ πρὸς αὐτὸν ἐχόντων ἀνεῖλεν.
2Εὐμενῆ δὲ παραδοὺς εἰς φυλακὴν ἐβουλεύετο πῶς
αὐτῷ χρηστέον εἴη. ἔσπευδε γὰρ ἔχειν μεθ᾿ αὑτοῦ
στρατηγὸν ἀγαθὸν καὶ χάριτος ὑπόχρεων, οὐ λίαν
δ᾿ ἐπίστευεν αὐτοῦ ταῖς ἐπαγγελίαις διὰ τὴν πρὸς
Ὀλυμπιάδα καὶ τοὺς βασιλεῖς φιλίαν· καὶ γὰρ




1Εὔδαμον, cp. chap. 14. 1: Εὔδημον.2Κελβανὸν RX, Κέβαλον F, Wesseling, Κεβαλῖνον Dindorf.348Book XIX

enemy had been shattered and the cavalry forces on 317/16 b.c. the two sides were equal. The Macedonians, however, refused to heed either party since their baggage had been taken, and their children, their wives, and many other relatives were in the hands of the enemy. The meeting accordingly broke up without having adopted any generally approved plan, whereupon the Macedonians secretly entered into negotiations with Antigonus, seized and surrendered Eumenes, recovered their baggage, and after receiving pledges were enrolled in Antigonus’ army. In the same way the satraps and most of the other commanders and soldiers deserted their general, thinking only of their own safety.1
44. Now that Antigonus had unexpectedly mastered Eumenes and all the army that had been opposing him, he seized Antigenes, the commander of the Silver Shields, put him into a pit, and burned him alive. He slew Eudamus, who had brought the elephants from India, and Celbanus,2 as well as certain others of those who had always been hostile to him. Putting Eumenes under guard, he considered how best to dispose of him. He wished, indeed, to have at his side a man who was a good general and who would be under obligations to him, but he had little faith in Eumenes’ promises because of the latter’s loyalty to Olympias and the kings; in fact,


1For Eumenes’ betrayal and death cp. Plutarch, Eumenes, 17.#x2013;19; Justin, 14. 3–4. According to Plutarch (Eumenes, 16. 1), even before the battle most of Eumenes’ generals had plotted to betray him as soon as his military genius had won them one more victory.2For Eudamus cp. chap. 14. 8. Celbanus (or Cebalus) is otherwise unknown. There is no reason to identify him with the Cebalinus who disclosed the conspiracy of Dimnus (Book 17. 79. 2).349