Diodorus of Sicily

οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι τῶν πολεμιωτάτων δεηθῆναι.
ὅμως δ᾿ οὐ διεσφάλησαν τῶν ἐλπίδων. ὁ γὰρ
τῶν Ἀθηναίων δῆμος, μεγαλόψυχος ὢν καὶ φιλάνθρωπος,
τὴν μὲν τῶν Θηβαίων ἰσχὺν οὐ κατεπλάγησαν,
τοῖς δὲ Λακεδαιμονίοις ὑπὲρ ἀνδραποδισμοῦ
κινδυνεύουσιν ἐψηφίσαντο βοηθεῖν πανδημεί. καὶ
παραχρῆμα στρατηγὸν καταστήσαντες τὸν Ἰφικράτην
ἐξέπεμψαν καὶ τοὺς νέους αὐθημερόν, ὄντας
μυρίους καὶ δισχιλίους. Ἰφικράτης μὲν οὖν, προθύμους
ἔχων τοὺς στρατιώτας, προῆγε μετὰ τῆς
3δυνάμεως κατὰ σπουδήν. οἱ δὲ Λακεδαιμόνιοι,
τῶν πολεμίων ἐπὶ1 τοὺς ὅρους τῆς Λακωνικῆς
καταστρατοπεδευόντων, καὶ αὐτοὶ πανδημεὶ τὴν
ἐκ τῆς Σπάρτης ἔξοδον ποιησάμενοι προῆγον ἐπὶ
τοὺς ἐναντίους, ταῖς μὲν τῶν στρατιωτῶν δυνάμεσι
τεταπεινωμένοι, ταῖς δὲ τῆς ψυχῆς ἀρεταῖς τεθαρρηκότες.
4οἱ μὲν οὖν περὶ τὸν Ἐπαμεινώνδαν
ὁρῶντες τὴν τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων χώραν δυσείσβολον
οὖσαν, τὸ μὲν ἀθρόᾳ τηλικαύτῃ δυνάμει ποιεῖσθαι
τὴν ἐμβολὴν οὐχ ἡγοῦντο συμφέρειν, εἰς
τέτταρα δὲ μέρη διελόμενοι σφᾶς αὐτοὺς κατὰ
πλείονας τόπους ἔκριναν ποιεῖσθαι τὴν ἔφοδον.
64. Ἡ μὲν οὖν πρώτη μερὶς ἡ2 τῶν Βοιωτῶν
μέσην3 τὴν πορείαν ἐποιήσατο ἐπὶ τὴν Σελλασίαν4
καλουμένην πόλιν, καὶ τοὺς τῇδε κατοικοῦντας
2ἀπέστησε τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων. Ἀργεῖοι δὲ κατὰ
τοὺς ὅρους τῆς Τεγεάτιδος χώρας ἐμβαλόντες συνῆψαν
μάχην τοῖς φρουροῦσι τὰς παρόδους, καὶ τόν




1ἐπὶ] περὶ Dindorf, Vogel.2ἡ added by Vogel.3μέσην Madvig, ἦν, ἣ Wurm: ἴσην.4Ἑλλασίαν PHL, Vogel.126Book XV

request the aid of their bitterest enemies. Nevertheless 369/8 b.c. they were not disappointed of their hopes. For the Athenian people, magnanimous and generous, were not terrified by the power of Thebes, and voted to aid with all their forces the Lacedaemonians now that they were in danger of enslavement. Immediately they appointed Iphicrates general and dispatched him with twelve thousand young men the self-same day.1 Iphicrates, then, whose men were in high spirits, advanced with the army at top speed. Meanwhile the Lacedaemonians, as the enemy took up quarters on the borders of Laconia, issued in full force from Sparta and marched on to meet them, weakened in military force but strong in inward courage. Now Epameinondas and the others, perceiving that the country of the Lacedaemonians was difficult to invade, thought it not to their advantage to make the invasion with such a large force in a body, and so decided to divide their army into four columns and enter at several points.2
64. Now the first contingent, composed of the Boeotians, took the middle route to the city known as Sellasia3 and. caused its inhabitants to revolt from the Lacedaemonians. The Argives, entering by the borders of Tegeatis,4 engaged in battle the garrison




1See Xenophon, Hell. 6. 5. 33–49. Diodorus brings in too soon the dispatch of Iphicrates and his army. It belongs to the spring of 369, after the campaign in Laconia.2The best account of this invasion is in Xenophon, Hell. 6. 5. 22–32. See also Plutarch, Pelopidas, 24, Agesilaüs, 31–32; Pausanias, 9, 14; Polyaenus, 2. 1. 14, 15, 27, 29; Nepos, Agesilaüs, 6; Aelian, Var. Hist. 14. 27. The invasion of Laconia belongs to the winter 370/69.3A rendezvous deep in Laconian territory north of Sparta.4South-eastern corner of Arcadia bordering Argolis.127