Diodorus of Sicily
2μεγάλην δόξαν ἐπιεικείας ἀπηνέγκατο· εὐθὺ
γὰρ οἱ Δαρείῳ συνεστρατευμένοι τῶν Ἑλλήνων
ὄντες περὶ χιλίους καὶ πεντακοσίους ἀνδρείᾳ τε
διαφέροντες, παρέδοσαν ἑαυτοὺς Ἀλεξάνδρῳ καὶ
συγγνώμης ἀξιωθέντες κατετάχθησαν εἰς τὰς τάξεις
ἐπὶ ταῖς αὐταῖς μισθοφοραῖς.
3Ὁ δ᾿ Ἀλέξανδρος ἐπελθὼν τὴν παραθαλάσσιον
τῆς Ὑρκανίας ἐνέβαλεν εἰς τὴν χώραν τῶν ὀνομαζομένων
Μάρδων. οὗτοι γὰρ ἀλκῇ διαφέροντες ὑπερεφρόνησαν
τὴν αὔξησιν τοῦ βασιλέως καὶ οὐδεμιᾶς
4ἐντεύξεως ἢ τιμῆς ἠξίωσαν αὐτόν, προκαταλαβόμενοι
δὲ τὰς εἰσβολὰς στρατιώταις ὀκτακισχιλίοις
τεθαρρηκότως τὴν τῶν Μακεδόνων ἔφοδον ὑπέμενον.
ὁ δὲ βασιλεὺς ἐπιπεσὼν1 αὐτοῖς καὶ συνάψας
μάχην τοὺς πλείους μὲν κατέκοψε, τοὺς δὲ
λοιποὺς εἰς τὰς δυσχωρίας κατεδίωξε.
5Πυρπολοῦντος δ᾿ αὐτοῦ τὴν χώραν καὶ τῶν τοὺς
βασιλικοὺς ἵππους ἀγόντων παίδων βραχὺ τοῦ βασιλέως
χωρισθέντων ἐπιβαλόντες τινὲς τῶν βαρβάρων
6ἀφήρπασαν τὸν ἄριστον τῶν ἵππων. οὗτος
δ᾿ ἐδόθη δῶρον μὲν ὑπὸ Δημαράτου τοῦ Κορινθίου,
συνηγώνιστο δὲ τῷ βασιλεῖ πάντας τοὺς κατὰ τὴν
Ἀσίαν ἀγῶνας. γυμνὸς δ᾿ ὢν ἔτι τὸν πωλοδαμαστὴν
μόνον προσεδέχετο, τυχὼν δὲ τῆς βασιλικῆς
σκευῆς οὐδὲ τοῦτον ἔτι προσίετο, μόνῳ δὲ Ἀλεξάνδρῳ





1ἐπιπεσὼν Dindorf: ἐπιμένων RX; ὑπομένων F; ἐπιθέμενος
Fischer.336Book XVII

kindly and gained wide repute for fair dealing; for 329/8 b.c. instance, the Greeks who had served with Dareius, one thousand five hundred in number, and accomplished soldiers, also promptly turned themselves over to Alexander, and receiving a full pardon for their previous hostility were assigned to units of his army on the same pay scale as the rest.1
Alexander followed the coastline to the west and entered the country of the people known as Mardians.2 They prided themselves on their fighting ability and thinking little of Alexander’s growth in power sent him no petition or mark of honour, but held the passes with eight thousand soldiers and confidently awaited the Macedonian approach. The king attacked them and joining battle killed most of them and drove the rest into the fastnesses of the mountains.
As he was wasting the countryside with fire and the pages who led the royal horses were at a little distance from the king, some of the natives made a sudden rush and carried off the best one of them.3 This animal had come to Alexander as a gift from Demaratus of Corinth4 and had carried the king in ail of his battles in Asia. So long as he was not caparisoned, he would permit only the groom to mount him, but when he had received the royal trappings, he would no longer allow even him, but for Alexander

1The same figure is given in Curtius, 6. 5. 6–10, and Arrian,
3. 23. 8–9; 24. 5.2Curtius, 6. 5. 11–17; Arrian, 3. 24. 1–3.3The famous Bucephalus.4Not otherwise mentioned by Diodorus, Demaratus was of some fame. He had served in Sicily with Timoleon, and although no longer young, accompanied Alexander to Asia, fought at the Granicus, and died shortly before Alexander’s Indian campaign (Berve, Alexanderreich, 2, no. 253). Plutarch, Alexander, 9. 6 mentions Demaratus as one of Philip’s advisers, but says (6. 1) that Bucephalus was given to Alexander by Philoneicus the Thessalian.337