Diodorus of Sicily

κατὰ πόλιν γίνεσθαι τοὺς ὅρκους καὶ τὰς
σπονδάς. διόπερ ἔκσπονδοι γενηθέντες ὥσπερ
καὶ πρότερον, συνεῖχον τὴν Βοιωτίαν ἐν τῇ καθ᾿
5αὑτοὺς μιᾷ συντελείᾳ. ἐπὶ δὲ τούτοις οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι
παροξυνθέντες ἔγνωσαν μεγάλῃ δυνάμει
στρατεύειν ἐπ᾿ αὐτούς, ὡς κοινοὺς πολεμίους·
σφόδρα γὰρ ὑφεωρῶντο τὴν αὔξησιν αὐτῶν, μήποτε
τῆς ὅλης Βοιωτίας ἡγούμενοι τὴν ἡγεμονίαν τῆς
Σπάρτης καταλύσωσιν, ἐπιλαβόμενοι καιροῦ. ἔν
τε γὰρ τοῖς γυμνασίοις συνεχῶς διατρίβοντες εὔρωστοι
τοῖς σώμασιν ὑπῆρχον, καὶ φύσει φιλοπόλεμοι
καθεστῶτες οὐδενὸς ἔθνους Ἑλληνικοῦ
6ταῖς ἀνδρείαις ἐλείποντο. εἶχον δὲ καὶ ἡγεμόνας
ἐπιφανεῖς ταῖς ἀρεταῖς πολλοὺς μὲν καὶ ἄλλους,
μεγίστους δὲ τρεῖς, Ἐπαμεινώνδαν καὶ Γοργίδαν,
ἔτι δὲ καὶ Πελοπίδαν· ἥ τε πόλις τῶν Θηβαίων
διὰ τῆς τῶν προγόνων ἐπιφανείας ἐν τοῖς ἡρωικοῖς
χρόνοις φρονήματος ἦν πλήρης καὶ μεγάλων ὠρέγετο
πραγμάτων. κατὰ μὲν οὖν τοῦτον τὸν ἐνιαυτὸν
οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι παρεσκευάζοντο πρὸς τὸν
πόλεμον καὶ δυνάμεις κατέλεγον τὰς μὲν πολιτικάς,
τὰς δὲ παρὰ τῶν συμμάχων.
51. Ἐπ᾿ ἄρχοντος δ᾿ Ἀθήνησι Φρασικλείδου
Ῥωμαῖοι κατέστησαν ἀντὶ τῶν ὑπάτων χιλιάρχους
ὀκτώ, Πόπλιον Μάνιον καὶ Γάιον Ἐρενούκιον καὶ
Γάιον Σέξστον καὶ Τιβέριον Ἰούλιον, ἔτι δὲ Λεύκιον
Λαβίνιον καὶ Πόπλιον Τριβώνιον καὶ Γάιον
Μάλλιον, πρὸς δὲ τούτοις Λεύκιον Ἀνθέστιον. ἐπὶ
δὲ τούτων οἱ μὲν Θηβαῖοι ἔκσπονδοι γεγονότες
92Book XV

to have the oaths and treaties made city by city.1 372/1 b.c. So, remaining outside of the treaties as formerly, the Thebans continued to hold Boeotia in a single confederacy subject to themselves. The Lacedaemonians, being exasperated by this, decided to lead a large army against them as common enemies, for they cast an extremely jealous eye upon their increase of power, fearing lest with the leadership of all Boeotia they might break up the Spartan supremacy, given a suitable opportunity. For they constantly practised gymnastics and had great bodily strength, and since they were naturally lovers of war, they were inferior to no Greek nation in deeds of valour. They had besides leaders conspicuous for their virtues, greatest among them being three men, Epameinondas, Gorgidas, and Pelopidas.2 The city of the Thebans was full of pride because of the glory of its ancestors in the heroic age and aspired to mighty deeds. In this year, then, the Lacedaemonians were making ready for war, levying armies both of their own citizens and from their allies as well.
51. When Phrasicleides was archon at Athens, the 371/0 b.c. Romans elected eight military tribunes with consular power, Publius Manius, Gaius Erenucius, Gaius Sextus, Tiberius Julius, Lucius Lavinius, Publius Tribonius, and Gaius Manlius, and besides Lucius Anthestius.3 During their term of office the Thebans, since they were not participants in the truce, were



1See Xenophon, op. cit. 6. 3. 19–20; Plutarch, Agesilaüs. 28; Nepos, Epameinondas, 6. 4; Pausanias, 9. 13. 2.2See chap. 39.3Gaius Erenucius is otherwise unknown. Livy (6. 30. 2) names six tribunes: Publius and Gaius Manlius, Lucius Julius, Gaius Sextilius, Marcus Albinius, and Lucius Antistius.93