Diodorus of Sicily

τῶν Ὀλυμπίων, καὶ ἐκυρίευον τοῦ ἱεροῦ καὶ τῶν
ἐν αὐτῷ χρημάτων. τῶν δὲ Μαντινέων ἀναλαβόντων
εἰς τοὺς ἰδίους βίους οὐκ ὀλίγα τῶν ἀναθημάτων
ἔσπευδον οἱ παρανομήσαντες διακατέχειν
τὸν πρὸς Ἠλείους πόλεμον, ἵνα μὴ δῶσιν ἐν εἰρήνῃ
2λόγον τῶν ἀναλωθέντων. τῶν δὲ ἄλλων Ἀρκάδων
βουλομένων συνθέσθαι τὴν εἰρήνην, στάσεις1 ἐκίνησαν
πρὸς τοὺς ὁμοεθνεῖς. γενομένων οὖν δυεῖν
ἑταιριῶν, συνέβαινε τῆς μὲν τοὺς Τεγεάτας, τῆς
3δὲ τοὺς Μαντινεῖς ἡγεῖσθαι. ἐπὶ πολὺ δὲ τῆς
διαφορᾶς αὐξηθείσης εἰς τὴν διὰ τῶν ὅπλων κρίσιν
κατήντησαν, καὶ Τεγεᾶται μὲν πρεσβεύσαντες πρὸς
Βοιωτοὺς ἔπεισαν ἑαυτοῖς βοηθεῖν, οἱ δὲ Βοιωτοὶ
στρατηγὸν ἐπιστήσαντες Ἐπαμεινώνδαν καὶ δύναμιν
ἀξιόλογον δόντες ἐξαπέστειλαν βοηθῆσαι τοῖς
4Τεγεάταις. οἱ δὲ Μαντινεῖς τὴν ἐκ τῆς Βοιωτίας
δύναμιν καὶ τὴν Ἐπαμεινώνδου δόξαν καταπλαγέντες,
πρὸς τοὺς ἐχθροτάτους τῶν Βοιωτῶν Ἀθηναίους
καὶ Λακεδαιμονίους πρέσβεις ἐκπέμψαντες
ἔπεισαν συμμαχεῖν. ὧν ἀμφοτέρων ἁδρὰς δυνάμεις
ταχέως ἀποστειλάντων, ἀγῶνες πολλοὶ καὶ
5μεγάλοι κατὰ τὴν Πελοπόννησον συνέστησαν. εὐθὺς
οὖν Λακεδαιμόνιοι μὲν πλησίον οἰκοῦντες ἐστράτευσαν
εἰς τὴν Ἀρκαδίαν, Ἐπαμεινώνδας δὲ κατὰ
τοῦτον τὸν καιρὸν μετὰ τῆς δυνάμεως προϊὼν καὶ
τῆς Μαντινείας οὐ μακρὰν ἀπέχων ἐπύθετο παρὰ
τῶν ἐγχωρίων ὅτι Λακεδαιμόνιοι πανδημεὶ πορθοῦσι




1στάσεις P, Vogel: στάσιν Vulgate, Dindorf, Bekker.180Book XV

the Olympian games, and were masters of the temple 363/2 b.c. and the offerings deposited in it.1 Since the Manti-neians had appropriated for their own private uses a large number of the dedications, they were eager as transgressors for the war against the Eleians to continue, in order to avoid, if peace were restored, giving an account of their expenditures.2 But since the rest of the Arcadians wished to make peace, they stirred up strife against their fellow countrymen. Two parties accordingly sprang up, one headed by Tegea, and the other by Mantineia. Their quarrel assumed such proportions that they resorted to a decision by arms, and the Tegeans, having sent ambassadors to the Boeotians, won assistance for themselves, for the Boeotians appointed Epameinondas general, gave him a large army, and dispatched him to aid the Tegeans.3 The Mantineians, terrified at the army from Boeotia and the reputation of Epameinondas, sent envoys to the bitterest enemies of the Boeotians, the Athenians and the Lacedaemonians, and prevailed upon them to fight on their side.4 And when both peoples had quickly sent in response strong armies, many heavy engagements took place in the Peloponnesus. Indeed the Lacedaemonians, living near at hand, immediately invaded Arcadia, but Epameinondas, advancing at this juncture with his army and being not far from Mantineia, learned from the inhabitants that the Lacedaemonians, in full force, were plundering the territory



1For the use of the treasure see Cary, Cambridge Ancient
History, 6. 98, and for the gold coins issued in the name of
Pisa see op. cit., Volume of Plates, ii. 6. d.2Diodorus completely reverses the rôle of Mantineia in the matter of the use of the treasures of Olympia. Mantineia, according to Xenophon, Hell. 7. 4. 33, protested against this and headed the party eager to make peace with Elis. The quarrel over the appropriation of sacred money brought to light the fundamental split in Arcadian politics.3See Xenophon, Hell. 7. 4. 34, 35.4See Xenophon, Hell. 7. 5. 3.181