Diodorus of Sicily

χειροποίητον,1 ὑπὸ ὀργάνων δέ τινων χειροποιήτων ἐξαιρομένων
8τῶν νεκρῶν δεχόμενοι τὰς ταφάς. κατὰ
δὲ τὴν ἄκραν ταύτην ἦσαν καταλύσεις βασιλικαὶ
καὶ στρατηγικαὶ πλείους πολυτελεῖς ταῖς κατασκευαῖς
καὶ θησαυροὶ πρὸς τὴν τῶν χρημάτων
παραφυλακὴν εὐθέτως κατεσκευασμένοι.
72. Ὁ δ᾿ Ἀλέξανδρος ἐπινίκια τῶν κατορθωμάτων
ἐπιτελῶν θυσίας τε μεγαλοπρεπεῖς τοῖς θεοῖς
συνετέλεσεν καὶ τῶν φίλων λαμπρὰς ἑστιάσεις ἐποιήσατο.
καὶ δή ποτε τῶν ἑταίρων εὐωχουμένων
καὶ τοῦ μὲν πότου προβαίνοντος, τῆς δὲ μέθης
προϊούσης κατέσχε λύσσα ἐπὶ πολὺ τὰς ψυχὰς τῶν
2οἰνωμένων. ὅτε δὴ καὶ μία τῶν παρουσῶν γυναικῶν,
ὄνομα μὲν Θαΐς, Ἀττικὴ δὲ τὸ γένος,
εἶπεν κάλλιστον Ἀλεξάνδρῳ τῶν κατὰ τὴν Ἀσίαν
πεπραγμένων ἔσεσθαι, ἐὰν κωμάσας μετ᾿ αὐτῶν
ἐμπρήσῃ τὰ βασίλεια καὶ τὰ Περσῶν περιβόητα γυναικῶν
χεῖρες ἐν βραχεῖ καιρῷ ποιήσωσιν ἄφαντα.
3τούτων δὲ ῥηθέντων εἰς ἄνδρας νέους καὶ διὰ τὴν
μέθην ἀλόγως μετεωριζομένους, ὡς εἰκός, ἄγειν τις
ἀνεβόησε καὶ δᾷδας ἅπτειν καὶ τὴν εἰς τὰ τῶν Ἑλλήνων
ἱερὰ παρανομίαν ἀμύνασθαι παρεκελεύετο.
4συνεπευφημούντων δὲ καὶ ἄλλων καὶ λεγόντων μόνῳ
τὴν πρᾶξιν ταύτην προσήκειν Ἀλεξάνδρῳ καὶ
τοῦ βασιλέως συνεξαρθέντος τοῖς λόγοις πάντες
ἀνεπήδησαν ἐκ τοῦ πότου καὶ τὸν ἐπινίκιον κῶμον
ἄγειν Διονύσῳ παρήγγειλαν.
5Ταχὺ δὲ πλήθους λαμπάδων ἀθροισθέντος καὶ γυναικῶν



1Post would delete as tautological, and I have omitted it
in the translation.324Book XVII

access but receive the sarcophagi of the dead which 330/29 b.c. are lifted by certain mechanical hoists. Scattered about the royal terrace were residences of the kings and members of the royal family as well as quarters for the great nobles,1 all luxuriously furnished, and buildings suitably made for guarding the royal treasure.
72. Alexander held games in honour of his victories. He performed costly sacrifices to the gods and entertained his friends bountifully. While they were feasting and the drinking was far advanced, as they began to be drunken a madness took possession of the minds of the intoxicated guests.2 At this point one of the women present, Thaïs by name and Attic by origin, said that for Alexander it would be the finest of all his feats in Asia if he joined them in a triumphal procession, set fire to the palaces, and permitted women’s hands in a minute to extinguish the famed accomplishments of the Persians. This was said to men who were still young and giddy with wine, and so, as would be expected, someone shouted out to form the comus and to light torches, and urged all to take vengeance for the destruction of the Greek temples.3 Others took up the cry and said that this was a deed worthy of Alexander alone. When the king had caught fire at their words, all leaped up from their couches and passed the word along to form a victory procession in honour of Dionysus.
Promptly many torches were gathered. Female


1Or, literally, generals.2Arrian (3. 18. 11) barely mentions the burning of Persepolis, but the story of Thai’s was a popular one. It is told in substantially this form by Curtius (5. 7) and Plutarch (Alexander, 38). See Addenda.3That is, in the invasions of Greece by Dareius and Xerxes. Cp. Book 16. 89. 2.325