Diodorus of Sicily

σῖτον εἰσάγεσθαι προσεκαρτέρησε μὲν
ἐνιαυτὸν καὶ τρεῖς μῆνας, εἰς ἔνδειαν δὲ δεινὴν
ἀγαγὼν τοὺς ἐγκατακεκλεισμένους τοῖς μὲν παρὰ
Πτολεμαίου στρατιώταις συνεχώρησεν ἀπελθεῖν
ἔχουσι τὰ ἑαυτῶν, τὴν δὲ πόλιν δι᾿ ὁμολογίας παραλαβὼν
φρουρὰν τὴν διαφυλάξουσαν εἰς αὐτὴν
εἰσήγαγεν.
62. Ἅμα δὲ τούτοις πραττομένοις Πτολεμαῖος
μὲν ἀκούσας τὰ δεδογμένα τοῖς μετ᾿ Ἀντιγόνου
Μακεδόσι περὶ τῆς τῶν Ἑλλήνων ἐλευθερίας ἔγραψε
καὶ αὐτὸς τὰ παραπλήσια, βουλόμενος εἰδέναι
τοὺς Ἕλληνας ὅτι φροντίζει τῆς αὐτονομίας αὐτῶν
2οὐχ ἧττον Ἀντιγόνου· οὐ γὰρ μικρὰν ῥοπὴν ὁρῶντες
οὖσαν ἑκάτεροι προσλαβέσθαι τὴν τῶν Ἑλλήνων
εὔνοιαν διημιλλῶντο πρὸς ἀλλήλους περὶ τῆς
εἰς τούτους εὐεργεσίας. προσελάβετο δ᾿ εἰς τὴν
συμμαχίαν καὶ τὸν τῆς Καρίας σατράπην Ἄσανδρον,1
ἰσχύσοντα καὶ πόλεις ἔχοντα τεταγμένας ὑφ᾿
3ἑαυτὸν οὐκ ὀλίγας. προαπεσταλκὼς δὲ τοῖς ἐν
Κύπρῳ βασιλεῦσι στρατιώτας τρισχιλίους ἐξέπεμψε
τότε δύναμιν ἁδράν, σπεύδων συναναγκάσαι τοὺς
ἐναντιοπραγοῦντας ποιεῖν τὸ προστασσόμενον.
4Μυρμιδόνα μὲν οὖν τὸν Ἀθηναῖον ἀπέστειλε μετὰ
στρατιωτῶν μυρίων, Πολύκλειτον δὲ μετὰ νεῶν
ἑκατόν, τῶν δὲ πάντων στρατηγὸν Μενέλαον τὸν
ἀδελφόν. οὗτοι δὲ πλεύσαντες εἰς Κύπρον κἀκεῖ
καταλαβόντες Σέλευκον μετὰ τοῦ στόλου συνήδρευσαν
5βουλευόμενοι τί χρὴ πράττειν. ἔδοξεν οὖν αὐτοῖς
Πολύκλειτον μετὰ πεντήκοντα νεῶν πλεῖν εἰς
Πελοπόννησον καὶ διαπολεμεῖν τοῖς περὶ Ἀριστόδημον

1Ἄσανδρον Wesseling, cp. Books 18. 3. 1, 39. 6; 19. 57. 1:
Κάσανδρον.400Book XIX

the sea and preventing food from being 315 b.c. brought in, yet after he had reduced the besieged to extreme want, he permitted the soldiers who had come from Ptolemy to depart each with his own possessions; but when the city capitulated, he introduced into it a garrison to watch it closely.1
62. While these things were going on, Ptolemy, who had heard what had been decreed by the Macedonians with Antigonus in regard to the freedom of the Greeks, published a similar decree himself, since he wished the Greeks to know that he was no less interested in their autonomy than was Antigonus. Each of them, indeed, perceiving that it was a matter of no little moment to gain the goodwill of the Greeks, rivalled the other in conferring favours upon this people. Ptolemy also brought into his alliance Asander, satrap of Caria, who was strong and had a considerable number of cities subject to him. To the kings on Cyprus, to whom he had previously sent three thousand soldiers, he now dispatched a strong army, for he was anxious to force those who were opposing him to carry out his commands. Myrmidon the Athenian, therefore, was sent with ten thousand men, and Polycleitus with a hundred ships, while Menelaüis, his own brother, was made commander of the whole force. When these had sailed to Cyprus and there had found Seleucus and his fleet, they met together and considered what they ought to do. They decided that Polycleitus with fifty ships should sail to the Peloponnesus and carry on the war against

1Tyre capitulated in 314.401