Diodorus of Sicily

μὲν τῶν Μακεδόνων ὀλιγότητος καταφρονήσαντες,
τὸ δὲ πλῆθος τῆς τῶν Περσῶν στρατιᾶς καταπεπληγμένοι
καταλιπόντες τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον προσέθεντο
τῷ Δαρείῳ καὶ τάς τε τροφὰς καὶ τὴν ἄλλην
παρασκευὴν μετὰ πολλῆς προθυμίας ἐχορήγουν τοῖς
Πέρσαις καὶ διὰ τῆς ἰδίας κρίσεως προεσήμαινον
τοῖς βαρβάροις τὴν νίκην. ὁ δ᾿ Ἀλέξανδρος τὴν
μὲν Ἰσσὸν πόλιν ἀξιόλογον καταπληξάμενος ἐχειρώσατο.
33. Τῶν δὲ κατασκόπων ἀπαγγειλάντων αὐτῷ
τριάκοντα σταδίους ἀπέχειν τὸν Δαρεῖον καὶ συντεταγμένῃ
τῇ δυνάμει προσιέναι καταπληκτικῶς,
ὑπολαβὼν παρὰ τῶν θεῶν αὐτῷ δεδόσθαι τὸν
καιρὸν ὥστε μιᾷ παρατάξει νικήσαντα καταλῦσαι
τὴν Περσῶν ἡγεμονίαν τοὺς μὲν στρατιώτας τοῖς
οἰκείοις λόγοις παρεκάλεσεν ἐπὶ τὸν περὶ τῶν ὅλων
ἀγῶνα, τὰ δὲ τάγματα τῶν στρατιωτῶν καὶ τὰς
τῶν ἱππέων εἴλας οἰκείως τοῖς ὑποκειμένοις τόποις
διατάξας τοὺς μὲν ἱππεῖς ἐπέστησε1 πρὸ πάσης τῆς
στρατιᾶς, τὴν δὲ τῶν πεζῶν φάλαγγα κατόπιν
2ἐφεδρεύειν προσέταξεν. αὐτὸς δὲ προηγούμενος
τοῦ δεξιοῦ μέρους ἀπήντα τοῖς πολεμίοις, ἔχων
μεθ᾿ ἑαυτοῦ τοὺς κρατίστους τῶν ἱππέων· τὸ δ᾿
εὐώνυμον μέρος ἐπεῖχον οἱ τῶν Θετταλῶν ἱππεῖς,
πολὺ τῶν ἄλλων διαφέροντες ταῖς τε ἀνδραγαθίαις
3καὶ ταῖς ἐμπειρίαις. ὡς δ᾿ αἱ δυνάμεις ἐντὸς βέλους
ἐγίνοντο, τοῖς μὲν περὶ τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον ἐπέρριψαν
οἱ βάρβαροι τοσοῦτον πλῆθος βελῶν ὥστε διὰ τὴν



1ἐπέστησε| ἔστησε Bekker.208Book XVII

the country, who had little respect for the small 333/2 b.c. numbers of the Macedonians but were much impressed with the great size of the Persian army, abandoned Alexander and came over to Dareius. They brought the Persians food and other materials with great goodwill, and mentally predicted victory for them. Alexander, however, occupied Issus, a considerable city, which was terrified into submission.
33. When his scouts reported that Dareius was only thirty stades away1 and advancing in alarming fashion with his forces drawn up for battle, a frightening spectacle, Alexander grasped that this was a god-given opportunity to destroy the Persian power in a single victory. He roused his soldiers with appropriate words for a decisive effort and marshalled the battalions of foot and the squadrons of horse appropriately to the location He set the cavalry along the front of the whole army, and ordered the infantry phalanx to remain in reserve behind it. He himself advanced at the head of the right wing to the encounter, having with him the best of the mounted troops. The Thessalian horse was on the left, and this was outstanding in bravery and skill. When the armies were within missile range, the Persians launched at Alexander such a shower of missiles that

1A little less than four miles (Curtius, 3. 8. 23). Of all the historians, Diodorus alone fails to state that Dareius occupied Issus in Alexander’s rear, and his narrative is very conventional. Actually, Dareius established a fortified line along the north bank of the river Pinarus, and Alexander was compelled to turn the position by a movement through the hills to the east. Cp. Polynias, 1:2. 17–23: Curtius, 3. 8–11. 15; Justin, 11. 9. 1–9; Plutarch, Alexander, 20. 1–5; Arrian, 2. 8–11. The battle was fought in the Attic month Maimacterion, perhaps in November, 333 b.c. (Arrian, 2. 11. 10), or somewhat earlier (M. J. Fontana, Kokalos, 2 (1956), 47).209