Diodorus of Sicily
3ἐταράττετο. διόπερ ἀγωνιῶν ὑπὲρ τῆς παιδοποιίας
ἔδωκεν ἐντολὰς Καρχηδονίοις τισὶ θεωροῖς ἀναγομένοις
εἰς Δελφοὺς ἐπερωτῆσαι τὸν θεὸν περὶ τοῦ
γεννηθησομένου1 βρέφους. ὧν ἐπιμελῶν τὸ παρακληθὲν
πραξάντων ἐξέπεσε χρησμὸς ὅτι μεγάλων
ἀτυχημάτων ὁ γεννηθεὶς αἴτιος ἔσται Καρχηδονίοις
4καὶ πάσῃ Σικελίᾳ. ἃ δὴ πυθόμενος καὶ φοβηθεὶς
ἐξέθηκε τὸ παιδίον δημοσίᾳ καὶ τοὺς τηρήσοντας
ἵνα τελευτήσῃ παρακατέστησεν. διελθουσῶν δέ τινων
ἡμερῶν τὸ μὲν οὐκ ἀπέθνησκεν, οἱ τεταγμένοι
5δ᾿ ἐπὶ τῆς φυλακῆς ὠλιγώρουν. καθ᾿ ὃν δὴ χρόνον
ἡ μήτηρ νυκτὸς παρελθοῦσα λάθρᾳ τὸ παιδίον
ἀνείλετο καὶ πρὸς αὑτὴν μὲν οὐκ ἀπήνεγκε, φοβουμένη
τὸν ἄνδρα, πρὸς δὲ τὸν ἀδελφὸν Ἡρακλείδην
καταθεμένη προσηγόρευσεν Ἀγαθοκλέα, τὴν ὁμωνυμίαν
6εἰς τὸν ἑαυτῆς ἀνενέγκασα πατέρα. παρ᾿
ᾧ τρεφόμενος ὁ παῖς ἐξέβη τήν τε ὄψιν εὐπρεπὴς
καὶ τὸ σῶμα εὔρωστος πολὺ μᾶλλον ἢ κατὰ τὴν
ἡλικίαν. ἑπταετοῦς δ᾿ ὄντος αὐτοῦ παρακληθεὶς ὁ
Καρκῖνος ὑφ᾿ Ἡρακλείδου πρός τινα θυσίαν καὶ
θεασάμενος τὴν Ἀγαθοκλέα παίζοντα μετά τινων
ἡλικιωτῶν ἐθαύμαζε τό τε κάλλος καὶ τὴν ῥώμην,
τῆς τε γυναικὸς εἰπούσης ὅτι τηλικοῦτος ἂν ἦν ὁ
ἐκτεθείς, εἴπερ ἐτράφη, μεταμέλεσθαί τε ἔφη τοῖς
7παραχθεῖσι καὶ συνεχῶς ἐδάκρυεν. εἶθ᾿ ἡ μὲν
γνοῦσα τὴν ὁρμὴν τἀνδρὸς συμφωνοῦσαν τοῖς πεπραγμένοις
ἐξέθηκε πᾶσαν τὴν ἀλήθειαν. ὁ δ᾿
ἀσμένως προσδεξάμενος τοὺς λόγους τὸν μὲν υἱὸν
ἀπέλαβε, τοὺς δὲ Καρχηδονίους φοβούμενος φοβούμενος μετῴκησεν1
1γεννηθησομένου Fischer: γεννησομένου.230Book XIX

Being thus made anxious about the begetting of the 317 b.c. child, he instructed certain Carthaginian envoys who were setting out for Delphi to ask the god about his expected son. They duly carried out their commission, and an oracle was given forth that the child whom he had begotten would be the cause of great misfortunes to the Carthaginians and to all Sicily. Learning this and being frightened, Carcinus exposed the infant in a public place and set men to watch him that he might die.1 After some days had passed the child had not died, and those who had been set to watch him began to be negligent. At this time, then, the mother came secretly by night and took the child; and, although, fearing her husband, she did not bring him to her own home, she left him with her brother Heracleides and called him Agathocles, the name of her own father. The boy was brought up in the home of Heracleides and became much fairer in face and stronger in body than was to be expected at his age. When the child was seven years old,2 Carcinus was invited by Heracleides to some festival and, seeing Agathocles playing with some children of his own age, wondered at his beauty and strength. On the woman’s remarking that the child who had been exposed would have been of the same age if he had been brought up, he said that he regretted what he had done and began to weep incessantly. Then she, seeing that the desire of the man was in harmony with her own past act, disclosed the entire truth. Gladly hearing her words, he accepted his son, but in fear of the Carthaginians removed to Syracuse with


1Agathocles was born about 361 (cp. Book 21. 16. 5).2But according to Polybius (12. 15. 6), Agathocles was eighteen when he went to Syracuse, an event placed by Diodorus immediately after the recognition.231