Diodorus of Sicily

τῶν φίλων ἀποβαλὼν καὶ στρατηγὸν μὲν
ἕτερον ἀξιόχρεων οὐκ ἔχων, αὐτὸς δ᾿ οὐ δυνάμενος
φέρειν τὸ τοῦ πολέμου βάρος ἐξέπεμψε πρεσβευτὰς
πρὸς τὸν Δίωνα, τὸ μὲν πρῶτον τὴν ἡμίσειαν τῆς
ἀρχῆς παραδιδούς, ὕστερον δὲ βουλόμενος ὅλην
ἐγχειρίζειν.
17. Τοῦ δὲ Δίωνος ἀποκριθέντος ὅτι τοῖς Συρακοσίοις
δίκαιόν ἐστι παραδιδόναι τὴν ἀκρόπολιν
ἐπί τισιν ἐξαιρέτοις χρήμασι καὶ τιμαῖς, ὁ μὲν
Διονύσιος ἕτοιμος ἦν παραδιδόναι τὴν ἄκραν τῷ
δήμῳ ὥστε τοὺς μισθοφόρους καὶ τὰ χρήματα
λαβόντα εἰς τὴν Ἰταλίαν μεταστῆναι, ὁ δὲ Δίων
συνεβούλευε τοῖς Συρακοσίοις δέχεσθαι τὰ διδόμενα.
ὁ δὲ δῆμος ὑπὸ τῶν1 ἀκαίρων δημηγόρων
πεισθεὶς ἀντεῖπε, νομίζων κατὰ κράτος ἐκπολιορκήσειν
2τὸν τύραννον. μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα ὁ μὲν Διονύσιος
τοὺς ἀρίστους τῶν μισθοφόρων ἀπέλιπεν φυλάξοντας
τὴν ἄκραν, αὐτὸς δ᾿ ἐνθέμενος τὰ χρήματα καὶ
πᾶσαν τὴν βασιλικὴν κατασκευὴν ἔλαθεν ἐκπλεύσας
3καὶ κατῆρεν εἰς τὴν Ἰταλίαν. οἱ δὲ Συρακόσιοι
πρὸς ἀλλήλους ἐστασίασαν, τῶν μὲν οἰομένων δεῖν
τὴν στρατηγίαν καὶ τὴν τῶν ὅλων ἐξουσίαν ἐγχειρίζειν
Ἡρακλείδῃ διὰ τὸ τοῦτον δοκεῖν μηδέποτ᾿
ἂν ἐπιθέσθαι τυραννίδι, τῶν δὲ ἀποφαινομένων τὸν
Δίωνα δεῖν ἔχειν τὴν τῶν ἁπάντων ἡγεμονίαν.
πρὸς δὲ τούτοις πολλῶν ὀφειλομένων μισθῶν τοῖς
ἐκ Πελοποννήσου ξένοις τοῖς ἠλευθερωκόσι τὰς
Συρακούσσας καὶ χρημάτων σπανιζούσης τῆς πόλεως,
οἱ μὲν μισθοφόροι τῶν χρημάτων ἀποστερούμενοι
συνεστράφησαν, ὄντες πλείους τῶν τρισχιλίων
πάντες δ᾿ ἐπίλεκτοι ταῖς ἀρεταῖς καὶ διὰ τὴν ἄθλησιν
τῶν πολεμικῶν ἔργων διαπεπονημένοι πολὺ
1Fischer would prefer ὑπό τινων.284Book XVI

who had lost the most efficient of his friends 356/5 b.c. and had no other general of repute, being himself unable to sustain the burden of the war, sent out ambassadors to Dion, first offering him the half of his power, but later consenting to place the whole of it in his hands.
17. But when Dion replied that it was only fair to surrender to the Syracusans the acropolis with the reservation of certain property and privileges, Dionysius was ready to surrender the citadel to the people on the condition that he took his mercenaries and his property and went abroad to Italy, and Dion counselled the Syracusans to accept his offer. But the people, persuaded by their inopportune demagogues, refused, believing that they could forcibly make the tyrant surrender by siege. Thereafter Dionysius left the best of his mercenaries to guard the citadel, while he himself, putting his possessions and all his royal paraphernalia on board ship, sailed off secretly and put ashore in Italy. But the Syracusans were divided into two factions, some being of the opinion that they should entrust the generalship and supreme power in the state to Heracleides because it was believed that he would never aim at tyrannical power, and the others declaring that Dion should have the supremacy over the entire government. Furthermore, large Sums for wages were due to the Peloponnesian mercenaries who had liberated Syracuse and the city was short of funds, so the mercenaries, deprived of their money, banded together in excess of three thousand, and since all had been selected for meritorious conduct and because of their training in actual warfare were hardened veterans, they were far


285