Diodorus of Sicily

πρεσβείαν ἐξέπεμψαν, ἀξιοῦντες βοηθεῖν αὐτοῖς
κατὰ τὸ διάγραμμα τὸ γραφὲν ὑπὲρ τῆς τῶν Ἑλλήνων
αὐτονομίας· αὐτοὶ δὲ πλεονάκις ἐκκλησίαν
συναγαγόντες ἐβουλεύοντο πῶς χρηστέον εἴη περὶ
4τοῦ πρὸς Νικάνορα πολέμου. τούτων δ᾿ ἔτι περὶ
ταῦτ᾿ ἀσχολουμένων ὁ Νικάνωρ, πολλοὺς ἐξενολογηκώς,
λάθρᾳ νυκτὸς ἐξαγαγὼν τοὺς στρατιώτας
κατελάβετο τὰ τείχη τοῦ Πειραιέως καὶ τοῦ λιμένος
τὰ κλεῖθρα. οἱ δὲ Ἀθηναῖοι τὴν μὲν Μουνυχίαν
οὐκ ἀπειληφότες, τὸν δὲ Πειραιᾶ προσαποβεβληκότες
5χαλεπῶς ἔφερον. διόπερ ἑλόμενοι πρέσβεις
τῶν ἐπιφανῶν ἀνδρῶν καὶ φιλίαν ἐχόντων πρὸς
Νικάνορα Φωκίωνα τὸν Φώκου καὶ Κόνωνα τὸν
Τιμοθέου καὶ Κλέαρχον τὸν Ναυσικλέους ἐξαπέστειλαν,
ἐγκαλοῦντες μὲν ἐπὶ τοῖς πεπραγμένοις,
ἀξιοῦντες δὲ ἀποδοῦναι τὴν αὐτονομίαν αὐτοῖς κατὰ
6τὸ γεγενημένον διάταγμα. ὁ δὲ Νικάνωρ ἀποκρίσεις
ἔδωκε πρεσβεύειν αὐτοὺς πρὸς Κάσανδρον·
ὑπ᾿ ἐκείνου γὰρ καθεσταμένον φρούραρχον μηδαμῶς
ἔχειν ἐξουσίαν ἰδιοπραγεῖν.
65. Κατὰ δὲ τοῦτον τὸν καιρὸν ἧκεν ἐπιστολὴ
Νικάνορι παρ᾿ Ὀλυμπιάδος, ἐν ᾗ προσέταττεν
ἀποδοῦναι Ἀθηναίοις τήν τε Μουνυχίαν καὶ τὸν
Πειραιᾶ. ὁ δὲ Νικάνωρ ἀκούων ὅτι μέλλουσιν οἱ
βασιλεῖς καὶ Πολυπέρχων κατάγειν εἰς Μακεδονίαν
τὴν Ὀλυμπιάδα καὶ τοῦ τε παιδίου τὴν ἐπιμέλειαν
ἐκείνῃ παραδιδόναι καὶ τὴν προϋπάρχουσαν ἀποδοχὴν
καὶ τιμὴν Ἀλεξάνδρου ζῶντος ἀποκαθιστάναι
Ὀλυμπιάδι, φοβηθεὶς ἐπηγγείλατο μὲν παραδώσειν,
ἀεὶ δὲ προφάσεις τινὰς ποιούμενος παρῆγε



188Book XVIII

them to send aid in accordance with the edict that had 318 b.c. been issued concerning the autonomy of the Greeks1; and they themselves, holding frequent meetings of the Assembly, considered what ought to be done about the war with Nicanor. While they were still engaged in this discussion, Nicanor, who had hired many mercenaries, made a secret sally by night and took the walls of the Piraeus and the harbour boom. The Athenians, who not only had failed to recapture Munychia but also had lost the Piraeus, were angry. They therefore selected as envoys some of the prominent citizens who were friends of Nicanor—Phocion the son of Phocus, Conon the son of Timotheüs,2 and Clearchus the son of Nausicles—and sent them to Nicanor to complain about what he had done and also to request him to restore their autonomy according to the edict that had been issued. Nicanor, however, answered that they should direct their mission to Cassander, since as a garrison commander appointed by Cassander he himself had no power of independent action.
65. At this time a letter came to Nicanor from Olympias, in which she ordered him to restore Munychia and the Piraeus to the Athenians. Since Nicanor had heard that the kings and Polyperchon were going to bring Olympias back to Macedonia, entrust to her the upbringing of the boy, and re-establish her in the state and honour that she had enjoyed during the lifetime of Alexander,3 he was frightened and promised to make the restoration, but he avoided the fulfilment of the promise by constantly making excuses.


1Cp. chaps. 55, 56.2Timotheüs was a leading statesman of Athens in the second quarter of the century. His father, Conon, had restored the walls of the Piraeus in 393 b.c. Nausicles was a statesman of the second rank and a supporter of Demosthenes.3Cp. chap. 57. 2.189