Diodorus of Sicily

πυκνότητα τῶν βαλλομένων ἀλλήλοις συγκρουόντων
4ἀσθενεστέρας γίνεσθαι τὰς πληγάς. τῶν δὲ
σαλπικτῶν παρ᾿ ἀμφοτέροις τὸ πολεμικὸν σημαινόντων
οἱ Μακεδόνες πρῶτοι συναλαλάξαντες βοὴν
ἐξαίσιον ἐποίησαν, μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα τῶν βαρβάρων
ἀντιφθεγξαμένων συνήχησε μὲν ἡ σύνεγγυς ὀρεινὴ
πᾶσα, τὸ δὲ μέγεθος τῆς βοῆς ὑπερῆρε τὴν προγεγενημένην
κραυγὴν ὡς ἂν πεντήκοντα μυριάδων
μιᾷ φωνῇ συνηχουσῶν.
5Ὁ δ᾿ Ἀλέξανδρος πάντῃ τὴν ὄψιν βάλλων καὶ
σπεύδων κατιδεῖν τὸν Δαρεῖον ἅμα τῷ κατανοῆσαι
παραχρῆμα μετὰ τῶν περὶ αὐτὸν ἱππέων ἐπ᾿ αὐτὸν
ἐφέρετο τὸν βασιλέα, σπεύδων οὐχ οὕτω καταπροτερῆσαι
τῶν Περσῶν ὡς τὸ δι᾿ αὑτοῦ περιποιήσασθαι
6τὴν νίκην. ἅμα δὲ τούτῳ καὶ τῶν ἄλλων
ἀπάντων ἱππέων συμπεσόντων ἀλλήλοις καὶ πολλοῦ
φόνου γινομένου ἡ μὲν μάχη διὰ τὰς τῶν ἀγωνιζομένων
ἀρετὰς ἀμφίδοξον εἶχε τὴν τῶν ὅλων κρίσιν·
ἐταλαντεύετο γὰρ δεῦρο κἀκεῖσε, τῆς τροπῆς ἐναλλὰξ
7γινομένης. οὔτε γὰρ ἀκοντίσας οὔτε πατάξας
οὐδεὶς ἄπρακτον ἔσχε τὴν πληγὴν ὡς ἂν διὰ τὸ
πλῆθος ἑτοίμου τοῦ σκοποῦ κειμένου. διὸ καὶ
πολλοὶ1 τραύμασιν ἐναντίοις περιτυγχάνοντες ἔπιπτον
καὶ μέχρι τῆς ἐσχάτης ἀναπνοῆς θυμομαχοῦντες
τὸ ζῆν πρότερον ἢ τὴν ἀρετὴν ἐξέλειπον.
34. Οἱ δὲ ἑκάστης τάξεως ἡγεμόνες τῶν ὑποτεταγμένων
προαγωνιζόμενοι διὰ τῆς ἰδίας ἀρετῆς
τοὺς πολλοὺς ἀνδραγαθεῖν προετρέψαντο. διὸ καὶ
παρῆν ὁρᾶν πολλὰς μὲν διαθέσεις τραυμάτων γινομένας,
ποικίλους δὲ καὶ μεγάλους ἀγῶνας συνισταμένους
2ὑπὲρ τῆς νίκης. Ὀξάθρης δ᾿ ὁ Πέρσης,
ἀδελφὸς μὲν ὢν Δαρείου, κατὰ δὲ τὴν ἀνδρείαν
1πολλοὶ F, corrected to πολλοῖς, as in RX.210Book XVII

they collided with one another in the air, so thickly 333/2 b.c. did they fly, and weakened the force of their impact. On both sides the trumpeters blew the signal of attack and then the Macedonians first raised an unearthly shout followed by the Persians answering, so that the whole hillside bordering the battlefield echoed back the sound, and this second roar in volume surpassed the Macedonian warcry as five hundred thousand men shouted with one voice.1
Alexander cast his glance in all directions in his anxiety to see Dareius, and as soon as he had identified him, he drove hard with his cavalry at the king himself, wanting not so much to defeat the Persians as to win the victory with his own hands. By now the rest of the cavalry on both sides was engaged and many were killed as the battle raged indecisively because of the evenly matched fighting qualities of the two sides. The scales inclined now one way, now another, as the lines swayed alternately forward and backward. No javelin cast or sword thrust lacked its effect as the crowded ranks offered a ready target. Many fell with wounds received as they faced the enemy and their fury held to the last breath, so that life failed them sooner than courage.
34. The officers of each unit fought valiantly at the head of their men and by their example inspired courage in the ranks. One could see many forms of wounds inflicted, furious struggles of all sorts inspired by the will to win. The Persian Oxathres was the brother of Dareius and a man highly praised for his



1This is the total Persian strength as given above, chap. 31. 2.211