Diodorus of Sicily
3τοῖς τῶν κρατούντων γόνασιν ἀγεννῶς. ἀλλ᾿ οὔτε
τὸ τῆς ἀρετῆς πάθος ἠλεεῖτο παρὰ τοῖς πολεμίοις
οὔτε τὸ τῆς ἡμέρας μῆκος ἤρκει πρὸς τὴν ὠμότητα
τῆς τιμωρίας, πᾶσα δὲ ἡ πόλις ἐξεφορεῖτο παιδίων
ὁμοῦ καὶ παρθένων ἑλκομένων καὶ τὸ τῆς τεκούσης
οἰκτρὸν ἐπιβοωμένων ὄνομα.
Καθόλου1 δὲ τῶν οἴκων σὺν ὅλαις ταῖς συγγενείαις
ἁρπαζομένων πάνδημος ὑπῆρχε τῆς πόλεως ἀνδραποδισμός.
4τῶν δὲ ὑπολελειμμένων Θηβαίων οἱ
μὲν κατατετρωμένοι τὰ σώματα καὶ λιποψυχοῦντες
συνεπλέκοντο τοῖς πολεμίοις, συναποθνήσκοντες τῇ
τῶν ἐχθρῶν ἀπωλείᾳ, οἱ δὲ κλάσματι δόρατος
ἐρειδόμενοι συνήντων τοῖς ἐπιφερομένοις καὶ διαγωνιζόμενοι
τὸν ὕστατον ἀγῶνα προετίμων τὴν
5ἐλευθερίαν τῆς σωτηρίας. πολλοῦ δὲ φόνου γενομένου
καὶ τῆς πόλεως κατὰ πάντα τόπον νεκρῶν
πληρουμένης οὐκ ἦν ὅστις ἰδὼν οὐκ ἂν ἠλέησε τὰς
τύχας τῶν ἀκληρούντων. καὶ γὰρ τῶν Ἑλλήνων
Θεσπιεῖς καὶ Πλαταιεῖς, ἔτι δ᾿ Ὀρχομένιοι καί
τινες ἄλλοι τῶν ἀλλοτρίως διακειμένων πρὸς τοὺς
Θηβαίους συστρατευόμενοι τῷ βασιλεῖ συνεισέπεσον2
εἰς τὴν πόλιν καὶ τὴν ἰδίαν ἔχθραν ἐν τοῖς τῶν
ἠτυχηκότων ἀκληρήμασιν ἐναπεδείκνυντο.
6Διὸ καὶ πάθη πολλὰ καὶ δεινὰ κατὰ τὴν πόλιν
ὁρᾶν ἦν γινόμενα· Ἕλληνες γὰρ ὑφ᾿ Ἑλλήνων
ἀνηλεῶς ἀνῃροῦντο καὶ συγγενεῖς ὑπὸ τῶν κατὰ
γένος προσηκόντων ἐφονεύοντο, μηδεμίαν ἐντροπὴν
τῆς ὁμοφώνου διαλέκτου παρεχομένης. τέλος δὲ
τῆς νυκτὸς ἐπικαταλαβούσης αἱ μὲν οἰκίαι διηρπάγησαν,
τέκνα δὲ καὶ γυναῖκες καὶ οἱ γεγηρακότες
εἰς τὰ ἱερὰ καταπεφευγότες μετὰ τῆς ἐσχάτης
ὕβρεως ἀπήγοντο.
1So Rhodoman: καθόλων.2So Hertlein: συνέπεσον.154Book XVII

to the knees of their conquerors. But neither did the 335/4 b.c. agony of courage elicit pity from the foe nor did the day’s length suffice for the cruelty of their vengeance. All the city was pillaged. Everywhere boys and girls were dragged into captivity as they wailed piteously the names of their mothers.
In sum, households were seized with all their members, and the city’s enslavement was complete. Of the men who remained, some, wounded and dying, grappled with the foe and were slain themselves as they destroyed their enemy; others, supported only by a shattered spear, went to meet their assailants and, in their supreme struggle, held freedom dearer than life. As the slaughter mounted and every corner of the city was piled high with corpses, no one could have failed to pity the plight of the unfortunates. For even Greeks—Thespians, Plataeans and Orchomenians and some others hostile to the Thebans who had joined the king in the campaign1—invaded the city along with him and now demonstrated their own hatred amid the calamities of the unfortunate victims.
So it was that many terrible things befell the city. Greeks were mercilessly slain by Greeks, relatives were butchered by their own relatives, and even a common dialect induced no pity. In the end, when night finally intervened, the houses had been plundered and children and women and aged persons who had fled into the temples were torn from sanctuary and subjected to outrage without limit.
1Justin (11. 3. 8) names Phocians, Plataeans, Thespians, and Orchomenians; Plutarch (Alexander, 11. 5) and Arrian (1. 8. 8). Phocians and Plataeans only.155