Diodorus of Sicily

καταπονηθέντες, οἱ δ᾿ ἐπὶ τῶν ἐλεφάντων ἐφεστηκότες
τὸ μὲν πρῶτον ἀντεῖχον καὶ διεκαρτέρουν
πανταχόθεν κατατιτρωσκόμενοι, βλάψαι δ᾿ οὐδὲν
6τοὺς πολεμίους δυνάμενοι, ἤδη δ᾿ αὐτῶν καταπονουμένων
ἀνελπίστως ἐπιφανέντες οἱ παρ᾿ Εὐμενοῦς
ἐξήρπασαν αὐτοὺς ἐκ τῶν κινδύνων. μετὰ
δ᾿ ἡμέρας ὀλίγας ἐν τεσσαράκοντα σταδίοις ἀντιστρατοπεδευουσῶν
τῶν δυνάμεων ἐξέταξαν ἀμφότεροι
τὸ στρατόπεδον εἰς μάχην, ὡς περὶ τῶν
ὅλων κρίσεως ἐσομένης.
40. Ἀντίγονος μὲν οὖν τοὺς ἱππεῖς ἐπὶ τὰ κέρατα
διελόμενος τὸ μὲν εὐώνυμον μέρος Πίθωνι παρέδωκε,
τὸ δὲ δεξιὸν τῷ υἱῷ Δημητρίῳ, μεθ᾿ οὗ καὶ
αὐτὸς διαγωνίζεσθαι διεγνώκει· τοὺς δὲ πεζοὺς εἰς
μέσον καταστήσας προέταξε1 παρ᾿ ὅλην τὴν δύναμιν
τοὺς ἐλέφαντας, πληρώσας2 τὰ διαστήματα τοῖς
ψιλικοῖς τάγμασιν. ὁ δὲ πᾶς ἀριθμὸς ἦν αὐτοῦ
τῆς δυνάμεως πεζοὶ μὲν δισμύριοι δισχίλιοι, ἱππεῖς
δ᾿ ἐννακισχίλιοι σὺν τοῖς ἐκ Μηδίας προσκαταγραφεῖσι,
θηρία δὲ ἑξήκοντα καὶ πέντε.
2Ὁ δ᾿ Εὐμενὴς πυθόμενος τὸν Ἀντίγονον ἐπὶ τοῦ
δεξιοῦ κέρατος τετάχθαι μετὰ τῶν ἀρίστων ἱππέων,
καὶ αὐτὸς ἀντετάξατο, ἐπὶ τὸ λαιὸν κέρας ἐπιστήσας
τοὺς ἀρίστους· καὶ γὰρ τῶν σατραπῶν τοὺς
πλείστους ἐνταῦθα κατέστησεν μετὰ τῶν συναγωνιζομένων
αὐτοῖς ἱππέων ἐπιλέκτων καὶ αὐτὸς μετὰ
τούτων ἔμελλε κινδυνεύειν· συνῆν δ᾿ αὐτοῖς καὶ
Μιθριδάτης ὁ Ἀριοβαρζάνου μὲν υἱός, ἀπόγονος δ᾿
ἑνὸς τῶν ἑπτὰ Περσῶν τῶν συγκαθελόντων τὸν

1προέταξε Wesseling, cp. chap. 28. 4: παρέταξε.2τὴν δύναμιν τοὺς ἐλέφαντας, πληρώσας Rhodoman: τὴν δύναμιν τοὺς δ᾿ ἐλέφαντας πληρώσαντες.338Book XIX

numbers; but those who were in charge of the elephants 317/16 b.c. resisted at first and held firm even though they were receiving wounds from all directions and were not able to injure the enemy in return in any way; and then, when they were now becoming exhausted, the troops sent by Eumenes suddenly appeared and rescued them from their danger. A few days later, when the armies were encamped opposite each other at a distance of forty stades,1 each general drew up his army for battle, expecting to decide the issue.
40. Antigonus placed his cavalry on the wings, giving the command of the left to Pithon and that of the right to his own son Demetrius, beside whom he himself planned to fight. He stationed the foot soldiers in the centre and extended the elephants across the whole front, filling the spaces between them with light armed troops. The total number of his army was twenty-two thousand foot, nine thousand horse including the additional troops enlisted in Media, and sixty-five elephants.
When Eumenes learned that Antigonus had taken his place on the right with his best cavalry, he drew up his army against him, stationing his best troops on the left wing. In fact, he placed there most of the satraps with the selected bodies of cavalry that accompanied them in battle, and he himself intended to take part in the fight along with them. There was also present with them Mithridates, the son of Ariobarzanes and a descendant of one of the seven Persians



1About four and a half miles. For the battle cp. Plutarch, Eumenes, 16.339