Diodorus of Sicily

ἄκραν Ἀρμενίαν ἔδωκεν. ἐκ δὲ τῶν ληφθέντων
χρημάτων τῶν μὲν ἱππέων ἑκάστῳ ἓξ μνᾶς ἐδωρήσατο,
τῶν δὲ συμμάχων πέντε, τῶν δ᾿ ἐκ τῆς
φάλαγγος Μακεδόνων δύο, τοὺς δὲ ξένους διμήνου
μισθοφοραῖς ἐτίμησε πάντας.
65. Τοῦ δὲ βασιλέως ἀναζεύξαντος ἐκ τῆς Βαβυλῶνος
καὶ κατὰ τὴν πορείαν ὄντος ἧκον πρὸς αὐτὸν
παρὰ μὲν Ἀντιπάτρου πεμφθέντες ἱππεῖς μὲν
Μακεδόνες πεντακόσιοι, πεζοὶ δὲ ἑξακισχίλιοι, ἐκ
δὲ Θρᾴκης ἱππεῖς μὲν ἑξακόσιοι, Τραλλεῖς1 δὲ
τρισχίλιοι καὶ πεντακόσιοι, ἐκ δὲ Πελοποννήσου
πεζοὶ μὲν τετρακισχίλιοι, ἱππεῖς δὲ βραχὺ λείποντες
τῶν χιλίων, ἐκ δὲ τῆς Μακεδονίας τῶν φίλων τοῦ
βασιλέως υἱοὶ πεντήκοντα πρὸς τὴν σωματοφυλακίαν
2ὑπὸ τῶν πατέρων ἀπεσταλμένοι. ὁ δὲ βασιλεὺς
τούτους παραλαβὼν προῆγε καὶ κατήντησεν
ἑκταῖος εἰς τὴν Σιττακινὴν2 ἐπαρχίαν.
Τῆς δὲ χώρας ταύτης πολλὴν ἀφθονίαν ἐχούσης
τῶν ἐπιτηδείων πάντων ἐν ταύτῃ πλείους ἡμέρας
ἔμεινεν, ἅμα μὲν σπεύδων ἐκ τῆς κατὰ τὴν ὁδοιπορίαν
ταλαιπωρίας ἀναλαβεῖν τὴν δύναμιν, ἅμα δὲ
τῆς στρατιωτικῆς τάξεως διανοούμενος ἐπιμεληθῆναι





1Τραλλεεῖς RX; Τραλεεῖς F.2Σιτακινὴν RXF, but cp. Book 18. 6. 3. The usual spelling
is Σιττακηνὴν.302Book XVII

Armenia as a province to Mithrines, who had surrendered 330/29 b.c. to him the citadel of Sardes.1 From the money which was captured he distributed to each of the cavalrymen six minas, to each of the allied cavalrymen five, and to the Macedonians of the phalanx two, and he gave to all the mercenaries two months’ pay.2
65. After the king had marched out of Babylon and while he was still on the road, there came to him, sent by Antipater, five hundred Macedonian cavalry and six thousand infantry, six hundred Thracian cavalry and three thousand five hundred Trallians, and from the Peloponnese four thousand infantry and little less than a thousand cavalry.3 From Macedonia also came fifty4 sons of the king’s Friends sent by their fathers to serve as bodyguards. The king welcomed all of these, continued his march, and on the sixth day crossed over into the province of Sittacenê.5
This was a rich country abounding in provisions of all sorts, and he lingered here for a number of days, at once anxious to rest his army from the fatigue of their long marches and concerned to review the organization of his army. He wanted to advance some




1Curtius, 5. 1. 44; Arrian, 3. 16. 5. Armenia had not
been and was not to be conquered at this time, and Mithrines
did not enter upon his governorship (Berve, Alexanderreich,
2, no. 524).2Curtius, 5. 1. 45. A mina contained one hundred drach- mae, and was one-sixtieth of a talent. The pay of Alexander’s army is unknown, but that of a cavalryman must have been at least two drachmae a day. IG, ii2. 329 shows that an Athenian hypaspist serving in the League troops with Alexander received a drachma a day from the city. Cp. W. Rüstow, H. Köchly, Geschichte der griechischen Kriegskunst (1852), 262 f.; Berve, Alexanderreich, 1. 193–196.3Curtius (5. 1. 39–42) gives the same figures, with the exception of specifying 380 cavalry. These troops must have been sent by Antipater before trouble was anticipated in Greece. They had been recruited by Amyntas (chap. 49. 1; Curtius, 5. 1. 40). The Trallians were a Thracian people.4The same figure is given by Curtius, 5. 1. 42.5Curtius, 5. 2. 1. This district lay parallel to Babylonia on the left bank of the Tigris.303