Diodorus of Sicily
5Τοῖς δὲ Λακεδαιμονίοις καὶ τοῖς Ἀθηναίοις σπονδὰς
πεποιημένοις ἐν τοῖς ἐπάνω χρόνοις συνέβαινε
μένειν τὴν εἰρήνην μέχρι τῶνδε τῶν καιρῶν. μετὰ
δὲ ταῦτα Σφοδριάδου τοῦ Σπαρτιάτου τεταγμένου
μὲν ἐφ᾿ ἡγεμονίας, φύσει δ᾿ ὄντος μετεώρου καὶ
προπετοῦς, ἔπεισεν αὐτὸν Κλεόμβροτος ὁ βασιλεὺς
τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων ἄνευ τῆς γνώμης τῶν ἐφόρων
6καταλαβέσθαι τὸν Πειραιᾶ. ὁ δὲ Σφοδριάδης ἔχων
στρατιώτας πλείους τῶν μυρίων ἐπεβάλετο μὲν τῆς
νυκτὸς καταλαβέσθαι τὸν Πειραιᾶ· καταφανὴς δὲ
γενόμενος Ἀθηναίοις καὶ διαμαρτὼν τῆς ἐπιβολῆς
ἄπρακτος ἐπανῆλθεν. κατηγορηθεὶς δ᾿ ἐν τῷ συνεδρίῳ
τῶν Σπαρτιατῶν, καὶ συναγωνιστὰς ἔχων
7τοὺς βασιλεῖς, ἀδίκως ἀπελύθη. διόπερ οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι
χαλεπῶς φέροντες ἐπὶ τοῖς γεγονόσιν, ἐψηφίσαντο
λελύσθαι τὰς σπονδὰς ὑπὸ Λακεδαιμονίων.
κρίναντες δὲ πολεμεῖν αὐτοῖς1 στρατηγοὺς τρεῖς
εἵλαντο τοὺς ἐπιφανεστάτους τῶν πολιτῶν, Τιμόθεον
καὶ Χαβρίαν καὶ Καλλίστρατον. ἐψηφίσαντο





1αὐτοῖς] Vogel (cp. chap. 51. 2): αὐτοὺς AJK.26Book XV
The truce which the Lacedaemonians and Athenians 377/6 b.c. had concluded in the earlier period1 remained unshaken up to this time. But now Sphodriades the Spartan, who had been placed in command and was by nature flighty and precipitate, was prevailed upon by Cleombrotus,2 the king of the Lacedaemonians, without the consent of the ephors to occupy the Peiraeus. Sphodriades with more than ten thousand soldiers attempted to occupy the Peiraeus at night,3 but he was detected by the Athenians and, failing in the attempt, returned without accomplishing anything. He was then denounced before the council of the Spartans, but since he had the kings to support him, he got off by a miscarriage of justice.4 As a result the Athenians, much vexed at the occurrence, voted that the truce had been broken by the Lacedaemonians.5 They then decided to make war on them and chose three of their most distinguished citizens as generals, Timotheüs,6 Chabrias, and





1Cp. Book 14. 110. 4.2Other accounts are Xenophon, Hell. 5. 4. 20–21 and
Plutarch, Pelopidas, 14 and Agesilaüs, 24. Diodorus here
as in the case of Phoebidas is suspicious of Spartan policy,
while Xenophon and Plutarch both speak of Thebes as the
instigator of the raid in order to embroil Athens and Sparta.
Again Diodorus seems right in suspecting Sparta (cp. “lei- tende Kreise in Sparta “in Beloch, Griechische Geschichte2, 3. 1. 147 and Judeich, op. cit. 178). The inroad of Sphodrias
(in Diodorus Sphodriades) was made (cp. Pearl Harbor) at the very time when three Spartan ambassadors were in Athens to negotiate. Their promises that Sparta would punish Sphodrias did much to assuage the anger of the Athenians at the moment.3Diodorus recounts the whole war from the raid of Sphodrias to the battle of Naxos under the year 377/6. The raid of Sphodrias probably took place in the spring of 378 when Cleombrotus was operating in Boeotia after the liberation of Thebes (December 379).4See for the influence of Cleombrotus and Archidamus, son of Agesilaüs, in rescuing Sphodrias, Xenophon, l.c. 22–33; Plutarch, Agesilaüs, 25.5Cp. Xenophon, Hell. 5. 4. 34; Plutarch, Pelopidas, 15.6Conon’s son Timotheüs was successful as general and as statesman from this time on till his death in 354.27