Diodorus of Sicily

περὶ αὐτὸν οὔσης οἱ μὲν Λευκανοὶ καταπλαγέντες
φιλίαν ἐποιήσαντο πρὸς τοὺς Ταραντίνους, τῶν δὲ
Μεταποντίνων οὐ προσεχόντων αὐτῷ τοὺς Λευκανοὺς
ἔπεισεν ἐμβαλεῖν εἰς τὴν χώραν καὶ τῷ
καιρῷ συνεπιθέμενος κατεπλήξατο τοὺς Μεταποντίνους.
παρελθὼν δ᾿ εἰς τὴν πόλιν ὡς φίλος ἐπράξατο
μὲν ἀργυρίου τάλαντα πλείω τῶν ἑξακοσίων, διακοσίας
δὲ παρθένους τὰς ἐπιφανεστάτας ἔλαβεν εἰς
ὁμηρίαν, οὐχ οὕτω τῆς περὶ τὴν πίστιν ἀσφαλείας
4χάριν, ὡς τῆς ἰδίας ἕνεκεν λαγνείας. ἀποθέμενος
γὰρ τὴν Λακωνικὴν ἐσθῆτα διετέλει τρυφῶν καὶ
τοὺς πιστεύσαντας αὐτῷ καταδουλούμενος· τηλικαύτας
γὰρ ἔχων δυνάμεις καὶ χορηγίας οὐδὲν τῆς
Σπάρτης ἄξιον ἔπραξεν. ἐπεβάλετο μὲν γὰρ ἐπὶ
τὴν Σικελίαν στρατεύειν, ὡς τὴν τυραννίδα μὲν
καταλύσων τὴν Ἀγαθοκλέους, τὴν δ᾿ αὐτονομίαν
τοῖς Σικελιώταις ἀποκαταστήσων, ὑπερθέμενος δὲ
ἐπὶ τοῦ παρόντος ταύτην τὴν στρατείαν ἔπλευσεν
εἰς Κόρκυραν καὶ κρατήσας τῆς πόλεως χρημάτων
τε πλῆθος εἰσεπράξατο καὶ φρουρὰν ἐγκατέστησε,
διανοούμενος ὁρμητηρίῳ τούτῳ τῷ τόπῳ χρήσασθαι
καὶ τοῖς περὶ τὴν Ἑλλάδα πράγμασιν
ἐφεδρεύειν.
105. Εὐθὺ δὲ καὶ πρεσβειῶν πρὸς αὐτὸν παραγενομένων
παρά τε Δημητρίου τοῦ πολιορκητοῦ
καὶ Κασάνδρου περὶ συμμαχίας τούτων μὲν οὐδετέρῳ
προσέθετο, τοὺς δὲ Ταραντίνους καὶ τῶν
ἄλλων τινὰς πυθόμενος ἀφεστηκέναι τῆς μὲν Κορκύρας
τὴν ἱκανὴν φυλακὴν ἀπέλιπεν, μετὰ δὲ τῆς
ἄλλης δυνάμεως ἔπλει κατὰ σπουδὴν ἐπὶ τὴν
Ἰταλίαν, ὡς κολάσων τοὺς ἀπειθοῦντας. προσσχὼν
δὲ τῇ χώρᾳ καθ᾿ ὃν τόπον ἐφύλασσον οἱ βάρβαροι,
420Book XX

he had a strong army under his command, the 303 b.c. Lucanians in alarm established friendship with the Tarentines; and when the people of Metapontum did not come over to him, he persuaded the Lucanians to invade the territory of the Metapontines and, by making a simultaneous attack himself, intimidated them. Then, entering their city as a friend, he exacted more than six hundred talents of silver; and he took two hundred maidens of the best families as hostages, not so much as a guarantee of the city’s faith as to satisfy his own lust.1 Indeed, having discarded the Spartan garb, he lived in continued luxury and made slaves of those who had trusted in him; for although he had so strong an army and such ample supplies, he did nothing worthy of Sparta. He planned to invade Sicily as if to overthrow the tyranny of Agathocles and restore their independence to the Siciliots; but postponing this campaign for the present, he sailed to Corcyra, and after getting possession of the city exacted a great sum of money and installed a garrison, intending to use this place as a base and to await a chance to take part in the affairs in Greece.
105. But soon, when envoys did come to him both from Demetrius Poliorcetes and from Cassander proposing alliances, he joined with neither of them; but when he learned that the Tarentines and some of the others were in revolt, he left an adequate garrison in Corcyra, and with the rest of his army sailed at top speed to Italy in order to punish those who defied his commands. Putting in to land in the district that was defended by the barbarians, he took

1Cp. Duris, FGrH, 76. 18; Athenaeus, 13. 84 (p. 605 e).421