Diodorus of Sicily

τόποις χιονοβολουμένοις καὶ τροφῆς ἐνδεέσιν1 εἰς
2τοὺς ἐσχάτους ἦλθον κινδύνους· ἀναγκαῖον γὰρ ἦν
ἢ καταβάντας ἀπὸ τῶν ὀρέων διαγωνίσασθαι πρὸς
δυνάμεις πολλαπλασίους καὶ στρατηγοὺς ἐπιφανεῖς
ἢ μένοντας ὑπ᾿ ἐνδείας καὶ κρυμοῦ διαφθαρῆναι.
ἤδη δ᾿ αὐτῶν ἀπογινωσκόντων τὴν σωτηρίαν αὐτόματός
τις λύσις τῶν κακῶν ἐφάνη, καθάπερ θεῶν
3τινος ἐλεοῦντος αὐτῶν τὴν εὐψυχίαν. Ἀντίγονος
γὰρ ὁ πεφευγὼς ἐκ τῆς Ἀσίας συμμίξας τοῖς περὶ
τὸν Ἀντίπατρον ἐδίδαξεν αὐτοὺς περὶ τῆς ὅλης
ἐπιβουλῆς τοῦ Περδίκκου καὶ διότι τὴν Κλεοπάτραν
γαμήσας εὐθὺς ἥξει μετὰ τῆς δυνάμεως εἰς
Μακεδονίαν ὡς βασιλεὺς καὶ τὴν ἡγεμονίαν αὐτῶν
4παραιρήσεται. οἱ δὲ περὶ τὸν Κρατερὸν καὶ
Ἀντίπατρον διὰ τὸ παράδοξον τῆς προσαγγελίας
καταπλαγέντες συνήδρευσαν μετὰ τῶν ἡγεμόνων.
προτεθείσης οὖν βουλῆς περὶ τούτων ἔδοξεν ὁμογνωμόνως
πρὸς μὲν Αἰτωλοὺς ἐφ᾿ οἷς ἦν δυνατὸν
διαλυθῆναι, τὰς δὲ δυνάμεις κατὰ τάχος περαιοῦν
εἰς τὴν Ἀσίαν καὶ τῷ μὲν Κρατερῷ τὴν τῆς Ἀσίας
ἡγεμονίαν περιτιθέναι, τῷ δ᾿ Ἀντιπάτρῳ τὴν τῆς
Εὐρώπης, πρεσβεύειν δὲ καὶ πρὸς Πτολεμαῖον περὶ
κοινοπραγίας, ὄντα τοῦ μὲν Περδίκκου παντελῶς
ἀλλότριον, ἑαυτοῖς δὲ φίλον, κοινῇ δὲ ἐπιβουλευόμενον.
5εὐθὺς οὖν πρὸς μὲν Αἰτωλοὺς διάλυσιν
ἐποιήσαντο, διεγνωκότες ὕστερον αὐτοὺς καταπολεμῆσαι
καὶ μεταστῆσαι πανοικίους ἅπαντας εἰς
τὴν ἐρημίαν2 καὶ πορρωτάτω τῆς Ἀσίας κειμένην
χώραν, αὐτοὶ δὲ δόγμα γράψαντες ἀκόλουθον
τοῖς προειρημένοις παρεσκευάζοντο τὰ πρὸς τὴν
στρατείαν.
1So Madvig: ἐν τοῖς χιονοβολουμένοις καὶ τροφῆς ἐνδεεῖς.2Madvig suggests εἴς τινα ἐρήμην, and other editors have proposed οἰκείας or Αἰτωλίας for Ἀσίας.84Book XVIII

that were covered with snow and lacking in food, the 322 b.c. Aetolians were brought into the greatest dangers1; for they had either to come down from their mountains and fight against forces numbering many times their own and against famous generals, or to remain and be utterly destroyed by want and cold. When they were already giving up hope of salvation, relief from their troubles appeared of its own accord, just as if one of the gods had been moved to pity by their high courage. For Antigonus, he who had fled from Asia, joined Antipater and told him the whole plot of Perdiccas,
and that Perdiccas, after marrying Cleopatra, would come at once with his army to Macedonia as king and deprive Antipater of the supreme command. Craterus and Antipater, dumbfounded by the unexpected news, met in council with their commanders. When the situation had been presented for deliberation, it was unanimously decided to make peace with the Aetolians on whatever terms were possible, to transport the armies with all speed to Asia, to assign the command of Asia to Craterus and that of Europe to Antipater, and also to send an embassy to Ptolemy to discuss concerted action, since he was utterly hostile to Perdiccas but friendly to them, and he in common with them was an object of the plot. Therefore they at once made a treaty with the Aetolians, firmly resolved to conquer them later and to move them all—men, women, and children—to the most distant desert of Asia. When they had recorded a decree embodying these plans, they made preparations for the campaign.
1The winter of 322/1.85