Diodorus of Sicily
ἀνδρῶν ἐκ μεγάλων πόλις ὄλλυται, εἰς δὲ
τυράννου1
δῆμος ἀϊδρίῃ δουλοσύνην ἔπεσεν.
5Μάλιστα δὲ πάντων ἐπεπόλασεν ἡ πρὸς τὰς μοναρχίας
ὁρμὴ περὶ Σικελίαν πρὸ τοῦ Ῥωμαίους
κυριεῦσαι ταύτης τῆς νήσου· αἱ γὰρ πόλεις ταῖς
δημαγωγίαις ἐξαπατώμεναι μέχρι τούτου τοὺς
ἀσθενεῖς ἰσχυροὺς κατεσκεύαζον, ἕως δεσπόται
6γένωνται2 τῶν ἐξαπατηθέντων. ἰδιώτατα δὲ πάντων
Ἀγαθοκλῆς ἐτυράννησε τῶν Συρακοσίων, ἀφορμαῖς
μὲν ἐλαχίσταις χρησάμενος, ἀτυχήμασι δὲ
μεγίστοις περιβαλὼν οὐ τὰς Συρακούσσας μόνον,
7ἀλλὰ καὶ πᾶσαν Σικελίαν τε καὶ Λιβύην. δι᾿
ἀπορίαν γὰρ βίου καὶ πραγμάτων ἀσθένειαν τὴν
κεραμευτικὴν τέχνην μεταχειρισάμενος εἰς τοῦτο
προῆλθε δυνάμεως ἅμα καὶ μιαιφονίας ὥστε καταδουλώσασθαι
μὲν τὴν μεγίστην καὶ καλλίστην τῶν
πασῶν νήσων, κατακτήσασθαι δὲ χρόνον τινὰ τῆς
τε Λιβύης τὴν πλείστην καὶ μέρη τῆς Ἰταλίας,
ὕβρεως δὲ καὶ σφαγῆς ἐμπλῆσαι τὰς κατὰ Σικελίαν
8πόλεις. οὐδεὶς γὰρ τῶν πρὸ τούτου τυράννων
ἐπετελέσατό τι τοιοῦτον οὐδὲ3 τοιαύτην ὠμότητα
κατὰ τῶν ὑποτεταγμένων ἔσχε. τοὺς μὲν γὰρ
ἰδιώτας ἐκόλαζε πᾶσαν τὴν συγγένειαν ἀποσφάττων,
παρὰ δὲ τῶν πόλεων τὰς εὐθύνας ἐλάμβανεν
ἡβηδὸν μιαιφονῶν καὶ δι᾿ ὀλίγους τῶν ἐγκαλουμένων
τοὺς πολλοὺς καὶ μηδ᾿ ὁτιοῦν ἀδικήσαντας



1τυράννου MSS. and editors, μονάρχου Book 9. 20. 2, Diog.
Laert. 1. 50.2γένωνται MSS., Fischer, γένοιντο Dindorf.3οὐδὲ Dindorf: οὔτε.226Book XIX
Destruction cometh upon a city from its great 317 b.c. men; and through ignorance the people fall into slavery to a tyrant.1
More than anywhere else this tendency toward the rule of one man prevailed in Sicily before the Romans became rulers of that island; for the cities, deceived by demagogic wiles, went so far in making the weak strong that these became despots over those whom they had deceived. The most extraordinary instance of all is that of Agathocles who became tyrant of the Syracusans, a man who had the lowest beginnings, but who plunged not only Syracuse but also the whole of Sicily and Libya into the gravest misfortunes. Although, compelled by lack of means and slender fortune, he turned his hand to the potter’s trade, he rose to such a peak of power and cruelty that he enslaved the greatest and fairest of all islands, for a time possessed the larger part of Libya2 and parts of Italy, and filled the cities of Sicily with outrage and slaughter. No one of the tyrants before him brought any such achievements to completion nor yet displayed such cruelty toward those who had become his subjects. For example, he used to punish a private individual by slaughtering all his kindred, and to exact reckoning from cities by murdering the people from youth up; and on account of a few who were charged with a crime, he would compel the many,


1Cp. Book 9. 21. 2; Diogenes Laertius, 1. 50; Edmonds, Elegy and Iambus (L.C.L.), 122; and Linforth, Solon the Athenian (Univ. of Cal. Pr., 1919), 144.2Libya is here a rather indefinite term applied to the region of Africa between Cyrenê and the possessions of Carthage. To say that Agathocles possessed the larger part even of this is an exaggeration.227