Diodorus of Sicily
6Πτολεμαίου στρατηγούς. οὗτος μὲν οὖν συντόμως
πάντα πράξας κατὰ τὰς ἐντολὰς τοῦ πατρὸς καὶ
κομισθεὶς ἐπὶ Καρίας παρεκάλει τοὺς Ῥοδίους πρὸς
τὸν κατὰ Πτολεμαίου πόλεμον. οὐ προσεχόντων
δ᾿ αὐτῶν, ἀλλὰ κοινὴν εἰρήνην αἱρουμένων ἄγειν
πρὸς ἅπαντας ταύτην ἀρχὴν συνέβη γενέσθαι τῷ
δήμῳ τῆς πρὸς Ἀντίγονον ἀλλοτριότητος.
47. Ὁ δὲ Δημήτριος παραπλεύσας εἰς Κιλικίαν
κἀκεῖθεν ναῦς καὶ στρατιώτας προσλαβόμενος διέπλευσεν
εἰς τὴν Κύπρον ἔχων πεζοὺς μὲν μυρίους
πεντακισχιλίους, ἱππεῖς δὲ τετρακοσίους, ναῦς δὲ
ταχυναυτούσας μὲν τριήρεις1 πλείους τῶν ἑκατὸν
δέκα, τῶν δὲ βαρυτέρων στρατιωτίδων πεντήκοντα
καὶ τρεῖς καὶ πόρια τῶν παντοδαπῶν ἱκανὰ τῷ
2πλήθει τῶν ἱππέων τε καὶ πεζῶν. καὶ τὸ μὲν
πρῶτον κατεστρατοπέδευσεν ἐν τῇ παραλίᾳ τῆς
Καρπασίας καὶ νεωλκήσας τὰ σκάφη χάρακι καὶ
τάφρῳ βαθείᾳ τὴν παρεμβολὴν ὠχύρωσεν· ἔπειτα
τοῖς πλησιοχώροις προσβολὰς ποιησάμενος εἷλε
κατὰ κράτος Οὐρανίαν καὶ Καρπασίαν, τῶν δὲ
νεῶν τὴν ἱκανὴν φυλακὴν ἀπολιπὼν ἀνέζευξε μετὰ
3τῆς δυνάμεως ἐπὶ τὴν Σαλαμῖνα. ὁ δὲ τεταγμένος
ὑπὸ Πτολεμαίου τῆς νήσου στρατηγὸς Μενέλαος
συναγαγὼν τοὺς στρατιώτας ἐκ τῶν φρουρίων
διέτριβεν ἐν Σαλαμῖνι, ἀπεχόντων δὲ τεσσαράκοντα




1τριήρεις omitted by Hertlein. Cp. note on translation.270Book XX

the generals of Ptolemy as soon as possible.1 Demetrius, 307 b.c. promptly doing all according to his father’s orders, moved toward Caria and summoned the Rhodians for the war against Ptolemy. They did not obey, preferring to maintain a common peace with all, and this was the beginning of the hostility between that people and Antigonus.
47. Demetrius, after coasting along to Cilicia and there assembling additional ships and soldiers, sailed to Cyprus with fifteen thousand foot-soldiers and four hundred horsemen, more than one hundred and ten swift triremes, fifty-three heavier transports,2 and freighters of every kind sufficient for the strength of his cavalry and infantry. First he went into camp on the coast of Carpasia,3 and after beaching his ships, strengthened his encampment with a palisade and a deep moat; then, making raids on the peoples who lived near by, he took by storm Urania4 and Carpasia; then leaving an adequate guard for the ships, he moved with his forces against Salamis. Menelaüs,5 who had been made general of the island by Ptolemy, had gathered his soldiers from the outposts and was waiting in Salamis; but when the enemy was at a




1Cp. chap. 27.2So the text; but in chap. 50. 1–3 we find that Demetrius,
after leaving 10 quinqueremes at Salamis, had 10 quinqueremes,
10 sixes, and 7 sevens in his left wing alone. It seems certain, therefore, that the βαρύτεραι στρατιώτιδες are not transports (which is the regular meaning of the term) but heavy warships (quinqueremes and larger) carrying armed men as well as oarsmen. Such ships would fight by boarding rather than by ramming (cp. Tarn, Hellenistic Military and Naval Developments, 144). It is quite certain also that among the ταχυναυτοῦσαι ναῦς are the quadriremes mentioned in the battle (chap. 50. 3), the τριήρεις of the text being an error either of the copyists or of Diodorus himself. For this whole passage cp. Beloch, Griechische Geschichte2, 4. 1. 154, note 1.3On the north coast of Cyprus, near the end of the cape that projects to the north-east.4The exact situation of this city is unknown.5Cp. chap. 21. 1.271