Diodorus of Sicily

σύνεγγυς φρουρίων συνδραμόντες στρατιῶται πεζοὶ
μὲν πλείους τῶν πεντακοσίων, ἱππεῖς δὲ τετρακόσιοι,
χωρὶς δὲ τούτων ἐκ τῶν ἐγχωρίων ἄλλοι
παντοδαποὶ πλείους τῶν τρισχιλίων, οἳ στρατηγὸν
ἐξ ἑαυτῶν καταστήσαντες περιεστρατοπέδευσαν τὸ
4χωρίον. παραδόξως δὲ πάλιν αὐτῶν κατακλεισθέντων
Δόκιμος μὲν κατάβασίν τινα κατανοήσας
ἀφύλακτον διεπρεσβεύσατο πρὸς τὴν Ἀντιγόνου
γυναῖκα Στρατονίκην, οὖσαν πλησίον τῶν τόπων,
καὶ δεύτερος διὰ ταύτης ἐκπηδήσας αὐτὸς μὲν οὐκ
ἔτυχε πίστεως, ἀλλ᾿ εἰς φυλακὴν παρεδόθη, ὁ δὲ
συγκαταβὰς αὐτῷ καθηγησάμενος τοῖς πολεμίοις
ἀνήγαγεν εἰς τὸ χωρίον οὐκ ὀλίγους καὶ κατελάβετο
5μίαν τῶν ὀρθίων πετρῶν. οἱ δὲ περὶ τὸν Ἄτταλον
πολὺ λειπόμενοι τοῖς πλήθεσι διὰ τὰς ἀρετὰς ἀντείχοντο
καὶ καθ᾿ ἡμέραν ἀγωνιζόμενοι διεκαρτέρουν·
πολιορκηθέντες δὲ ἐνιαυτὸν καὶ μῆνας τέσσαρας
ἥλωσαν κατὰ κράτος.
17. Ἐπ᾿ ἄρχοντος δ᾿ Ἀθήνησι Δημοκλείδου Ῥωμαῖοι
μὲν ὑπάτους κατέστησαν Γάιον Ἰούνιον
καὶ Κόιντον Αἰμίλιον, Ὀλυμπιὰς δ᾿ ὑπῆρχεν ἕκτη
πρὸς ταῖς ἑκατὸν καὶ δέκα, καθ᾿ ἣν ἐνίκα στάδιον
2Δεινομένης Λάκων. περὶ δὲ τούτους τοὺς καιροὺς
Ἀντίγονος μὲν ἐκ τῆς Μεσοποταμίας ἀναζεύξας
ἧκεν εἰς τὴν Βαβυλωνίαν κἀκεῖ συνέθετο κοινοπραγίαν
Σελεύκῳ καὶ Πίθωνι· προσλαβόμενος δὲ καὶ
παρὰ τούτων στρατιώτας ἔζευξε πλοίοις τὸν Τίγριν
ποταμὸν καὶ περαιώσας τὰς δυνάμεις ὥρμησεν ἐπὶ


274Book XIX

with each other, troops had already assembled from 317 b.c. the adjacent fortresses, more than five hundred foot soldiers and four hundred horsemen; and in addition, others had come from the native peoples, men of every kind to a number exceeding three thousand, who had selected a commander from their own ranks and encamped about the stronghold. When they had unexpectedly been shut in again, Docimus, who had learned that a certain way of descent was unguarded, sent an ambassador to Antigonus’ wife Stratonicê, who was in the neighbourhood. When he and one companion escaped by arrangement with her, he was accorded no confidence but was handed over to a guard; and the man who had gone out with him became a guide for the enemy, conducted a considerable number of them into the stronghold, and occupied one of the peaks. Although the followers of Attalus were far outnumbered, their courage enabled them to hold their ground, and keeping up the fight day after day they resisted stubbornly; only after they had been besieged for a year and four months were they taken by assault.
17. When Democleides was archon at Athens, the Romans elected Gaius Junius and Quintus Aemilius consuls.1 This was the one hundred and sixteenth celebration of the Olympic Games, at which Deinomenes the Laconian won the footrace. At this time Antigonus set out from Mesopotamia and came into Babylonia, where he made an agreement for common action with Seleucus and Pithon.2 He received soldiers from them also, made a pontoon bridge over the Tigris River, took his army across, and set out


1Democleides was archon in 316/15. According to the
traditional chronology, C. Junius Bubulcus and Q. Aemilius
Barbula were consuls in 317 (Livy, 9. 20. 7; Fasti Capito- lini for 317). Chapters 17–38 continue to relate events of 317 b.c.2Cp. chaps. 12. 5, 13. 3.275