Diodorus of Sicily

σῶμα διὰ τοῦ ποταμοῦ1 διεκόμισεν εἰς Παντικάπαιον
πρὸς τὸν ἀδελφὸν Πρύτανιν.
24. Ὃς ταφὴν συντελέσας μεγαλοπρεπῆ καὶ
καταθέμενος εἰς τὰς βασιλικὰς θήκας τὸ σῶμα ταχέως
ἧκεν εἰς Γάργαζαν καὶ τὴν δύναμιν ἅμα καὶ τὴν
δυναστείαν παρέλαβεν. Εὐμήλου δὲ διαπρεσβευομένου
περὶ μέρους τῆς βασιλείας τούτῳ μὲν οὐ
προσεῖχεν, ἐν δὲ Γαργάζῃ φρουρὰν ἀπολιπὼν ἐπανῆλθεν
εἰς Παντικάπαιον, ἀσφαλισόμενος τὰ κατὰ
τὴν βασιλείαν. καθ᾿ ὃν δὴ χρόνον Εὔμηλος, συναγωνισαμένων
αὐτῷ τῶν βαρβάρων, τήν τε Γάργαζαν
κατελάβετο καὶ τῶν ἄλλων πολισμάτων καὶ
2χωρίων οὐκ ὀλίγα. ἐπιστρατεύσαντος δὲ τοῦ Πρυτάνιδος
μάχῃ τε ἐνίκησε τὸν ἀδελφὸν καὶ συγκλείσας
εἰς τὸν ἰσθμὸν τὸν πλησίον τῆς Μαιώτιδος
λίμνης συνηνάγκασεν ὁμολογίας θέσθαι, καθ᾿ ἃς
τούς τε στρατιώτας παρέδωκε καὶ τῆς βασιλείας
ἐκχωρεῖν ὡμολόγησεν. ὡς δὲ παρεγένετο εἰς Παντικάπαιον,
ἐν ᾧ τὸ βασίλειον ἦν ἀεὶ τῶν ἐν Βοσπόρῳ
βασιλευσάντων, ἐπεχείρησε μὲν πάλιν ἀνακτᾶσθαι
τὴν βασιλείαν, κατισχυθεὶς δὲ καὶ φυγὼν εἰς τοὺς
3καλουμένους Κήπους ἀνῃρέθη. Εὔμηλος δὲ μετὰ
τὸν τῶν ἀδελφῶν θάνατον βουλόμενος ἀσφαλῶς
θέσθαι τὰ κατὰ τὴν ἀρχὴν ἀνεῖλε τούς τε φίλους
τῶν περὶ τὸν Σάτυρον καὶ Πρύτανιν, ἔτι δὲ τὰς
γυναῖκας καὶ τὰ τέκνα. μόνος δὲ διέφυγεν αὐτὸν
ὁ παῖς ὁ Σατύρου Παρυσάδης, νέος ὢν παντελῶς
τὴν ἡλικίαν· ἐξιππεύσας γὰρ ἐκ τῆς πόλεως κατέφυγε
πρὸς Ἄγαρον τὸν βασιλέα τῶν Σκυθῶν.

1For ποταμοῦ Fischer in apparatus suggests πορθμοῦ: cp.
Strabo, 9. 2. 6.204Book XX

way of the river1 to Panticapaeum to his brother, 310 b.c. Prytanis.
24. Prytanis, after celebrating a magnificent funeral and placing the body in the royal tombs, came quickly to Gargaza and took over both the army and the royal power. When Eumelus sent envoys to discuss a partition of the kingdom, he did not heed him but he left a garrison in Gargaza and returned to Panticapaeum in order to secure the royal prerogatives for himself. During this time Eumelus with the co-operation of the barbarians captured Gargaza and several of the other cities and villages. When Prytanis took the field against him, Eumelus defeated his brother in battle; and, after shutting him up in the isthmus2 near the Maeotic Lake, he forced him to accept terms according to which he gave over his army and agreed to vacate his place as king. However, when Prytanis entered Panticapaeum, which had always been the capital of those who had ruled in Bosporus, he tried to recover his kingdom; but he was overpowered and fled to the so-called Gardens,3 where he was slain. After his brothers’ death Eumelus, wishing to establish his power securely, slew the friends of Satyrus and Prytanis, and likewise their wives and children. The only one to escape him was Parysades, the son of Satyrus, who was very young; he, riding out of the city on horseback, took refuge with Agarus,4 the king of




1Or, reading πορθμοῦ: “through the straits.”2Probably the isthmus to the east of the Cimmerian Bosporus, separating the Maeotic Lake from the Euxine.3Probably the modern Taman on the isthmus just referred to.4King Agarus is otherwise unknown, but Appian, Mithridatic
War, 88, mentions a Scythian people called the Agari.205