Diodorus of Sicily

καταπλαγεὶς τὸ ἀξίωμα τῶν ἀνδρῶν· μεγάλη γάρ
τις ἐμπειρία περὶ τούτους εἶναι δοκεῖ καὶ παρατήρησις
τῶν ἄστρων1 ἀκριβεστάτη. ἀποφαίνονται
γὰρ πολλὰς μυριάδας ἐτῶν ὑπάρχειν ἐξ οὗ παρ᾿
αὐτοῖς ἐστιν ἡ περὶ ταῦτα σπουδή· δοκοῦσι δὲ καὶ
Ἀλεξάνδρῳ προειπεῖν ὅτι παρελθὼν εἰς Βαβυλῶνα
9τελευτήσει. ὁμοίως δὲ τῇ περὶ Ἀλεξάνδρου προρρήσει
συνέβη καὶ τὴν περὶ2 Σελεύκου τελεσθῆναι
κατὰ τὰς τῶν ἀνδρῶν τούτων ἀποφάσεις· περὶ ἧς
τὰ κατὰ μέρος ἐροῦμεν, ὅταν ἐπὶ τοὺς οἰκείους
χρόνους ἐπιβαλώμεθα.
56. Ὁ δ᾿ οὖν Σέλευκος διασωθεὶς εἰς τὴν Αἴγυπτον
φιλανθρωπίας τε πάσης ἐτύγχανε παρὰ Πτολεμαίῳ
καὶ κατηγορίαν ἐποιεῖτο πικρὰν Ἀντιγόνου,
λέγων ὅτι διέγνωκεν3 πάντας τοὺς ἐν ἀξιώμασιν
ὄντας καὶ μάλιστα τοὺς Ἀλεξάνδρῳ συνεστρατευκότας
ἐκβαλεῖν ἐκ τῶν σατραπειῶν καὶ τούτων
ἀποδείξεις ἔφερε τήν τε Πίθωνος ἀναίρεσιν καὶ τὴν
Πευκέστου τῆς Περσίδος ἀφαίρεσιν καὶ τὰ περὶ
2αὐτὸν συμβάντα· πάντας γὰρ οὐδὲν ἠδικηκότας,
ἀλλὰ καὶ χρείας πολλὰς καὶ μεγάλας ἐν τῇ φιλίᾳ
παρεσχημένους ἀρετῆς ὑπομεμενηκέναι πρόστιμον.
διεξῄει δὲ καὶ τὰ μεγέθη τῶν περὶ αὐτὸν δυνάμεων
καὶ τὸ πλῆθος τῶν χρημάτων, ἔτι δὲ τὰς προσφάτους
εὐτυχίας, ἐξ ὧν ὑπεδείκνυεν ὑπερήφανον γεγενημένον
καὶ ταῖς ἐλπίσι περιειληφότα πᾶσαν τὴν
3Μακεδόνων βασιλείαν. διὰ δὲ τοιούτων λόγων
προτρεψάμενος τὸν Πτολεμαῖον ἑτοιμάζεσθαι τὰ



1καὶ παρατήρησις τῶν ἄστρων Wurm, cp. Books 1. 28. 1,
2. 30. 1: καὶ παρὰ τούτοις ἡ τήρησις τῶν ἄστρων.2περὶ added by Dindorf.3διέγνωκεν Hertlein: διεγνώκει.384Book XIX

turbed by the reputation of the men, for they are 316 b.c. reputed to possess a great deal of experience and to make most exact observations of the stars. Indeed they declare that for many myriads of years the study of these matters has been pursued among them. It is also believed that they foretold to Alexander that, if he entered Babylon, he would die.1 And just as was the case with the prophecy about Alexander, it came to pass that this prophecy in regard to Seleucus was fulfilled according to the assertion of these men. Of this we shall speak in detail when we come to the proper period.2
56. Seleucus, arriving safely in Egypt, met with nothing but kindness from Ptolemy. He bitterly accused Antigonus, saying that Antigonus had determined to remove from their satrapies all who were men of rank and in particular those who had served under Alexander; as examples of this he mentioned the slaying of Pithon,3 the removal of Peucestes from Persia,4 and his own experiences; for all of these men, who were guiltless of wrongdoing and had even performed great services out of friendship, had been patiently awaiting a reward for virtue. He reviewed also the magnitude of Antigonus’ armed forces, his vast wealth, and his recent successes, and went on to intimate that in consequence he had become arrogant and had encompassed in his ambitious plans the entire kingdom of the Macedonians. When by such arguments he had induced Ptolemy to prepare for




1Cp. Book 17. 112. 2.2Book 21, in which Diodorus narrated the rise of Seleucus, is extant only in fragments.3Cp. chap. 46. 1–4.4Cp. chap. 48. 5.385