Diodorus of Sicily

μὲν τείχους καθεῖλεν ἐπὶ δέκα σταδίους, τὴν δ᾿
ὀπτὴν πλίνθον ἀναλεξάμενος καὶ τὸν δεχόμενον τὴν
πυρὰν τόπον ὁμαλὸν κατασκευάσας ᾠκοδόμησε
τετράπλευρον πυράν, σταδιαίας οὔσης ἑκάστης
2πλευρᾶς. εἰς τριάκοντα δὲ δόμους διελόμενος τὸν
τόπον καὶ καταστρώσας τὰς ὀροφὰς φοινίκων
στελέχεσι τετράγωνον ἐποίησε πᾶν τὸ κατασκεύασμα.
μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα περιετίθει τῷ περιβόλῳ παντὶ
κόσμον, οὗ τὴν μὲν κρηπῖδα χρυσαῖ πεντηρικαὶ
πρῷραι συνεπλήρουν, οὖσαι τὸν ἀριθμὸν διακόσιαι
τεσσαράκοντα, ἐπὶ δὲ τῶν ἐπωτίδων ἔχουσαι δύο
μὲν τοξότας εἰς γόνυ κεκαθικότας τετραπήχεις,
ἀνδριάντας δὲ πενταπήχεις καθωπλισμένους, τοὺς
δὲ μεταξὺ τόπους φοινικίδες ἀνεπλήρουν πιληταί.
3ὑπεράνω δὲ τούτων τὴν δευτέραν ἐπανεῖχον χώραν
δᾷδες πεντεκαιδεκαπήχεις, κατὰ μὲν τὴν λαβὴν
ἔχουσαι χρυσοῦς στεφάνους, κατὰ δὲ τὴν ἐκφλόγωσιν
ἀετοὺς διαπεπετακότας1 τὰς πτέρυγας καὶ κάτω
νεύοντας, παρὰ δὲ τὰς βάσεις δράκοντας ἀφορῶντας
τοὺς ἀετούς.2 κατὰ δὲ τὴν τρίτην περιφορὰν κατεσκεύαστο
ζῴων παντοδαπῶν πλῆθος κυνηγουμένων.
4ἔπειτα ἡ μὲν τετάρτη χώρα κενταυρομαχίαν χρυσῆν
εἶχεν, ἡ δὲ πέμπτη λέοντας καὶ ταύρους
ἐναλλὰξ χρυσοῦς. τὸ δ᾿ ἀνώτερον μέρος ἐπεπλήρωτο3
Μακεδονικῶν καὶ βαρβαρικῶν ὅπλων, ὧν
μὲν τὰς ἀνδραγαθίας, ὧν δὲ τὰς ἥττας σημαινόντων.
ἐπὶ πᾶσι δὲ ἐφειστήκεισαν Σειρῆνες διάκοιλοι καὶ
δυνάμεναι λεληθότως δέξασθαι τοὺς ἐν αὐταῖς ὄντας
καὶ ᾄδοντας ἐπικήδιον θρῆνον τῷ τετελευτηκότι.


1διαπεπτακότας RX.2περὶ τοὺς ἀετούς F.3ἐπληροῦτο X; ἀποπεπλήρωτο F.458Book XVII

distance of ten furlongs. He collected the baked tiles 324/3 b.c, and levelled off the place which was to receive the pyre, and then constructed this square in shape, each side being a furlong in length. He divided up the area into thirty compartments and laying out the roofs upon the trunks of palm trees wrought the whole structure into a square shape.1 Then he decorated all the exterior walls. Upon the foundation course were golden prows of quinqueremes in close order, two hundred and forty in all. Upon the catheads each carried two kneeling archers four cubits in height, and (on the deck) armed male figures five cubits high, while the intervening spaces were occupied by red banners fashioned out of felt. Above these, on the second level, stood torches fifteen cubits high with golden wreaths about their handles. At their flaming ends perched eagles with outspread wings looking downward, while about their bases were serpents looking up at the eagles. On the third level were carved a multitude of wild animals being pursued by hunters. The fourth level carried a centauromachy rendered in gold, while the fifth showed lions and bulls alternating, also in gold. The next higher level was covered with Macedonian and Persian arms, testifying to the prowess of the one people and to the defeats of the other. On top of all stood Sirens, hollowed out and able to conceal within them persons who sang a lament in mourning for the dead. The



1The brevity of Diodorus’s account leaves the meaning a little obscure. It is possible that the ground plan was divided into thirty transverse compartments, each thus about 22 feet wide and 220 yards long. Each of these could be roofed with flat timbers to support the next higher section of the pyre.459