Diodorus of Sicily

Θηβαῖοι τριπλασίους σφενδονήτας καὶ ἀκοντιστὰς
τοὺς ἐκ τῶν περὶ τὴν Θετταλίαν τόπων ἀπεσταλμένους.
5οὗτοι περιττότερον ἐκ παίδων ζηλοῦντες
τὴν ἐν τούτοις μάχην, μεγάλην ῥοπὴν ποιεῖν εἰώθεισαν1
ἐν ταῖς μάχαις διὰ τὴν ἐν τούτοις ἐμπειρίαν.
διόπερ οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι κατατιτρωσκόμενοι μὲν ὑπὸ
τῶν2 ψιλικῶν, καταπονούμενοι δ᾿ ὑπὸ τῶν ἀνθεστηκότων,
6ἅπαντες ἐτράπησαν. τὴν δὲ φυγὴν
ἐκτὸς τῶν κεράτων ποιησάμενοι διωρθώσαντο τὴν
ἧτταν· ἅμα μὲν γὰρ κατὰ τὴν ἀποχώρησιν οὐκ
ἐτάραξαν τὴν ἰδίαν φάλαγγα, ἅμα δὲ περιπεσόντες
Εὐβοεῦσι καὶ μισθοφόροις τισὶν ἀπεσταλμένοις ἐπὶ
τὴν κατάληψιν τῶν πλησίον λόφων, συνάψαντες
7αὐτοῖς μάχην ἅπαντας ἀπέκτειναν. οἱ δὲ τῶν
Θηβαίων ἱππεῖς τοὺς μὲν φεύγοντας οὐκ ἐπεδίωξαν,
ἐπὶ δὲ τὴν φάλαγγα τῶν ἀντιτεταγμένων ἐπελάσαντες
ἐφιλοτιμοῦντο παραλλάξαι τοὺς πεζούς.
ἰσχυρᾶς δὲ μάχης γενομένης, καὶ τῶν Ἀθηναίων
καταπονουμένων καὶ πρὸς φυγὴν ὁρμησάντων, ὁ
τῶν Ἠλείων ἵππαρχος ἐπὶ τῆς οὐραγίας τεταγμένος
ἐπεβοήθησε τοῖς φεύγουσι, καὶ πολλοὺς τῶν
Βοιωτῶν καταβαλὼν παλίντροπον ἐποίησε τὴν μάχην.
8οἱ μὲν οὖν τῶν Ἠλείων ἱππεῖς τοῦτον τὸν
τρόπον ἐπιφανέντες τῷ λαιῷ κέρατι τὸ γεγονὸς
περὶ τοὺς συμμάχους ἐλάττωμα διωρθώσαντο· ἐπὶ
δὲ θατέρου κέρατος ἐπιρραξάντων ἀλλήλοις τῶν
ἱππέων βραχὺν χρόνον ἡ μάχη διέμεινεν ἰσόρροπος,
μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα διά τε τὸ πλῆθος καὶ τὴν ἀρετὴν
τῶν Βοιωτῶν καὶ Θετταλῶν ἱππέων οἱ μετὰ τῶν
Μαντινέων ὄντες ἐβιάσθησαν, καὶ συχνοὺς ἀποβαλόντες
κατέφυγον πρὸς τὴν ἰδίαν φάλαγγα.
86. Ἡ μὲν οὖν τῶν παρ᾿ ἀμφοτέροις ἱππέων
1So Dindorf: εἰώθασιν.2τῶν added by Reiske.190Book XV

whereas the Thebans had three times as many slingers 363/2 b.c. and javelin-throwers sent them from the regions about Thessaly. These people practised from boyhood assiduously this type of fighting and consequently were wont to exercise great weight in battles because of their experience in handling these missiles. Consequently the Athenians, who were continually being wounded by the light-armed and were harried to exhaustion by the opponents who confronted them, all turned and fled. But having fled beyond the flanks, they managed to retrieve their defeat, for even in their retreat they did not break their own phalanx, and encountering simultaneously the Euboeans and certain mercenaries who had been dispatched to seize the heights near by, they gave battle and slew them all. Now the Theban horse did not follow up the fugitives, but, assailing the phalanx opposing them, strove zealously to outflank the infantry. The battle was a hot one; the Athenians were exhausted and had turned to flee, when the Eleian cavalry-commander, assigned to the rear, came to the aid of the fugitives and, by striking down many Boeotians, reversed the course of the battle. So while the Eleian cavalry by their appearance in this fashion on the left wing retrieved the defeat their allies had sustained, on the other flank both cavalry forces lashed at one another and the battle hung for a short time in the balance, but then, because of the number and valour of the Boeotian and Thessalian horsemen, the contingents on the Mantineian side were forced back, and with considerable loss took refuge with their own phalanx. 86. Now the cavalry battle had the foregoing issue.



191