Diodorus of Sicily

ἐζωγρήθησαν· οἱ δὲ περιλειφθέντες εἰς τὴν πόλιν
συνεδιώχθησαν. οἱ δὲ περὶ τὸν Ἰφικράτην συνεισπεσόντες
τοῖς φρουροῦσιν ἐντὸς τῶν τειχῶν, καὶ
κρατήσαντες τοῦ φρουρίου, τοῦτο μὲν κατέσκαψαν,
τοὺς δ᾿ ἐνοικοῦντας ἐξηνδραποδίσαντο.
43. Μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα τοῖς στρατηγοῖς ἐνέπεσε
στάσις, δι᾿ ἣν τῆς ἐπιβολῆς ἐσφάλησαν. ὁ μὲν
γὰρ Ἰφικράτης παρὰ τῶν αἰχμαλώτων πυθόμενος
ἔρημον εἶναι τὴν Μέμφιν, ἐπικαιροτάτην οὖσαν
πόλιν τῶν κατ᾿ Αἴγυπτον, συνεβούλευεν ἐξαυτῆς
ἀναπλεῖν ἐπὶ τὴν Μέμφιν πρὸ τοῦ παραγενέσθαι
τὰς τῶν Αἰγυπτίων δυνάμεις· οἱ δὲ περὶ τὸν Φαρνάβαζον
ᾦντο δεῖν ἀναμένειν τὴν ὅλην δύναμιν τῶν
Περσῶν· ἀσφαλεστέραν γὰρ ἔσεσθαι τὴν στρατείαν
2ἐπὶ τὴν Μέμφιν. τοῦ δ᾿ Ἰφικράτους ἀξιοῦντος
αὑτῷ1 δοθῆναι τοὺς παρόντας μισθοφόρους, καὶ
μετ᾿ ἐκείνων ἐπαγγελλομένου κρατήσειν τῆς πόλεως,
τό τε θράσος αὐτοῦ καὶ τὴν ἀρετὴν ὑπώπτευσε,
μὴ κατ᾿ ἰδίαν κατάσχῃ τὴν Αἴγυπτον.
διόπερ οὐ συγχωροῦντος τοῦ Φαρναβάζου, ὁ Ἰφικράτης
διεμαρτύρατο, λέγων ὡς ἐὰν παρῶσι τὴν
ὀξύτητα τῶν καιρῶν, ἄπρακτον ποιήσουσι τὴν
ὅλην2 στρατιάν. στρατηγοὶ μὲν οὖν τινες3 ἐφθόνουν
3αὐτῷ καὶ διαβολὰς ἀδίκους προσῆπτον. οἱ δ᾿
Αἰγύπτιοι πολλὴν ἀναστροφὴν λαβόντες, εἰς μὲν
τὴν Μέμφιν ἐξέπεμψαν τὴν ἱκανὴν φυλακήν, ἐπὶ
δὲ τὸ πεπορθημένον πολισμάτιον πάσαις ταῖς δυνάμεσι
παραγενόμενοι, καὶ πολλὰ πλεονεκτοῦντες διὰ
τὴν τῶν τόπων4 ὀχυρότητα, συμπλοκὰς ἐποιοῦντο


1αὑτῷ Dindorf: αὐτῷ.2ὅλην Sintenis: πολλὴν.3στρατηγοὶ μὲν οὖν τινες Capps: om. MSS. Lacuna has been recognized by edd.4τόπων Dindorf: ὅπλων.66Book XV

were driven in confusion into the city. Iphicrates’ 374/3 b.c. men dashed in with the defenders inside the walls, took possession of the fortress, razed it, and enslaved the inhabitants.
43. After this, discord set in amongst the commanders, causing the failure of the enterprise. For Iphicrates, learning from the captives that Memphis,1 the most strategically situated of the Egyptian cities, was undefended, advised sailing immediately up to Memphis before the Egyptian forces arrived there, but Pharnabazus thought they should await the entire Persian force; for in this way the campaign against Memphis would be less dangerous. When Iphicrates demanded that he be given the mercenaries that were on hand and promised if he had them to capture the city, Pharnabazus became suspicious of his boldness and his courage for fear lest he take possession of Egypt for himself. Accordingly when Pharnabazus would not yield, Iphicrates protested that if they let slip the exact moment of opportunity, they would make the whole campaign a failure. Some generals indeed bore a grudge against him and were attempting to fasten unfair charges upon him. Meanwhile the Egyptians, having had plenty of time to recuperate, first sent an adequate garrison into Memphis, and then, proceeding with all their forces against the ravaged stronghold at the Mendesian mouth of the Nile and being now at a great advantage owing to the strength of their position, fought constant engagements with the




1See Book 1. 50. 3 if.67