Diodorus of Sicily
3εἰς τὴν Πελοπόννησον. ἀθροισθέντες δ᾿
εἰς Μαλέαν ἄκραν τῆς Λακωνικῆς ἐκεῖ κατέλαβον
ἐκ Κρήτης καταπεπλευκότας Κνωσσίους πρέσβεις
ἐπὶ συναγωγῇ μισθοφόρων· ὧν διαλεχθέντων τῷ τε
Φαλαίκῳ καὶ τοῖς ἡγεμόσι καὶ δόντων ἀξιολόγους
τοὺς μισθοὺς μετὰ τούτων ἅπαντες ἐξέπλευσαν.
κατάραντες δὲ τῆς Κρήτης εἰς Κνωσσὸν εὐθὺς ἐξ
ἐφόδου πόλιν κατελάβοντο τὴν καλουμένην Λύκτον.
4τοῖς δὲ Λυκτίοις ἐκ τῆς πατρίδος ἐκπεπτωκόσι
παράδοξος καὶ σύντομος ἐφάνη βοήθεια. περὶ γὰρ
τοὺς αὐτοὺς χρόνους Ταραντίνων διαπολεμούντων
πρὸς Λευκανοὺς καὶ πρὸς Λακεδαιμονίους ὄντας
προγόνους ἑαυτῶν πεμψάντων πρέσβεις περὶ βοηθείας
οἱ μὲν Σπαρτιᾶται διὰ τὴν συγγένειαν
προθύμως ἔχοντες συμμαχῆσαι ταχέως δύναμιν
ἤθροιζον πεζικήν τε καὶ ναυτικὴν καὶ ταύτης στρατηγὸν
ἀπέδειξαν Ἀρχίδαμον τὸν βασιλέα· μελλόντων
δ᾿ ἀπαίρειν εἰς τὴν Ἰταλίαν, ἠξίωσαν οἱ
Λύκτιοι πρῶτον αὐτοῖς βοηθῆσαι· οἱ δὲ Λακεδαιμόνιοι
πεισθέντες καὶ πλεύσαντες εἰς τὴν Κρήτην
τοὺς μισθοφόρους ἐνίκησαν, τοῖς δὲ Λυκτίοις
ἀνέσωσαν τὴν πατρίδα.
63. Μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα ὁ μὲν Ἀρχίδαμος πλεύσας
εἰς τὴν Ἰταλίαν καὶ συμμαχήσας τοῖς Ταραντίνοις
ἔν τινι μάχῃ διαγωνισάμενος λαμπρῶς ἐτελεύτησεν,
ἀνὴρ κατὰ μὲν τὴν στρατηγίαν καὶ τὸν ἄλλον βίον
ἐπαινούμενος, κατὰ δὲ τὴν πρὸς Φωκεῖς συμμαχίαν
μόνην βλασφημούμενος, ὡς μάλιστ᾿ αἴτιος γεγονὼς
2τῆς τῶν Δελφῶν καταλήψεως. Ἀρχίδαμος μὲν
οὖν ἐβασίλευσε τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων ἔτη τρία πρὸς
τοῖς εἴκοσι, τὴν δ᾿ ἀρχὴν διαδεξάμενος Ἆγις ὁ
412Book XVI

put in again at a Peloponnesian harbour. Then they 346/5 b.c. gathered at the Malean promontory in Laconia and there found Cnossian envoys who had sailed in from Crete to enlist mercenaries. After these envoys had conversed with Phalaecus and the commanders and had offered rather high pay, they all sailed off with them. Having made port at Cnossus in Crete, they immediately took by storm the city called Lyctus.1 But to the Lyctians, who had been expelled from their native land, there appeared a miraculous and sudden reinforcement. For at about the same time the people of Tarentum were engaged in prosecuting a war against the Lucanians and had sent to the Lacedaemonians, who were the stock of their ancestors, envoys soliciting help, whereupon the Spartans, who were willing to join them because of their relationship, quickly assembled an army and navy and as general in command of it appointed King Archidamus. But as they were about to set sail for Italy, a request came from the Lyctians to help them first. Consenting to this, the Lacedaemonians sailed to Crete, defeated the mercenaries and restored to the Lyctians their native land.
63. After this Archidamus sailed to Italy and joined forces with the Tarentines but lost his life fighting gallantly in battle. He was praised for his ability as general and for his conduct on the whole, though in the matter of the Phocian alliance alone he was severely criticized as the one who was chiefly responsible for the seizure of Delphi. Now Archidamus was king of the Lacedaemonians for twenty-three years, and Agis

1An important Cretan city, neighbour of Cnossus and frequently engaged in war with Cnossus. The inhabitants of Lyctus called themselves colonists of Sparta; Aristotle, Politics, 1271 b 28.413