Diodorus of Sicily
5τὴν δ᾿ ἀνωτάτω ἐννέα. τὰς δὲ τρεῖς ἐπιφανεῖς1
πλευρὰς τῆς μηχανῆς ἔξωθεν συνεκάλυψε λεπίσι
σιδηραῖς καθηλωμέναις, ἵνα μηδὲν ὑπὸ τῶν πυρφόρων
βλάπτηται. θυρίδας δ᾿ εἶχον αἱ στέγαι κατὰ
πρόσωπον, τοῖς μεγέθεσι καὶ τοῖς σχήμασι πρὸς
τὰς ἰδιότητας τῶν μελλόντων ἀφίεσθαι βελῶν ἁρμοζούσας.
6αὗται δὲ εἶχον καλύμματα διὰ μηχανῆς
ἀνασπώμενα, δι᾿ ὧν ἀσφάλειαν ἐλάμβανον οἱ κατὰ
τὰς στέγας περὶ τὴν ἄφεσιν τῶν βελῶν ἀναστρεφόμενοι·
ἦσαν μὲν γὰρ ἐκ βυρσῶν περιερραμμένα,
πλήρη δὲ ἐρίων, εἰς τὸ τῇ πληγῇ2 ἐνδιδόναι τῶν
7λιθοβόλων. ἑκάστη δὲ τῶν στεγῶν εἶχε δύο κλίμακας
πλατείας, ὧν τῇ μὲν πρὸς τὴν ἀνακομιδὴν
τῶν χρησίμων, τῇ δὲ πρὸς τὴν κατάβασιν ἐχρῶντο
πρὸς τὸ χωρὶς θορύβου πᾶν ὑπηρετεῖσθαι. οἱ δὲ
μέλλοντες κινήσειν τὴν μηχανὴν ἐξελέχθησαν ἐξ
ἁπάσης τῆς δυνάμεως οἱ ταῖς ῥώμαις διαφέροντες
8ἄνδρες τρισχίλιοι καὶ τετρακόσιοι· τούτων δ᾿ οἱ
μὲν ἐντὸς ἀποληφθέντες, οἱ δ᾿ ἐκ τῶν ὄπισθεν
μερῶν παριστάμενοι προεώθουν,3 πολλὰ τῆς τέχνης
συνεργούσης εἰς τὴν κίνησιν. κατεσκεύασε δὲ καὶ
χελώνας τὰς μὲν χωστρίδας, τὰς δὲ κριοφόρους καὶ
στοὰς δι᾿ ὧν ἔμελλον οἱ τοῖς ἔργοις προσιόντες
ἐλεύσεσθαι καὶ πάλιν ἐπιστρέψειν ἀσφαλῶς. τοῖς
δ᾿ ἐκ τῶν νεῶν πληρώμασιν ἀνεκάθαρε4 τὸν τόπον
ἐπὶ σταδίους τέτταρας, δι᾿ ὧν ἔμελλεν προσάξειν






1ἐπιφανεῖς added by Fischer, cp. Pol. 8. 4. 8.2τῇ πληγῇ Dindorf: τὴν πληγὴν.3προεώθουν Wesseling: προσώθουν.4ἀνεκάθαρε Fischer: ἀνεκάθαιρε RX, ἀνεκάθηρε F.384Book XX

storey of nine hundred.1 The three exposed sides 304 b.c. of the machine he covered externally with iron plates nailed on so that it should receive no injury from fire carriers. On each storey there were ports on the front, in size and shape fitted to the individual characteristics of the missiles that were to be shot forth. These ports had shutters, which were lifted by a mechanical device and which secured the safety of the men on the platforms who were busy serving the artillery; for the shutters were of hides stitched together and were filled with wool so that they would yield to the blows of the stones from the ballistae. Each of the storeys had two wide stairways, one of which they used for bringing up what was needed and the other for descending, in order that all might be taken care of without confusion. Those who were to move the machine were selected from the whole army, three thousand four hundred2 men excelling in strength; some of them were enclosed within the machine while others were stationed in its rear, and they pushed it forward, the skilful design aiding greatly in its motion. He also constructed penthouses—some to protect the men who were filling the moat, others to carry rams—and covered passages through which those who were going to their labours might go and return safely. Using the crews of the ships, he cleared a space four stades wide through which he planned to advance the siege engines he


1The tower then would be nearly 150 feet high, about
30 feet square at the top and 65½ feet square at the base. If the platform was 75 feet square, a ledge about 5 feet wide would be left about the base of the tower.2Either they worked in relays or this figure includes all the men employed for moving the various machines, towers, and penthouses. Allowing five square feet to the man, a minimum if they were to work effectively, 3400 men would occupy 17,000 sq. ft., three times the area of the helopolis.385