Diodorus of Sicily

ἔκ τε τῆς χώρας καὶ τῆς πόλεως· ἀπίστως
γὰρ διακείμενος ὁ Διονύσιος πρὸς τοὺς Συρακοσίους
2πολλῶν τὰ ὅπλα παρῄρητο.1 κατὰ δὲ τοῦτον τὸν
καιρὸν ὁ μὲν τύραννος περὶ τὰς νεοκτίστους πόλεις
κατὰ τὸν Ἀδρίαν διέτριβε μετὰ πολλῶν δυνάμεων,
οἱ δ᾿ ἐπὶ τῆς φυλακῆς τῶν Συρακουσσῶν ἀπολειφθέντες
ἡγεμόνες τὸ μὲν πρῶτον ἐπειρῶντο μετακαλεῖσθαι
τοὺς Συρακοσίους ἀπὸ τῆς ἀποστάσεως·
ἀκατασχέτου δὲ τῆς ὁρμῆς τῶν ὄχλων οὔσης ἀπογνόντες2
τοὺς μισθοφόρους καὶ τοὺς τὰ τοῦ δυνάστου
φρονοῦντας ἤθροισαν καὶ τὰς τάξεις πληρώσαντες
3τοῖς ἀφεστηκόσιν ἐπιθέσθαι διέγνωσαν. Δίων δὲ
τοῖς μὲν ἀνόπλοις τῶν Συρακοσίων διέδωκε τὰς
πεντακισχιλίας πανοπλίας, τοὺς δὲ ἄλλους ἐκ τῶν
δυνατῶν τοῖς παρατυχοῦσιν ὅπλοις συνεσκεύασεν.
συναγαγὼν δ᾿ ἅπαντας εἰς κοινὴν ἐκκλησίαν ἀπεφαίνετο
μὲν ἑαυτὸν ἥκειν ἐπὶ τὴν ἐλευθέρωσιν τῶν
Σικελιωτῶν, παρεκάλει δὲ στρατηγοὺς αἱρεῖσθαι
τοὺς εὐθέτους πρὸς τὴν ἀποκατάστασιν τῆς αὐτονομίας
καὶ τὴν κατάλυσιν τῆς ὅλης τυραννίδος.
τὸ δὲ πλῆθος ὥσπερ ἀπὸ μιᾶς φωνῆς ἀνεβόησε
στρατηγοὺς αἱρεῖσθαι τόν τε Δίωνα καὶ τὸν ἀδελφὸν
4αὐτοῦ Μεγακλῆν αὐτοκράτορας. εὐθὺς οὖν ἀπὸ
τῆς ἐκκλησίας ἐκτάξας τὴν δύναμιν προσῆγε τῇ
πόλει. οὐδενὸς δ᾿ ἀντιποιουμένου τῶν ὑπαίθρων
ἀδεῶς εἰσῆλθεν ἐντὸς τοῦ τείχους καὶ διὰ τῆς




1So Gemistus: παρῃρεῖτο.2So Dindorf; τὴν διὰ τῶν λόγων σύνθεσιν ἀπογνόντες
Fischer (cp. Book 17. 55. 1): ἐπιγνόντες.266Book XVI

arms both from the countryside and from the city; 357/6 b.c. for Dionysius, being suspicious of the Syracusans, had disarmed many of them. About this time the tyrant was sojourning in the newly founded cities1 along the Adriatic with large forces, and the commanders who had been left in charge of the garrison of Syracuse at first attempted to summon back the Syracusans from their revolt, but when the impulse of the mobs could not be checked they gave up in despair and gathered mercenaries and those who favoured the cause of the tyrant, and having filled their ranks decided to attack the insurgents. Dion distributed the five thousand suits of armour2 to such of the Syracusans as were unarmed, and equipped the rest as well as he could with weapons that came to hand. Then having brought them all to a general assembly, he disclosed that he had come for the liberation of the Greeks of Sicily, and he urged them to elect as generals those men who were well qualified to effect the restoration of their independence and the dissolution of the entire tyranny. The crowd as with one voice cried out that it chose Dion and his brother Megacles3 as generals with absolute power.4 Accordingly he drew up his army in line of battle immediately at the close of the assembly and advanced upon the city. Since no one disputed with him the open country, he entered fearlessly within the walls, and making his way through




1That Dionysius was in Italy is attested by Plutarch, Dion,
26. 1 and Nepos, Dion, 5. 4. If Plutarch is correct in placing
him at Caulonia (ibid. 26. 4) as Diodorus does in chap. 11. 3. he could not have been by the Adriatic. Caulonia, on the east coast of Bruttium, was destroyed by Dionysius the Elder in 389 b.c., its inhabitants removed to Syracuse, and its territory given to the Locrians for settlement (see Book 14. 106. 3). In this sense it might be called a new foundation.2See chap. 6. 5.3See chap. 6. 4.4See the interpretation of this manœuvre by Hackforth, Cambridge Ancient History, 6. 279.267