Diodorus of Sicily

σάλπιγγι τοὺς στρατιώτας νυκτὸς ἤδη γενομένης.
καὶ τὸ μὲν πρῶτον ἔκρινε λῦσαι τὴν πολιορκίαν καὶ
τὴν στρατείαν ἐπὶ τὴν Αἴγυπτον ποιεῖσθαι· μετανοήσας
δὲ πάλιν καὶ νομίσας αἰσχρὸν εἶναι παραχωρῆσαι
Τυρίοις τῆς κατὰ τὴν πολιορκίαν δόξης
καὶ τῶν φίλων ἕνα μόνον ὁμογνωμονοῦντα λαβὼν
Ἀμύνταν τὸν Ἀνδρομένους πάλιν πρὸς τὴν πολιορκίαν
ἐτρέπετο.
46. Παρακαλέσας δὲ τοὺς Μακεδόνας ἑαυτοῦ μὴ
λειφθῆναι κατ᾿ ἀνδρείαν ἁπάσας τὰς ναῦς πολεμικῶς
κατασκευάσας προσέβαλλε τοῖς τείχεσιν ἐκθύμως
κατὰ γῆν ἅμα καὶ κατὰ θάλατταν. κατανοήσας
δὲ περὶ τὰ νεώρια τὸ τεῖχος ἀσθενέστερον
ὑπάρχειν τούτῳ προσήγαγε τὰς τριήρεις ἐζευγμένας
2καὶ φερούσας τὰς ἀξιολογωτάτας μηχανάς. ἐνταῦθα1
δὲ ἐτόλμησεν ἐπιτελέσασθαι πρᾶξιν οὐδ᾿
αὐτοῖς τοῖς ὁρῶσι πιστευομένην· ἐπιβάθραν γὰρ
ἀπὸ τοῦ ξυλίνου πύργου τοῖς τῆς πόλεως τείχεσιν
ἐπιβαλὼν διὰ ταύτης μόνος ἐπέβη τῷ τείχει, οὔτε
τὸν ἀπὸ τῆς τύχης φθόνον εὐλαβηθεὶς οὔτε τὴν τῶν
Τυρίων δεινότητα καταπλαγείς, ἀλλὰ τὴν καταγωνισαμένην
τοὺς Πέρσας δύναμιν ἔχων θεωρὸν
τῆς ἰδίας ἀνδραγαθίας τοῖς μὲν ἄλλοις Μακεδόσιν
ἀκολουθεῖν προσέταξεν, αὐτὸς δὲ καθηγούμενος τῶν
εἰς χεῖρας βιαζομένων τοὺς μὲν τῷ δόρατι, τοὺς δὲ
τῇ μαχαίρᾳ τύπτων ἀπέκτεινεν, ἐνίους δ᾿ αὐτῇ τῇ
περιφερείᾳ τῆς ἀσπίδος ἀνατρέπων ἐπισχεῖν τοῦ
πολλοῦ θράσους ἐποίησε τοὺς πολεμίους.
3Ἅμα δὲ τούτοις πραττομένοις καθ᾿ ἕτερον μέρος



1ἐνταῦθα Dindorf; ἐν ταύταις codd.248Book XVII

was now night, recalled his soldiers by a trumpet call. 332/1 b.c. His first impulse was to break off the siege and march on to Egypt.1 but he changed his mind as he reflected that it would be disgraceful to leave the Tyrians with all the glory of the operation. He found support in only one of his Friends, Amyntas the son of Andromenes,2 but turned again to the attack.
46. Alexander addressed the Macedonians, calling on them to dare no less than he. Fitting out all his ships for fighting, he began a general assault upon the walls by land and sea and this was pressed furiously. He saw that the wall on the side of the naval base was weaker than elsewhere, and brought up to that point his triremes lashed together and supporting his best siege engines. Now he performed a feat of daring which was hardly believable even to those who saw it.3 He flung a bridge across from the wooden tower to the city walls and crossing by it alone gained a footing on the wall, neither concerned for the envy of Fortune nor fearing the menace of the Tyrians. Having as witness of his prowess the great army which had defeated the Persians, he ordered the Macedonians to follow him, and leading the way he slew some of those who came within reach with his spear, and others by a blow of his sabre. He knocked down still others with the rim of his shield, and put an end to the high confidence of the enemy.
Simultaneously in another part of the city the battering


1Curtius, 4. 4. 1.2A prominent Macedonian noble, who served Alexander in various positions of trust until his death in 330 or 329 b.c. (Berve, Alexanderreich, 2, no. 57).3Curtius, 4. 4. 10–11. Tarn comments (Alexander the Great, 2, p. 120) that this description would fit better the description of a land siege. Arrian’s account (2. 23. 5) is quite different.249