Diodorus of Sicily

ἀπαγγείλαντος, ἐπὶ μὲν τῇ συνθέσει τῇ πρὸς
τοὺς Ναβαταίους ἐπετίμησεν αὐτῷ, λέγων ὅτι
πολλῷ θρασυτέρους πεποίηκε τοὺς βαρβάρους ἐάσας
ἀτιμωρήτους· δόξειν γὰρ αὐτοὺς τετευχέναι συγγνώμης
οὐ δι᾿ ἐπιείκειαν ἀλλὰ δι᾿ ἀδυναμίαν τοῦ
κρατῆσαι· ἐπὶ δὲ τῷ κατασκέψασθαι τὴν λίμνην καὶ
δοκεῖν εὑρηκέναι τινὰ τῇ βασιλείᾳ πρόσοδον ἐπαινέσας
ἐπὶ μὲν ταύτης ἐπιμελητὴν ἔταξεν Ἱερώνυμον
2τὸν τὰς ἱστορίας συγγράψαντα, τούτῳ δὲ συνετέτακτο
πλοῖα παρασκευάσασθαι καὶ πᾶσαν τὴν
ἄσφαλτον ἀναλαβόντα συνάγειν εἴς τινα τόπον. οὐ
μὴν ἀπέβη γε καὶ τὸ τέλος κατὰ τὴν ἐλπίδα τοῖς
περὶ τὸν Ἀντίγονον· οἱ γὰρ Ἄραβες συστραφέντες
εἰς ἑξακισχιλίους, ἐπιπλεύσαντες ἐν ταῖς δέσμαις
ἐπὶ τοὺς ἐν τοῖς πλοίοις, σχεδὸν ἅπαντας κατετόξευσαν.
3ἐξ οὗ δὴ συνέβη τὸν Ἀντίγονον ἀπογνῶναι
τὰς προσόδους ταύτας διὰ τὸ γεγονὸς
παράπτωμα καὶ διὰ τὸ τὸν νοῦν ἔχειν πρὸς ἑτέροις
μείζοσι. παρεγένετο γὰρ κατὰ τούτους τοὺς καιροὺς
βυβλιαφόρος ἔχων ἐπιστολὴν παρὰ Νικάνορος
τοῦ στρατηγοῦ τῆς τε Μηδίας καὶ τῶν ἄνω1 σατραπειῶν·
ἐν ταύτῃ δ᾿ ἦν γεγραμμένον περί τε τῆς
ἀναβάσεως τῆς Σελεύκου καὶ τῶν γεγονότων περὶ
4αὐτὸν ἀτυχημάτων. διόπερ ἀγωνιῶν ὁ Ἀντίγονος
περὶ2 τῶν ἄνω σατραπειῶν ἐξέπεμψε Δημήτριον
τὸν υἱὸν ἔχοντα πεζοὺς Μακεδόνας μὲν πεντακισχιλίους,
μισθοφόρους δὲ μυρίους, ἱππεῖς δὲ τετρακισχιλίους·
συνετέτακτο δ᾿ αὐτῷ μέχρι Βαβυλῶνος


1ἄνω Dindorf: ἄλλων.2καὶ before περὶ in all MSS., deleted by first hand in R
and by editors. Perhaps we should read καὶ <περὶ τῆς Μηδίας
καὶ> περὶ τῶν etc.104Book XIX

him for the treaty with the Nabataeans, saying that 312 b.c. he had made the barbarians much bolder by leaving them unpunished, since it would seem to them that they had gained pardon not through his kindness but through his inability to overcome them; but he praised him for examining the lake and apparently having found a source of revenue for the kingdom. In charge of this he placed Hieronymus,1 the writer of the history, and instructed him to prepare boats, collect all the asphalt, and bring it together in a certain place. But the result was not in accord with the expectations of Antigonus; for the Arabs, collecting to the number of six thousand and sailing up on their rafts of reeds against those on the boats, killed almost all of them with their arrows. As a result, Antigonus gave up this source of revenue because of the defeat he had suffered and because his mind was engaged with other and weightier matters. For there came to him at this time a dispatch-bearer with a letter from Nicanor, the general of Media and the upper satrapies. In this letter was written an account of Seleucus’ march inland and of the disasters that had been suffered in connection with him.2 Therefore Antigonus, worried about the upper satrapies,3 sent his son Demetrius with five thousand Macedonian and ten thousand mercenary foot-soldiers and four thousand horse; and he ordered him to go up as far as Babylon and then, after



1For Hieronymus cp. the Introduction to Vol. IX.2Cp. chaps. 90–92. For the campaign that follows cp. Plutarch, Demetrius, 7. 2–3. It should, perhaps, be placed in 311 b.c.3Or, reading καὶ περὶ τῆς Μηδίας καὶ περὶ τῶν . . .: “worried both about Media and about the upper satrapies.”105