Diodorus of Sicily

μὲν Χαρίδημος παροργισθεὶς καὶ προχειρότερον
ὀνειδίσας τὴν Περσῶν ἀνανδρίαν ἐποίησεν ἐπὶ
πλεῖον1 προσκόψαι τὸν βασιλέα τοῖς λόγοις, τοῦ
θυμοῦ δὲ τὸ συμφέρον ἀφαιρουμένου ὁ μὲν Δαρεῖος
ἐπιλαβόμενος τῆς τοῦ Χαριδήμου ζώνης κατὰ τὸν
τῶν Περσῶν νόμον παρέδωκε τοῖς ὑπηρέταις καὶ
5προσέταξεν ἀποκτεῖναι· ὁ δὲ Χαρίδημος ἀπαγόμενος
ἐπὶ τὸν θάνατον ἀνεβόησεν μεταμελήσειν
ταῦτα ταχὺ τῷ βασιλεῖ καὶ τῆς ἀδίκου τιμωρίας
αὐτοῦ σύντομον ἕξειν τὴν κόλασιν, ἐπιδόντα τὴν
κατάλυσιν τῆς βασιλείας.
Χαρίδημος μὲν οὖν μεγάλων ἐλπίδων ἐκπεσὼν
διὰ παρρησίαν ἄκαιρον τοιαύτην ἔσχε τὴν τοῦ βίου
6καταστροφήν· ὁ δὲ βασιλεὺς ἀνέντος τοῦ θυμοῦ
τὴν ψυχὴν εὐθὺς μετενόησε καὶ κατεμέμψατο ἑαυτὸν
ὡς τὰ μέγιστα ἡμαρτηκότα. ἀλλ᾿ οὐ γὰρ ἦν
δυνατὸν τὸ γεγονὸς διὰ τῆς βασιλικῆς ἐξουσίας
7ἀγένητον κατασκευάσαι. διόπερ ὀνειροπολούμενος
ταῖς Μακεδόνων ἀρεταῖς καὶ τὴν ἐνέργειαν τὴν
Ἀλεξάνδρου πρὸ ὀφθαλμῶν λαμβάνων ἐζήτει
στρατηγὸν ἀξιόχρεων τὸν διαδεξόμενον τὴν τοῦ
Μέμνονος ἡγεμονίαν· οὐ δυνάμενος δ᾿ εὑρεῖν αὐτὸς
ἠναγκάζετο καταβαίνειν εἰς τὸν ὑπὲρ τῆς βασιλείας
κίνδυνον.
31. Εὐθὺς οὖν μετεπέμπετο τὰς πανταχόθεν
δυνάμεις καὶ προσέταξεν ἀπαντᾶν εἰς Βαβυλῶνα
καὶ τῶν φίλων καὶ τῶν συγγενῶν ἐπελέγετο τοὺς
εὐθέτους, ὧν τοῖς μὲν τὰς ἁρμοζούσας ἡγεμονίας
κατεμέριζε, τοὺς δὲ μεθ᾿ αὑτοῦ κινδυνεύειν προσέταττεν.
2ὡς δ᾿ ὁ τῆς στρατείας ἀφωρισμένος
χρόνος προσεγένετο, κατήντησαν ἅπαντες εἰς τὴν
Βαβυλῶνα. ὁ δ᾿ ἀριθμὸς ἦν τῶν στρατιωτῶν πεζοὶ
1πλεῖον] πλείω RF.202Book XVII

the Macedonians. At this, Charidemus became angry 333/2 b.c. and made free with slurs on Persian lack of manliness. This offended the king, and as his wrath blinded him to his advantage, he seized Charidemus by the girdle according to the custom of the Persians, turned him over to the attendants, and ordered him put to death. So Charidemus was led away, but as he went to his death, he shouted that the king would soon change his mind and would receive a prompt requital for this unjust punishment, becoming the witness of the overthrow of the kingdom.
Charidemus’s prospects had been high, but he missed their fulfilment because of his ill-timed frankness and he ended his life in this fashion. Once the king’s passion had cooled he promptly regretted his act and reproached himself for having made a serious mistake, but all his royal power was not able to undo what was done. He was haunted by dreams of the Macedonian fighting qualities and the vision of Alexander in action was constantly before his eyes. He searched for a competent general to take over Memnon’s command but could find no one, and finally felt constrained to go down himself to take part in the contest for the kingdom.
31. He wasted no time in summoning his forces from all directions and ordered them to muster in Babylon. He canvassed his Friends and Relatives and selected those who were suitable, giving to some commands suited to their abilities and ordering others to fight at his side as his personal staff. When the time set for the march had come, they had all arrived in Babylon. The number of the soldiers was over


203