Diodorus of Sicily

μετελήλυθα τοὺς γενομένους φονεῖς τοῦ πατρὸς ἤ
3τινες διαλελήθασιν. ὁ δὲ προφήτης ἀνεβόησεν, Εὐφήμει·
οὐδένα γὰρ ἀνθρώπων ὑπάρχειν τὸν δυνησόμενον
ἐπιβουλεῦσαι τῷ γεννήσαντι αὐτόν, τοὺς δὲ
τοῦ Φιλίππου φονεῖς ἅπαντας τετευχέναι τιμωρίας.
τεκμήρια δ᾿ ἔσεσθαι τῆς ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ γενέσεως
τὸ μέγεθος τῶν ἐν ταῖς πράξεσι κατορθωμάτων·
καὶ γὰρ πρότερον ἀήττητον αὐτὸν γεγονέναι καὶ
4μετὰ ταῦτ᾿ ἔσεσθαι διὰ παντὸς ἀνίκητον. ὁ δ᾿
Ἀλέξανδρος ἡσθεὶς ἐπὶ τοῖς κεχρησμῳδημένοις καὶ
τὸν θεὸν μεγαλοπρεπέσιν ἀναθήμασι τιμήσας ἐπανῆλθεν
εἰς τὴν Αἴγυπτον.
52. Κρίνας δ᾿ ἐν ταύτῃ πόλιν μεγάλην κτίσαι
προσέταξε τοῖς ἐπὶ τὴν ἐπιμέλειαν ταύτην καταλειπομένοις
ἀνὰ μέσον τῆς τε λίμνης καὶ τῆς θαλάσσης
2οἰκίσαι τὴν πόλιν. διαμετρήσας δὲ τὸν
τόπον καὶ ῥυμοτομήσας φιλοτέχνως τὴν πόλιν ἀφ᾿
αὑτοῦ προσηγόρευσεν Ἀλεξάνδρειαν, εὐκαιρότατα
μὲν κειμένην πλησίον τοῦ Φάρου λιμένος, εὐστοχίᾳ
δὲ τῆς ῥυμοτομίας ποιήσας διαπνεῖσθαι τὴν πόλιν
τοῖς ἐτησίοις ἀνέμοις καὶ τούτων πνεόντων μὲν διὰ
τοῦ μεγίστου πελάγους, καταψυχόντων δὲ τὸν
κατὰ τὴν πόλιν ἀέρα πολλὴν τοῖς κατοικοῦσιν εὐκρασίαν
3καὶ ὑγίειαν κατεσκεύασεν. καὶ τὸν μὲν
περίβολον αὐτῆς ὑπεστήσατο τῷ τε μεγέθει διαφέροντα
καὶ κατὰ τὴν ὀχυρότητα θαυμάσιον· ἀνὰ
μέσον γὰρ ὢν μεγάλης λίμνης καὶ θαλάσσης δύο
μόνον ἀπὸ τῆς γῆς ἔχει προσόδους στενὰς καὶ
παντελῶς εὐφυλάκτους.
266Book XVII

murderers of my father or have some escaped me?” 331/o b.c. The prophet shouted: “Silence! There is no mortal who can plot against the one who begot him. All the murderers of Philip, however, have been punished. The proof of his divine birth will reside in the greatness of his deeds; as formerly he has been undefeated, so now he will be unconquerable for all time.” Alexander was delighted with these responses. He honoured the god with rich gifts and returned to Egypt.1
52. He decided to found a great city in Egypt, and gave orders to the men left behind with this mission to build the city between the marsh and the sea.2 He laid out the site and traced the streets skilfully and ordered that the city should be called after him Alexandria. It was conveniently situated near the harbour of Pharos, and by selecting the right angle of the streets, Alexander made the city breathe with the etesian winds3 so that as these blow across a great expanse of sea, they cool the air of the town, and so he provided its inhabitants with a moderate climate and good health. Alexander also laid out the walls so that they were at once exceedingly large and marvellously strong. Lying between a great marsh and the sea, it affords by land only two approaches, both narrow and very easily blocked.
1Curtius, 4. 7. 27–28; Justin, 11. 11. 9; Plutarch, Alexander, 27. 3–4. See Addenda.2Curtius, 4. 8. 1–6; Justin, 11. 11. 13; Plutarch, Alexander, 26. 2–6; Arrian, 3. 1. 5–2. 2. Diodorus, Curtius, and Justin follow the tradition of Aristobulus (Arrian, 3. 4. 5) in placing the foundation of Alexandria after Alexander’s visit to Siwah; Plutarch and Arrian follow Ptolemy in locating it before the visit. The marsh is Lake Mareoiis.3The north-western winds of summer. This description of Alexandria is based on Diodorus’s own observation (Introd. p. 6), and is lacking in the other Alexander histories.267