Diodorus of Sicily

ἐπὶ τὴν γῆν καὶ καταλιπὼν τὴν ναῦν ἐπεβάλετο
μὲν διὰ Μακεδονίας ἀνασώζεσθαι, περιπεσὼν δὲ
στρατιώταις τισὶ τοῦ Λυσιμάχου διεφθάρη.
73. Ἀντίγονος μὲν οὖν τηλικαύτῃ συμφορᾷ περιβαλὼν
τοὺς πολεμίους μεγάλην ἐπὶ στρατηγίᾳ καὶ
συνέσει δόξαν ἀπηνέγκατο. θαλασσοκρατῆσαι δὲ
ἔσπευδε καὶ τὴν τῆς Ἀσίας ἡγεμονίαν ἀδήριτον
περιποιήσασθαι. διόπερ ἐξ ἁπάσης τῆς δυνάμεως
ἐπιλέξας εὐζώνους πεζοὺς μὲν δισμυρίους, ἱππεῖς
δὲ τετρακισχιλίους προῆγεν ἐπὶ Κιλικίας, σπεύδων
τοὺς περὶ τὸν Εὐμενῆ κατακόψαι πρὸ τοῦ δύναμιν
2ἁδροτέραν ἀθροίσειν.1 Εὐμενὴς δὲ πυθόμενος τὴν
ὁρμὴν τῶν περὶ τὸν Ἀντίγονον ἐπεβάλετο μὲν τὴν
Φοινίκην ἀνακτᾶσθαι τοῖς βασιλεῦσι, κατειλημμένην
ἀδίκως ὑπὸ Πτολεμαίου, καταταχούμενος δ᾿ ὑπὸ
τῶν καιρῶν ἀνέζευξεν ἐκ τῆς Φοινίκης καὶ διὰ τῆς
Κοίλης Συρίας προῆγε μετὰ τῆς δυνάμεως, σπεύδων
τῶν ἄνω λεγομένων σατραπειῶν ἅψασθαι.
3περὶ δὲ τὸν Τίγριν ποταμὸν ἐπιθεμένων αὐτῷ τῶν
ἐγχωρίων νυκτὸς ἀπέβαλέ τινας τῶν στρατιωτῶν.
παραπλησίως δὲ καὶ κατὰ τὴν Βαβυλωνίαν ἐπιθεμένου
τοῦ Σελεύκου παρὰ τὸν Εὐφράτην ποταμὸν
ἐκινδύνευσε μὲν ἅπασαν ἀποβαλεῖν τὴν δύναμιν,
διώρυγός τινος ῥαγείσης καὶ τῆς στρατοπεδείας
ὅλης συγκλυσθείσης, ὅμως δὲ διὰ τῆς ἰδίας στρατηγίας
ἐπί τι χῶμα καταφυγὼν καὶ τὴν διώρυγα
πάλιν ἀποστρέψας, διέσωσεν αὑτόν τε καὶ τὴν
4δύναμιν. παραδόξως δὲ τὰς τοῦ Σελεύκου χεῖρας
διαφυγὼν διήνυσεν εἰς τὴν Περσίδα μετὰ τῆς
δυνάμεως, ἔχων πεζοὺς μὲν μυρίους καὶ πεντακισχιλίους,
ἱππεῖς δὲ τρισχιλίους καὶ τριακοσίους.
ἀναλαβὼν δὲ τοὺς στρατιώτας ἐκ τῆς κακοπαθίας
1ἀθροίσειν RX, ἀθροῖσαι, F, Fischer, ἀθροίζειν other editors.210Book XVIII

the shore and abandoned his ship, endeavouring to 318 b.c. make his way through Macedonia to safety, but he fell into the hands of certain soldiers of Lysimachus and was put to death.1
73. As for Antigonus, by inflicting so disastrous a blow upon the enemy, he gained a great reputation for military genius. He now set out to gain command of the sea and to place his control of Asia beyond dispute. For this end he selected from his entire army twenty thousand lightly equipped infantry and four thousand cavalry and set out for Cilicia, hoping to destroy Eumenes before the latter should gather stronger forces.2 After Eumenes had news of Antigonus’ move, he thought to recover for the kings Phoenicia, which had been unjustly occupied by Ptolemy3; but being forestalled by events, he moved from Phoenicia and marched with his army through Coelê Syria with the design of making contact with what are called the upper satrapies. Near the Tigris, however, the inhabitants fell on him by night, causing him the loss of some soldiers. Likewise in Babylonia when Seleucus attacked him near the Euphrates he was in danger of losing his whole army; for a canal was breached and his entire camp inundated, but by a piece of strategy of his own he escaped to a mound, diverted the canal to its old course, and saved himself and his army. Thus unexpectedly slipping through the hands of Seleucus, he won through into Persia with his army, which consisted of fifteen thousand infantry and thirty-three hundred cavalry. After letting the





1Both naval battles took place in the summer of 318.2Cp. chap. 63. 6.3Cp. chap. 43.211