Diodorus of Sicily
3συναποστῆναι πάλιν ἀπεχώρησαν. εὔζωνοι δ᾿ ὄντες
καὶ πάντες ἵπποις χρώμενοι τάς τε καταδρομὰς
ἀπροσδοκήτους ἐποιοῦντο καὶ τὴν χώραν ταραχῆς
ἐπλήρωσαν. μετὰ δέ τινα χρόνον συγκλεισθέντες
εἴς τινα τόπον κρημνοῖς περιεχόμενον οἱ μὲν αὐτῶν
4ἀνῃρέθησαν, οἱ δ᾿ ἐζωγρήθησαν. τῶν δὲ ἡγεμόνων
Μελέαγρος καὶ Ὀκράνης ὁ Μῆδος καί τινες τῶν
ἀξιολόγων ἀνδρῶν ὑποστάντες ἀνῃρέθησαν.
Καὶ τὰ μὲν περὶ τοὺς ἀποστάντας ἐν Μηδίᾳ
τοιαύτην ἔσχε τὴν κατάστασιν.
48. Ὁ δ᾿ Ἀντίγονος ἐπειδὴ τάχιστ᾿ ἦλθεν εἰς
τὴν Περσίδα, τιμῆς μὲν ὑπὸ τῶν ἐγχωρίων ἠξιώθη
βασιλικῆς ὡς ἂν κύριος ὢν ὁμολογουμένως
τῆς Ἀσίας, αὐτὸς δὲ μετὰ τῶν φίλων συνεδρεύσας
ἐβουλεύετο περὶ τῶν σατραπειῶν. τὴν μὲν
οὖν Καρμανίαν εἴασεν ἔχειν Τληπόλεμον καὶ τὴν
Βακτριανὴν ὁμοίως Στασάνορα· οὐ γὰρ ῥᾴδιον ἦν
τούτους δι᾿ ἐπιστολῆς ἐκβαλεῖν, εὖ τὰ πρὸς τοὺς
ἐγχωρίους πεπολιτευμένους καὶ πολλοὺς ἔχοντας
2συναγωνιστάς. εἰς δὲ τὴν Ἀρίαν ἀπέστειλεν
Εὔιτον· τελευτήσαντος δὲ μετ᾿ ὀλίγον χρόνον ἀντικατέστησεν
Εὐαγόραν, ἄνδρα καὶ1 κατ᾿ ἀνδρείαν
καὶ σύνεσιν θαυμαζόμενον. Ὀξυάρτην δὲ τὸν Ῥωξάνης
πατέρα τὴν ἐν Παροπανισάδαις σατραπείαν
εἴασεν ἔχειν, καθὰ καὶ πρότερον εἶχεν· οὐδὲ2 γὰρ
τοῦτον ἦν ἐκβαλεῖν δυνατὸν ἄνευ χρόνου πολλοῦ
καὶ δυνάμεως ἁδρᾶς.
3Μετεπέμψατο δὲ καὶ Σιβύρτιον ἐξ Ἀραχωτῶν,
εὖ διακείμενον τὰ πρὸς αὐτόν, καὶ τήν τε σατραπείαν
ἔχειν συνεχώρησε καὶ τῶν ἀργυρασπίδων


1καὶ deleted by Dindorf and Fischer.2οὐδὲ Dindorf: οὔτε.358Book XIX

winning certain of the soldiers to join the revolt. 316 b.c. Since these1 were without heavy equipment and were all mounted on horses, their raids were unexpected, and the country was filled with confusion. After some time, however, they were hemmed up in a narrow place that was surrounded by cliffs, where some of them were killed and the others were taken alive. Meleager and Ocranes the Mede, who were among the commanders, and some of the outstanding men were killed while resisting the attack.
This was the outcome of the revolt in Media.
48. As soon as Antigonus came into Persia, he was granted the dignity of kingship by the inhabitants as if he was the acknowledged lord of Asia, and he himself sitting in council with his friends considered the question of the satrapies.2 He permitted Tlepolemus to retain Carmania, and likewise Stasanor to retain Bactrianê, for it was not easy to remove them by sending a message since they had conducted themselves well toward the inhabitants and had many supporters. He sent Evitus to Aria,3 but when Evitus died soon afterwards he put Evagoras in his place, a man admired for both courage and shrewdness. He permitted Oxyartes, the father of Roxanê, to keep the satrapy in Paropanisadae as before, for he too could not be removed without a long campaign and a strong army.
From Arachosia he summoned Sibyrtius, who was well disposed to him, permitted him to retain the satrapy, and assigned to him the most turbulent of



1i.e. Meleager and Menoetas and their followers.2cp. Book 18. 39. 5-7 for the previous distribution.3Stasander, to whom Aria and Drangenê had been assigned by Antipater (Book 18. 39. 6), had supported Eumenes (chap. 14. 7).359