Diodorus of Sicily
5ἐξουσίαν. ἡ δὲ τοῦ χιλιάρχου τάξις καὶ προαγωγὴ
τὸ μὲν πρῶτον ὑπὸ τῶν Περσικῶν βασιλέων εἰς
ὄνομα καὶ δόξαν προήχθη, μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα πάλιν ὑπ᾿
Ἀλεξάνδρου μεγάλης ἔτυχεν ἐξουσίας καὶ τιμῆς,
ὅτε καὶ τῶν ἄλλων1 Περσικῶν νομίμων ζηλωτὴς
ἐγένετο. διὸ καὶ Ἀντίπατρος κατὰ τὴν αὐτὴν
ἀγωγὴν τὸν υἱὸν Κάσανδρον ὄντα νέον ἀπέδειξε
χιλίαρχον.
49. Οὐ μὴν ὁ Κάσανδρός γε τῇ τοῦ πατρὸς2 τάξει
συνευδοκήθη, δεινὸν ἡγούμενος εἰ τὴν τοῦ πατρὸς
ἡγεμονίαν ὁ μὴ προσήκων κατὰ γένος διαδέξεται
καὶ ταῦθ᾿ υἱοῦ γ᾿ ὄντος τοῦ3 δυναμένου πραγμάτων
ἡγεῖσθαι καὶ δεδωκότος ἤδη πεῖραν ἱκανὴν ἀρετῆς
2τε καὶ ἀνδρείας. τὸ μὲν οὖν πρῶτον εἰς ἀγρὸν
βαδίσας μετὰ τῶν φίλων τούτοις4 διελέγετο πολλὴν
ἔχων εὐκαιρίαν καὶ σχολὴν περὶ τῆς τῶν ὅλων ἡγεμονίας·
ἕκαστον δ᾿ αὐτῶν ἐκλαμβάνων κατ᾿ ἰδίαν
προετρέπετο συγκατασκευάζειν αὐτῷ τὴν δυναστείαν
καὶ μεγάλαις ἐπαγγελίαις πείσας ἑτοίμους
3ἐποιήσατο πρὸς τὴν κοινοπραγίαν. ἐξαπέστειλε
δὲ καὶ πρὸς Πτολεμαῖον λάθρᾳ πρεσβευτάς, τήν
τε φιλίαν ἀνανεούμενος καὶ παρακαλῶν συμμαχεῖν
αὐτῷ καὶ ναυτικὴν δύναμιν πέμψαι τὴν
ταχίστην ἐκ τῆς Φοινίκης ἐπὶ τὸν Ἑλλήσποντον.
ὁμοίως δὲ καὶ πρὸς τοὺς ἄλλους ἡγεμόνας καὶ
πόλεις ἐξέπεμψε τοὺς προτρεψομένους ἑαυτῷ συμμαχεῖν.
αὐτὸς δὲ κυνηγίαν ἐπὶ πολλὰς ἡμέρας
συστησάμενος ἀνύποπτον ἑαυτὸν ἐποίει τῆς ἀποστάσεως.
4Πολυπέρχων δὲ παραλαβὼν τὴν τῶν



1τῶν after ἄλλων deleted by Fischer.2τοῦ πατρὸς deleted by Dindorf and Fischer.3γ᾿ ὄντος τοῦ added by Hertlein, cp. chap. 50. 2.4τε after τούτοις deleted by Dindorf.146Book XVIII

in authority.1 The position and rank of chiliarch
had 319 b.c. first been brought to fame and honour by the
Persian kings, and afterwards under Alexander it gained great power and glory at the time when he became an admirer of this and all other Persian customs. For this reason Antipater, following the same
course, appointed his son Cassander, since he was young, to the office of chiliarch.
49. Cassander, however, did not approve of the arrangement made by his father, regarding it as
outrageous that one not related by blood should succeed to the command of his father, and this while there was a son who was capable of directing public affairs and who had already given sufficient proof of his ability and courage. First going with his friends into the country where he had plenty of opportunity and leisure, he talked to them about the supreme command; then, taking them apart one by one, he kept urging them privately to join him in establishing his dominion, and having won them by great promises, he made them ready for the joint enterprise. He also sent envoys in secret to Ptolemy, renewing their friendship and urging him to join the alliance and to send a fleet as soon as possible from Phoenicia to the Hellespont. In like manner he sent messengers to the other commanders and cities to urge them to ally themselves with him. He himself, however, by making arrangements for a hunt to last many days, avoided suspicion of complicity in the revolt. After Polyperchon had assumed the guardianship of the



1For the office of chiliarch cp. note on chap. 39. 7. For the appointment of Polyperchon and Cassander cp. Plutarch, Phocion, 31. 1.147