Diodorus of Sicily

τῶν τόπων. ἀπαροδεύτων δ᾿ ὄντων κρημνῶν τῶν
ἐγχωρίων τις ἀνήρ, Οὔξιος μὲν τὸ γένος, ἔμπειρος
δὲ τῶν τόπων, ἐπηγγείλατο τῷ βασιλεῖ διά τινος
στενῆς ἀτραποῦ καὶ παραβόλου ἄξειν τοὺς στρατιώτας,
5ὥστε ὑπερδεξίους γενέσθαι τῶν πολεμίων. ὁ
δ᾿ Ἀλέξανδρος προσδεξάμενος τοὺς λόγους τούτῳ
μὲν συναπέστειλε τοὺς ἱκανοὺς στρατιώτας, αὐτὸς
δὲ τὴν δίοδον κατασκευάσας ἐφ᾿ ὧν1 ἦν ἐνδεχόμενον
ἐκ διαδοχῆς προσέβαλε τοῖς ἐπὶ τῶν παρόδων
ἐφεστηκόσιν. ἐνεργῶς δὲ τοῦ κινδύνου συνεστῶτος
καὶ τῶν βαρβάρων περισπωμένων περὶ τὸν ἀγῶνα
παραδόξως οἱ πεμφθέντες ἐφάνησαν ὑπερδέξιοι τοῖς
τὴν πάροδον φυλάττουσι. καταπλαγέντων δὲ τῶν
βαρβάρων καὶ πρὸς φυγὴν ὁρμησάντων ἐγκρατὴς
ἐγένετο τῆς διεξόδου καὶ ταχέως πασῶν τῶν κατὰ
τὴν Οὐξιανὴν πόλεων.
68. Ἐντεῦθεν δ᾿ ἀναζεύξας προῆγεν ἐπὶ τὴν Περσίδα
καὶ πεμπταῖος ἧκεν ἐπὶ τὰς Σουσιάδας καλουμένας
πέτρας. ταύτας δὲ προκατειληφὼς ἦν ὁ
Ἀριοβαρζάνης μετὰ στρατιωτῶν πεζῶν μὲν δισμυρίων
καὶ πεντακισχιλίων, ἱππέων δὲ τριακοσίων.
2ὁ δὲ βασιλεὺς δόξας τῇ βίᾳ κρατήσειν τῆς πύλης
προῆγε διὰ τόπων στενῶν καὶ τραχέων οὐδενὸς
παρενοχλοῦντος. οἱ δὲ βάρβαροι μέχρι μέν τινος
εἴων αὐτὸν διαπορεύεσθαι τὰς παρόδους, ἐπεὶ δὲ
εἰς μέσας τὰς δυσχωρίας ἧκον, ἄφνω τὴν ἐπίθεσιν
ἐποιοῦντο καὶ πολλοὺς μὲν ἁμαξιαίους λίθους ἐπεκύλιον,
οἳ προσπίπτοντες ἄφνω τοῖς Μακεδόσιν
ἀθρόοις2 πολλοὺς διέφθειρον, οὐκ ὀλίγοι δ᾿ ἀπὸ
τῶν κρημνῶν ἀκοντίζοντες εἰς πεπυκνωμένους οὐκ


1ἐφ᾿ ὧν codd.; ἀφ᾿ ὧν Wesseling; ἐφ᾿ ὅσον Fischer.2ἀθρόοις Fischer; ἀθρόοι F; omitted by RX.310Book XVII

cliffs offered no passage, but an Uxian native who 330/29 b.c. knew the country offered to lead soldiers by a narrow and hazardous path to a position above the enemy. Alexander accepted the proposal and sent off with him a body of troops, while he himself expedited the move as far as possible and attacked the defenders in waves. The assault was pressed vigorously and the Persians were preoccupied with the struggle when to their astonishment above their heads appeared the flying column of Macedonians. The Persians were frightened and took to their heels. Thus Alexander won the pass and soon after took all the cities in Uxianê.1
68. Thereafter Alexander marched on in the direction of Persis and on the fifth day2 came to the so-called Susian Rocks.3 Here the passage was held by Ariobarzanes with a force of twenty-five thousand infantry and three hundred cavalry.4 The king first thought to force his way through and advanced to the pass through narrow defiles in rough country, but without opposition. The Persians allowed him to proceed along the pass for some distance, but when he was about half-way through the hard part, they suddenly attacked him and rolled down from above huge boulders, which falling suddenly upon the massed ranks of the Macedonians killed many of them. Many of the enemy threw javelins down from the cliffs into the crowd, and did not miss their mark.




1Curtius, 5. 3. 4–15; Arrian, 3. 17.2Curtius, 5. 3. 17.3Arrian’s account (3. 18) explains that Alexander had sent on his main body of troops toward Persis along the royal road, and only undertook this pass with a flying column.4Curtius, 5. 3. 17 (25,000 infantry); Arrian, 3. 18. 2 (40,000 infantry and 700 cavalry).311