Diodorus of Sicily
2ἐξαπέστειλεν. Ἀγαθοκλῆς δὲ καταστοχασάμενος
πιθανῶς τὴν ἐπίνοιαν τοῦ στρατηγοῦ τῶν παίδων
ἐξελέξατο τὸν ἑαυτῷ μάλιστα ἐοικότα καὶ κατὰ τὸ
μέγεθος τοῦ σώματος καὶ κατὰ τὴν ὄψιν· τούτῳ δὲ
δοὺς τὴν ἑαυτοῦ πανοπλίαν καὶ τὸν ἵππον, ἔτι δὲ
τὴν ἐσθῆτα παρεκρούσατο τοὺς ἐπὶ τὴν ἀναίρεσιν
3ἀποσταλέντας. αὐτὸς δὲ ῥάκη περιβαλόμενος
ἀνοδίᾳ τὴν ὁδοιπορίαν ἐποιήσατο. ἐκεῖνοι δὲ ἀπὸ
τῶν ὅπλων καὶ τῶν ἄλλων συσσήμων ὑπολαβόντες
εἶναι τὸν Ἀγαθοκλέα καὶ τἀκριβὲς διὰ τὸ σκότος
οὐ συνιδόντες τὸν μὲν φόνον ἐπετέλεσαν, τῆς δὲ
προκεχειρισμένης πράξεως διήμαρτον.
4Μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα τῶν Συρακοσίων καταδεξαμένων
τοὺς μετὰ Σωστράτου φυγάδας καὶ πρὸς Καρχηδονίους
εἰρήνην συνθεμένων Ἀγαθοκλῆς φυγὰς ὢν
ἰδίαν δύναμιν ἐν τῇ μεσογείῳ συνεστήσατο. γενόμενος
δὲ φοβερὸς οὐ μόνον τοῖς πολίταις, ἀλλὰ καὶ
τοῖς Καρχηδονίοις ἐπείσθη κατελθεῖν εἰς τὴν πατρίδα
καὶ παραχθεὶς εἰς τὸ τῆς Δήμητρος ἱερὸν ὑπὸ
τῶν πολιτῶν ὤμοσε μηδὲν ἐναντιωθήσεσθαι1 τῇ
5δημοκρατίᾳ. προσποιηθεὶς δὲ τῆς δημοκρατίας
προΐστασθαι καὶ δημαγωγήσας ποικίλως τὰ πλήθη
στρατηγὸς κατεστάθη καὶ φύλαξ τῆς εἰρήνης, μέχρι
ἂν γνησίως ὁμονοήσωσιν οἱ συνεληλυθότες εἰς τὴν
6πόλιν. εἰς πολλὰ γὰρ μέρη συνέβαινε διαιρεῖσθαι
τὰς ἑταιρίας τῶν συνιόντων καὶ πρὸς ἀλλήλους
ἑκάστοις εἶναι μεγάλας διαφοράς, μέγιστον δ᾿ ἦν
ἀντίταγμα τοῖς περὶ τὸν Ἀγαθοκλέα τὸ τῶν ἑξακοσίων
συνέδριον, κατὰ2 τὴν ὀλιγαρχίαν ὑφηγημένον3
1ἐναντιωθήσεσθαι MSS., Fischer, ἐναντιώσεσθαι Dindorf.2κατὰ Wesseling: μετὰ.3ὑφηγημένον MSS., Fischer, ἀφηγημένον Wurm, Dindorf.240Book XIX

But Agathocles, who had shrewdly guessed the intention 317 b.c. of the general, selected from his slaves the one who was most like himself in stature and face, and by equipping him with his own armour, horse, and even his own clothing, he deceived those who had been dispatched to kill him. As for himself, he put on rags and by avoiding the roads completed the journey. They, supposing from the armour and the other indications that it was Agathocles and not observing more closely because of the darkness, accomplished a murder indeed, but failed to carry out the task that had been assigned to them.
Afterwards the Syracusans received back those who had been expelled with Sostratus and made peace with the Carthaginians; but Agathocles as an exile gathered together an army of his own in the interior. After he had become an object of dread not only to his own fellow citizens but also to the Carthaginians,1 he was persuaded to return to his own city; and at the shrine of Demeter, to which he was taken by the citizens, he swore that he would undertake nothing against the democracy. And it was by pretending to be a supporter of democracy and by winning the favour of the people in artful ways that he secured his own election as general and protector of the peace until such time as real harmony might be established among the exiles who had returned to the city. For it happened that the political clubs of those who were holding meetings were divided into many factions and that important differences of opinion existed among them; but the chief group opposed to Agathocles was the society of the Six Hundred,2 which had directed the city in


1Cp. Justin, 22. 2. 1–7.2Cp. note on chap. 4. 3.241