Diodorus of Sicily

τῆς πόλεως· οἱ προέχοντες γὰρ τῶν Συρακοσίων
ταῖς δόξαις καὶ ταῖς οὐσίαις ἐν τούτοις ὑπῆρχον
καταλελεγμένοι.
6. Ὁ δ᾿ οὖν Ἀγαθοκλῆς ἐπιθυμητὴς ὢν δυναστείας
πολλὰς ἀφορμὰς ἔσχεν εἰς τὸ συντελέσαι τὸ
βουλευθέν. οὐ μόνον γὰρ στρατηγὸς ὢν κύριος τῆς
δυνάμεως ἦν, ἀλλὰ καὶ προσαγγελθέντος ὅτι τινὲς
τῶν ἀποστατῶν ἐν τῇ μεσογείῳ πρὸς Ἐρβίτῃ1
συνάγουσι δύναμιν, ἐξουσίαν ἔλαβεν ἀνυπόπτως
2καταγράφειν οὓς προαιροῖτο στρατιώτας. διὸ καὶ
προσποιηθεὶς στρατεύειν ἐπὶ τὴν Ἐρβίταν κατέλεξεν
εἰς τάξεις τούς τ᾿ ἐκ Μοργαντίνης καὶ τῶν
ἄλλων τῶν ἐν τῇ μεσογείῳ πόλεων τοὺς αὐτῷ
3πρότερον συμπορευθέντας πρὸς Καρχηδονίους. οὗτοι
γὰρ πάντες πρὸς Ἀγαθοκλέα μὲν εὐνούστατα
διέκειντο, πολλὰ προευεργετημένοι κατὰ τὰς στρατείας,
πρὸς δὲ τοὺς ἐν Συρακούσσαις ὀλιγαρχίας
κεκοινωνηκότας ἑξακοσίους ἀεὶ πολεμικῶς εἶχον
καὶ καθόλου τὸν δῆμον ἐμίσουν, ἀναγκαζόμενοι
ποιεῖν τὸ προσταττόμενον. τούτων δ᾿ ὄντων μὲν
τὸν ἀριθμὸν εἰς τρισχιλίους, ταῖς δ᾿ ὁρμαῖς καὶ ταῖς
προαιρέσεσιν εὐθετωτάτων πρὸς τὴν κατάλυσιν τῆς
δημοκρατίας, προσεπελέξατο καὶ τῶν πολιτῶν τοὺς
διὰ πενίαν καὶ φθόνον ἐναντιουμένους ταῖς τῶν
4ἰσχυόντων ἐπιφανείαις. ὡς δ᾿ αὐτῷ πάντ᾿ ἦν εὐτρεπῆ,
τοῖς μὲν στρατιώταις παρήγγειλεν ἀπαντᾶν
ἅμ᾿ ἡμέρᾳ εἰς τὸ Τιμολεόντιον, αὐτὸς δὲ μεταπεμπόμενος
τοὺς περὶ Πείσαρχον καὶ Διοκλέα,2
τοὺς δοκοῦντας προεστάναι τῆς τῶν ἑξακοσίων
ἑταιρίας, ὡς περί τινων κοινῇ συμφερόντων διαλεξόμενος,


1Ἐρβίτῃ MSS., Fischer, Ἑρβίτῃ Dindorf.2Διοκλέα Wesseling: Δεκλέα.242Book XIX

the time of the oligarchy; for the Syracusans who 317 b.c. were first in reputation and in property had been enrolled in this society.
6. Agathocles, who was greedy for power, had many advantages for the accomplishment of his design. Not only as general was he in command of the army, but moreover, when news came that some rebels were assembling an army in the interior near Erbita, without rousing suspicion he obtained authority to enrol as soldiers what men he chose. Thus by feigning a campaign against Erbita he enrolled in the army the men of Morgantina and the other cities of the interior who had previously served with him against the Carthaginians. All these were very firmly attached to Agathocles, having received many benefits from him during the campaigns, but they were unceasingly hostile to the Six Hundred, who had been members of the oligarchy in Syracuse, and hated the populace in general because they were forced to carry out its orders. These soldiers numbered about three thousand, being both by inclination and by deliberate choice most suitable tools for the overthrow of the democracy. To them he added those of the citizens who because of poverty and envy were hostile to the pretensions of the powerful. As soon as he had everything ready, he ordered the soldiers to report at daybreak at the Timoleontium1; and he himself summoned Peisarchus and Diocles, who were regarded as the leaders of the society of the Six Hundred, as if he wished to consult them on some matter

1A gymnasium built about the tomb of Timoleon (Plutarch, Timoleon, 39. 4).243