Diodorus of Sicily

τῆς δυνάμεως. εὐθὺ δὲ Γέσκωνα τὸν Ἄννωνος
πεφυγαδευμένον κατήγαγον καὶ στρατηγὸν ἀπέδειξαν
διὰ τὸ δοκεῖν τόλμῃ τε καὶ στρατηγίᾳ διαφέρειν.
4αὐτοὶ δ᾿ ἔκριναν πολιτικοῖς μὲν σώμασι μὴ διακινδυνεύειν,
μισθοφόρους δὲ ἀλλοεθνεῖς ἀθροίζειν καὶ
μάλιστα Ἕλληνας· ὑπακούσεσθαι δ᾿ αὐτοῖς πρὸς
τὴν στρατείαν πολλοὺς ὑπελάμβανον διὰ τὸ μέγεθος
τῆς μισθοφορᾶς1 καὶ τὴν εὐπορίαν τῆς Καρχηδόνος.
εἰς δὲ τὴν Σικελίαν τοὺς εὐθέτους πρέσβεις ἐξέπεμψαν,
προστάξαντες ἐφ᾿ οἷς ἂν ᾖ δυνατὸν συνθέσθαι
τὴν εἰρήνην.
82. Τοῦ δ᾿ ἔτους τούτου διελθόντος Ἀθήνησι
μὲν ἦρχε Λυσιμαχίδης, ἐν Ῥώμῃ δ᾿ ὕπατοι καθειστήκεισαν
Κόιντος Σερουίλιος καὶ Μάρκος Ῥουτίλιος.
ἐπὶ δὲ τούτων Τιμολέων ἐπανελθὼν εἰς
Συρακούσσας πρῶτον μὲν τοὺς ἐγκαταλιπόντας
αὐτὸν2 μισθοφόρους τοὺς μετὰ Θρασίου πάντας ἐκ
2τῆς πόλεως ὡς προδότας ὄντας ἐξέβαλεν. οὗτοι δ᾿
εἰς τὴν Ἰταλίαν διαβάντες καὶ χωρίον τι παραθαλάττιον
ἐν τῇ Βρεττίᾳ καταλαβόμενοι διήρπασαν.
οἱ δὲ Βρέττιοι παροξυνθέντες εὐθὺς μετὰ δυνάμεως
πολλῆς ἐστράτευσαν ἐπ᾿ αὐτοὺς καὶ τὸ χωρίον
ἐκπολιορκήσαντες ἅπαντας κατηκόντισαν. οἱ μὲν
οὖν καταλιπόντες τὸν Τιμολέοντα μισθοφόροι τῆς
ἰδίας παρανομίας ἐπάθλου3 τοιαύτης συμφορᾶς
ἔτυχον.
3Ὁ δὲ Τιμολέων Ποστόμιον τὸν Τυρρηνὸν δώδεκα
λῃστρίσι τοὺς πλέοντας ληιζόμενον καὶ καταπλεύσαντα


1μισθοφορᾶς editors: συμφορᾶς.2αὐτὸν added by Fischer.3ἐπάθλου Wesseling: ἔπαθλον. Fischer inserts λαβόντες after ἔπαθλον.64Book XVI

them directly with his army. They wasted no time 340/39 b.c. in recalling from exile Gisco1 the son of Hanno and appointing him general, for they thought that he best combined the qualities of boldness and military skill. They voted not to risk the lives of citizens in the future but to enlist foreign mercenaries, especially Greeks2 who, they thought, would answer the call in large numbers because of the high rate of pay and the wealth of Carthage; and they sent skilled envoys to Sicily with instructions to make peace on whatever terms proved possible.
82. At the end of this year, Lysimachides became 339/8 b.c. archon at Athens, and in Rome there were elected as consuls Quintus Servilius and Marcus Rutilius.3 In this year, Timoleon returned to Syracuse and promptly expelled from the city as traitors all the mercenaries who had abandoned him under the leadership of Thrasius. These crossed over into Italy, and coming upon a coastal town in Bruttium, sacked it. The Bruttians, incensed, immediately marched against them with a large army, stormed the place, and shot them all down with javelins.4 Those who had abandoned Timoleon were rewarded by such misfortune for their own wickedness.
Timoleon himself seized and put to death Postumius the Etruscan,5 who had been raiding sea traffic







1Plutarch, Timoleon, 30. 3.2Plutarch, Timoleon, 30. 3.3Lysimachides was archon at Athens from July 339 to June 338 b.c. The consuls of 342 b.c. were Q. Servilius Ahala and C. Marcius Rutilus (Broughton, 1. 133).4Plutarch, Timoleon, 30. 1–2. Another group of the impious mercenaries is mentioned also in 30. 4.5This story does not appear in Plutarch.65