Diodorus of Sicily
2τὴν πρᾶξιν. οἱ δὲ Ἀθηναῖοι πεπολυωρηκότες ἐν
τοῖς ἔμπροσθεν χρόνοις τὴν Ὀλυμπιάδα καὶ νομίσαντες
τὰς μὲν ταύτῃ δεδογμένας1 τιμὰς ὄντως
γεγονέναι, τὴν δὲ ἀπόληψιν τῆς αὐτονομίας διὰ
ταύτης ἐλπίζοντες ἀκινδύνως ἔσεσθαι περιχαρεῖς
3ἦσαν. ἀτελέστων δ᾿ ἔτι τῶν ἐπαγγελιῶν οὐσῶν
ἧκεν Ἀλέξανδρος ὁ Πολυπέρχοντος υἱὸς μετὰ
δυνάμεως εἰς τὴν Ἀττικήν. οἱ μὲν οὖν Ἀθηναῖοι
διέλαβον αὐτὸν ἥκειν ἀποκαταστήσοντα τῷ δήμῳ
τήν τε Μουνυχίαν καὶ τὸν Πειραιᾶ, τὸ δ᾿ ἀληθὲς
οὐχ οὕτως εἶχεν, ἀλλὰ τοὐναντίον αὐτὸς ἰδίᾳ παραληψόμενος
ἀμφότερα παρῆν2 πρὸς τὰς ἐν τῷ πολέμῳ
4χρείας. τῶν γὰρ Ἀντιπάτρῳ γεγονότων φίλων
τινές, ὧν3 ὑπῆρχον καὶ οἱ περὶ Φωκίωνα, φοβούμενοι
τὰς ἐκ τῶν νόμων τιμωρίας ὑπήντησαν τῷ
Ἀλεξάνδρῳ καὶ διδάξαντες τὸ συμφέρον ἔπεισαν
αὐτὸν ἰδίᾳ κατέχειν τὰ φρούρια καὶ μὴ παραδιδόναι
τοῖς Ἀθηναίοις, μέχρι ἂν ὁ Κάσανδρος καταπολεμηθῇ.
5ὁ δὲ Ἀλέξανδρος πλησίον τοῦ Πειραιῶς
καταστρατοπεδεύσας τοὺς μὲν Ἀθηναίους οὐ παρελάμβανε
πρὸς τὰς ἐντεύξεις τὰς πρὸς τὸν Νικάνορα,
ἰδίᾳ δὲ συνιὼν εἰς λόγους καὶ ἐν ἀπορρήτοις
διαπραττόμενος φανερὸς ἦν ἀδικεῖν μέλλων
6τοὺς Ἀθηναίους. ὁ δὲ δῆμος εἰς ἐκκλησίαν συνελθὼν
τὰς μὲν ὑπαρχούσας ἀρχὰς κατέλυσεν, ἐκ δὲ
τῶν δημοτικωτάτων τὰ ἀρχεῖα καταστήσας τοὺς
ἐπὶ τῆς ὀλιγαρχίας γεγονότας ἄρχοντας κατεδίκασε
τοὺς μὲν θανάτῳ, τοὺς δὲ φυγῇ καὶ δημεύσει τῆς



1Dindorf reads δεδομένας.2παρῆν added by Reiske, followed by Fischer in his corrigenda.
Dindorf indicates a lacuna after χρείας.3ὧν added by Reiske.190Book XVIII

The Athenians, who had had great respect for Olympias 318 b.c. in former times and now regarded the honours that had been decreed for her as actually in effect, were filled with joy, hoping that through her favour the recovery of their autonomy might be accomplished without risk. While the promise was still unfulfilled, however, Alexander the son of Polyperchon arrived in Attica with an army. The Athenians, indeed, believed that he had come to give back Munychia and the Piraeus to the people; this, however, was not the truth, but on the contrary he had come from interested motives to take both of them himself for use in the war. Now certain Athenians who had been friends of Antipater, of whom Phocion was one, fearing the punishment due them in accordance with the laws, went to Alexander and, by showing him what was to his own advantage, persuaded him to hold the forts for himself and not deliver them to the Athenians until after the defeat of Cassander. Alexander, who had pitched his camp near the Piraeus, did not admit the Athenians to his parley with Nicanor; but by conferring with him in private and negotiating secretly, he made it evident that he did not intend to deal fairly with the Athenians. The people, coming together in an assembly, removed from office the existing magistrates, filling the offices with men from the extreme democrats1; and they condemned those who had held office under the oligarchy, decreeing the death penalty for some of them, exile and confiscation of

1In March, 318 b.c.191