Diodorus of Sicily

τὰς τῶν ἠτυχηκότων κτήσεις ἐκ τῆς
χώρας μεγάλας ἐλάμβανον προσόδους. διόπερ
εἰδότες ὅτι κρατήσαντες Ἀθηναῖοι τῷ πολέμῳ τοῖς
Θηβαίοις ἀποκαταστήσουσι τήν τε πατρίδα καὶ τὴν
5χώραν, ἀπέκλινον πρὸς τοὺς Μακεδόνας. στρατοπεδευόντων
δ᾿ αὐτῶν περὶ τὰς Πλαταιὰς ὁ Λεωσθένης
μέρος τῆς ἰδίας δυνάμεως ἀναλαβὼν ἧκεν
εἰς τὴν Βοιωτίαν. μετὰ δὲ τῶν Ἀθηναίων παραταξάμενος
πρὸς τοὺς ἐγχωρίους μάχῃ τε ἐνίκησε
καὶ τρόπαιον στήσας ταχέως ἐπανῆλθεν εἰς Πύλας·
ἐνταῦθα γὰρ διατρίβων χρόνον τινὰ προκατείληπτο
τὰς παρόδους καὶ τὴν τῶν Μακεδόνων δύναμιν
ἀνεδέχετο.
12. Ἀντίπατρος δ᾿ ἀπολελειμμένος ὑπ᾿ Ἀλεξάνδρου
στρατηγὸς τῆς Εὐρώπης ὡς ἐπύθετο τήν τε
τοῦ βασιλέως ἐν Βαβυλῶνι τελευτὴν τήν τε τῶν
σατραπειῶν διαίρεσιν, πρὸς μὲν Κρατερὸν εἰς
Κιλικίαν διεπέμπετο παρακαλῶν τὴν ταχίστην βοηθῆσαι
(οὗτος γὰρ προαπεσταλμένος εἰς Κιλικίαν
ἤμελλε κατάγειν εἰς Μακεδονίαν τοὺς ἀπολελυμένους
τῆς στρατείας Μακεδόνας, ὄντας ὑπὲρ τοὺς
μυρίους1), πρὸς δὲ Φιλώταν τὸν εἰληφότα σατραπείαν
τὴν ἐφ᾿ Ἑλλησπόντῳ Φρυγίαν, ὁμοίως ἀξιῶν
καὶ τοῦτον βοηθῆσαι καὶ μίαν τῶν ἑαυτοῦ θυγατέρων
2συνοικιεῖν ἐπαγγελλόμενος. πυθόμενος δὲ
τὴν ὑπὸ τῶν Ἑλλήνων συνδρομὴν ἐπ᾿ αὐτὸν γεγενημένην
τῆς μὲν Μακεδονίας ἀπέλιπε στρατηγὸν
Σίππαν, δοὺς στρατιώτας τοὺς ἱκανοὺς καὶ παραγγείλας
στρατολογεῖν ὡς πλείστους· αὐτὸς δ᾿ ἀναλαβὼν
Μακεδόνας μὲν μυρίους καὶ τρισχιλίους,

1τοὺς μυρίους Wesseling: τρισμυρίους. (See Books 17.
109. 1 and 18. 4. 1, 16. 4.44Book XVIII

of the unfortunate people, were receiving a large 323 b.c. income from the land. Therefore, since they knew that the Athenians, if they were successful in the war, would restore both fatherland and fields to the Thebans, they were inclined toward the Macedonians. While the Boeotians were in camp near Plataea, Leosthenes, taking part of his own forces, came into Boeotia. Drawing up his own men along with the Athenians against the inhabitants, he defeated the latter in battle and, after erecting a trophy, hurried back to Thermopylae. For there, where he had spent some time in occupying the passes in advance of the enemy, he intended to meet the Macedonian forces.
12. When Antipater, who had been left by Alexander as general of Europe, heard of the death of the king in Babylon and of the distribution of the satrapies, he sent into Cilicia to Craterus, asking him to come to his aid as soon as possible (for the latter, having been previously dispatched to Cilicia, was going to bring back to Macedonia the Macedonians who had been mustered out of service, being more than ten thousand in number).1 He also sent to Philotas,2 who had received Hellespontine Phrygia as his satrapy, asking him likewise for aid and promising to give him one of his own daughters in marriage. As soon, however, as he learned of the movement concerted against him by the Greeks, he left Sippas as general of Macedonia, giving him a sufficient army and bidding him enlist as many men as possible, while he himself, taking thirteen thousand Macedonians


1Cp. Books 17. 109. 1, and 18. 4. 1, 16. 4.2This is an error for Leonnatus. Cp. chaps. 3. 1 and 14. 445