Diodorus of Sicily

ἐναντίων καὶ λαθόντες ἐπέθεντο τοῖς σκευοφόροις,
ἀπέχουσι τῆς μάχης ὡς πέντε σταδίους· εὑρόντες
δ᾿ αὐτὴν πλήρη μὲν ὄχλου πρὸς μάχην ἀχρήστου,
τοὺς δ᾿ ἀμυνομένους ὀλίγους ταχὺ τοὺς ἀντιστάντας
τρεψάμενοι τῶν ἄλλων ἁπάντων ἐκυρίευσαν.
4ἅμα δὲ τούτοις πραττομένοις Ἀντίγονος μὲν συνάψας
μάχην τοῖς ἀντιτεταγμένοις καὶ μετὰ πλήθους
ἱππέων ἐπιφανεὶς κατεπλήξατο Πευκέστην
τὸν τῆς Περσίδος σατράπην, ὃς μετὰ τῶν περὶ
ἑαυτὸν ἱππέων ἔξω τοῦ κονιορτοῦ διδοὺς ἑαυτὸν
συνεπεσπάσατο καὶ τῶν ἄλλων εἰς χιλίους πεντακοσίους.
5Εὐμενὴς δὲ μετ᾿ ὀλίγων ἀπολειφθεὶς ἐπ᾿
ἄκρου τοῦ κέρατος τὸ μὲν εἶξαι τῇ τύχῃ καὶ φυγεῖν
αἰσχρὸν διέλαβεν, τὸ δὲ τηροῦντα τὴν δεδομένην
ὑπὸ τῶν βασιλέων πίστιν γενναίᾳ προαιρέσει συναποθανεῖν
προκρίνας ἐπ᾿ αὐτὸν ἐώσατο τὸν Ἀντίγονον.
6γενομένης δ᾿ ἱππομαχίας καρτερᾶς καὶ τῶν
μὲν μετ᾿ Εὐμενοῦς ταῖς προθυμίαις προεχόντων,
τῶν δὲ μετ᾿ Ἀντιγόνου τῷ πλήθει περιγινομένων
πολλοὶ παρ᾿ ἀμφοτέρων ἔπιπτον· ὅτε δὴ συνέβη
καὶ τῶν ἐλεφάντων πρὸς ἀλλήλους ἀγωνιζομένων
πεσεῖν τῶν Εὐμενοῦς τὸν προηγούμενον, συμπλακέντα
7τῷ κρατίστῳ τῶν ἀντιτεταγμένων. διόπερ
Εὐμενὴς ὁρῶν τοὺς μετ᾿ αὐτοῦ πανταχόθεν ἐλαττουμένους
ἐξῆγεν ἐκ τῆς μάχης τοὺς ὑπολελειμμένους
ἱππεῖς καὶ παρελθὼν ἐπὶ θάτερον κέρας ἀνελάμβανε
τοὺς μετὰ Φιλίππου τεταγμένους οἷς ἦν παρηγγελκὼς
φυγομαχεῖν. ἡ μὲν οὖν τῶν ἱππέων μάχη
τοιοῦτον ἔσχε τὸ τέλος.
43. Τῶν δὲ πεζῶν οἱ μὲν ἀργυράσπιδες συμφράξαντες
καὶ βιαιότερον τοῖς ἀντιτεταγμένοις ἐπιπεσόντες
τοὺς μὲν ἐν χειρῶν νόμῳ διέφθειραν, τοὺς
344Book XIX

noticed attacked the baggage train, which was about 317/16 b.c. five stades1 distant from the battle. They found that it was packed with a multitude of persons who were useless for fighting but had few defenders, and after quickly defeating those who resisted, they captured all the others. While this was taking place, Antigonus joined battle with those who were opposite him and by appearing with a large number of cavalry struck panic into Peucestes, satrap of Persia, who in retiring from the dust cloud with his own cavalry drew away fifteen hundred others as well. Eumenes, although he and a few troopers were left unsupported at the extremity of the wing, regarded it as shameful to yield to fortune and flee; preferring to die while still upholding with noble resolution the trust that had been given him by the kings, he forced his way toward Antigonus himself. A fierce cavalry battle ensued, in which Eumenes’ men were superior in spirit but those of Antigonus had the advantage in number, and many were falling on both sides. It was at this time, while the elephants also were struggling against each other, that Eumenes’ leading elephant fell after having been engaged with the strongest of those arrayed against it. Thereupon Eumenes, seeing that his forces were everywhere having the worst of it, led what remained of the cavalry out of the battle and went around to the other wing, where he assumed command of those troops whom he had assigned to Philip and had ordered to avoid fighting. This was the outcome of the cavalry engagement.
43. As for the infantry, the Silver Shields in close order fell heavily upon their adversaries, killing some of them in hand to hand fighting and forcing others to

1About 1000 yards.345