Diodorus of Sicily

ἐν τῇ Τρῳάδι συνῆψε μάχην πρὸς τοὺς Πέρσας,
ὄντας πολλαπλασίους, καὶ λειφθεὶς ἀπεχώρησεν εἰς
τὸ Ῥοίτειον.
Καὶ τὰ μὲν κατὰ τὴν Ἀσίαν ἐν τούτοις ἦν.
8. Ἀλέξανδρος δὲ τὰς κατὰ τὴν Ἑλλάδα ταραχὰς
καταπαύσας ἐστράτευσεν ἐπὶ τὴν Θρᾴκην
καὶ πολλὰ μὲν ἔθνη Θρᾴκια ταραττόμενα καταπληξάμενος
ὑποταγῆναι κατηνάγκασεν, ἐπῆλθεν δὲ καὶ
τὴν Παιονίαν καὶ τὴν Ἰλλυρίδα καὶ τὰς ὁμόρους
ταύταις χώρας καὶ πολλοὺς τῶν κατοικούντων βαρβάρων
ἀφεστηκότας χειρωσάμενος ὑπηκόους πάντας
2τοὺς πλησιοχώρους βαρβάρους ἐποιήσατο. περὶ
ταῦτα δ᾿ ὄντος αὐτοῦ παρῆσάν τινες ἀπαγγέλλοντες
πολλοὺς τῶν Ἐλλήνων νεωτερίζειν καὶ πολλὰς τῆς
Ἑλλάδος πόλεις πρὸς ἀπόστασιν ὡρμηκέναι, μάλιστα
δὲ Θηβαίους. ἐπὶ δὲ τούτοις ὁ βασιλεὺς
παροξυνθεὶς ἐπανῆλθεν εἰς τὴν Μακεδονίαν σπεύδων
τὰς κατὰ τὴν Ἑλλάδα παῦσαι ταραχάς.
3Θηβαίων δὲ τὴν ἐν τῇ Καδμείᾳ φρουρὰν ἐκβάλλειν
φιλοτιμουμένων καὶ πολιορκούντων τὴν ἄκραν
ἧκεν ὁ βασιλεὺς ἄφνω πρὸς τὴν πόλιν καὶ κατεστρατοπέδευσε
πλησίον τῶν Θηβῶν μετὰ πάσης
4τῆς δυνάμεως. οἱ δὲ Θηβαῖοι πρὸ μὲν τῆς τοῦ
βασιλέως παρουσίας τὴν Καδμείαν τάφροις βαθείαις
καὶ σταυρώμασι πυκνοῖς περιέβαλον ὥστε
μήτε βοήθειαν αὐτοῖς δύνασθαι μήτ᾿ ἀγορὰν εἰσπέμψαι,
5πρὸς δὲ Ἀρκάδας καὶ Ἀργείους, ἔτι δὲ


138Book XVII

joined battle in the Troad against a much 335/4 b.c. larger force of Persians and, finding himself inferior, fell back on the promontory of Rhoeteium.1
That was the’ situation in Asia.
8. Now that the unrest in Greece had been brought under control, Alexander shifted his field of operations into Thrace.2 Many of the tribes in this region had risen but, terrified by his appearance, felt constrained to make their submission. Then he swung west to Paeonia and Illyria and the territories that bordered on them. Many of the local tribesmen had revolted, but these he overpowered, and established his control over all the natives in the area. This task was not yet finished when messengers reached him reporting that many of the Greeks were in revolt.3 Many cities had actually taken steps to throw off the Macedonian alliance, the most important of these being Thebes. At this intelligence, the king was roused to return in haste to Macedonia in his anxiety to put an end to the unrest in Greece.
The Thebans4 sought first of all to expel the Macedonian garrison from the Cadmeia and laid siege to this citadel; this was the situation when the king appeared suddenly before the city and encamped with his whole army near by. Before the king’s arrival, the Thebans had had time to surround the Cadmeia with deep trenches and heavy stockades so that neither reinforcements nor supplies could be sent in, and they had sent an appeal to the Arcadians,




1Rhoeteium is a promontory at the mouth of the Hellespont
north of Ilium. Calas (as the name is properly spelled) was
the son of a Harpalus, of a family prominent in the Elimiotis.
Later he commanded the Thessalian cavalry in Alexander’s
army (chap. 17. 4), and then remained in Asia Minor as satrap of Hellespontine Phrygia; cp. Berve, Alexanderreich, 2, no. 397.2This campaign is described in detail by Arrian, 1. 1–6.3Justin. 11. 2. 7–10.4The siege of Thebes is described more briefly in Justin, 11. 3. 6–7; Plutarch, Alexander, 11–12; Arrian, 1. 7–8.139