Diodorus of Sicily

αὑτῶν καιρόν, ἐξέλεξεν ἐξ ἁπάσης τῆς δυνάμεως
πεζοὺς μὲν ψιλοὺς καὶ πρὸς δρόμον εὖ πεφυκότας
τετρακισχιλίους, ἱππεῖς δὲ πλείους τῶν τετρακισχιλίων
καὶ τούτοις μὲν παρήγγειλε φέρειν ἄπυρα
σῖτα πλειόνων ἡμερῶν, Δημήτριον δὲ τὸν υἱὸν
καταστήσας ἡγεμόνα πρώτης φυλακῆς ἐξέπεμψε,
προστάξας κολάσαι τοὺς Ἄραβας καθ᾿ ὃν ἂν δύνηται
τρόπον.
97. Οὗτος μὲν οὖν ἐφ᾿ ἡμέρας τρεῖς ἀνοδίᾳ πορευόμενος
ἔσπευδε λαθεῖν τοὺς βαρβάρους, οἱ δὲ
σκοποὶ κατανοήσαντες πολεμίαν δύναμιν εἰσβεβληκυῖαν1
ἐσήμηναν τοῖς Ναβαταίοις διὰ τῶν συγκειμένων
πυρσῶν· διόπερ οἱ βάρβαροι νομίσαντες
συντόμως ἥκειν τοὺς Ἕλληνας, εἰς μὲν τὴν πέτραν
ἀπέθεντο τὰς ἀποσκευὰς καὶ φυλακὴν τὴν ἱκανὴν
ἐπέστησαν, οὔσης μιᾶς ἀναβάσεως χειροποιήτου,
αὐτοὶ δὲ διελόμενοι τὴν λείαν ἄλλοι κατ᾿ ἄλλους
2τόπους ἀπήλαυνον εἰς τὴν ἔρημον. Δημήτριος δὲ
παραγενόμενος εἰς τὴν πέτραν καὶ τὴν λείαν
καταλαβὼν ἀπηλλαγμένην προσβολὰς συνεχεῖς
ἐποιεῖτο τῷ χωρίῳ. ἀμυνομένων δὲ τῶν ἔνδον
εὐρώστως καὶ περιγιγνομένων ῥᾳδίως διὰ τὴν
ὑπεροχὴν τῶν τόπων τότε μὲν μέχρι δείλης ἀγωνισάμενος
ἀνεκαλέσατο τῇ σάλπιγγι τοὺς στρατιώτας.
3Τῇ δ᾿ ὑστεραίᾳ προσαγαγόντος αὐτοῦ τῇ πέτρᾳ
τῶν βαρβάρων τις ἀνεβόησεν “Βασιλεῦ Δημήτριε,
τί βουλόμενος ἢ τίνος ἀναγκάζοντος πολεμεῖς ἡμᾶς,
οἰκοῦντας ἐν ἐρημίᾳ καὶ τόποις οὔθ᾿ ὕδωρ ἔχουσιν
οὔτε σῖτον οὔτε οἶνον οὔτ᾿ ἄλλο τι ἁπλῶς οὐδὲν
1εἰσβεβληκυῖαν Dindorf: εἰσβεβηκυῖαν.96Book XIX

his opportunity against themselves, selected from 312 b.c. his whole force four thousand foot-soldiers, who were lightly armed and well fitted by nature for rapid marching, and more than four thousand mounted men. He ordered them to carry several days’ supply of food that would not require cooking, and, after placing his son Demetrius in command, he sent them off during the first watch, ordering him to punish the Arabs in whatever way he could.
97. Demetrius, therefore, advanced for three days through regions with no roads, striving not to be observed by the barbarians; but the lookouts, having seen that a hostile force had entered, informed the Nabataeans by means of prearranged fire signals. The barbarians, having thus learned at once that the Greeks had come, sent their property to the rock and posted there a garrison that was strong enough since there was a single artificial approach; and they themselves divided their flocks and drove them into the desert, some into one place and some into another. Demetrius, on arriving at the rock and finding that the flocks had been removed, made repeated assaults upon the stronghold. Those within resisted stoutly, and easily had the upper hand because of the height of the place; and so on this day, after he had continued the struggle until evening, he recalled his soldiers by a trumpet call.
On the next day, however, when he had advanced upon the rock, one of the barbarians called to him, saying: “King Demetrius, with what desire or under what compulsion do you war against us who live in the desert and in a land that has neither water nor grain nor wine nor any other thing whatever of those


97