Diodorus of Sicily

Ἐφιάλτην· οὗτος γὰρ πολὺ προέχων τῶν ἄλλων
τῇ τοῦ σώματος ῥώμῃ πολλοὺς ἀνῄρει τῶν εἰς
χεῖρας ἐρχομένων. οἵ τ᾿ ἐφεστῶτες ἐπὶ τῷ προσφάτως
ἀντικατασκευασθέντι τείχει πολλοὺς ἀνῄρουν
πυκνοῖς τοῖς βέλεσι χρώμενοι· ἑκατὸν γὰρ πηχῶν
τὸ ὕψος πύργος ξύλινος κατεσκεύαστο, πλήρης
7καταπελτῶν ὀξυβελῶν. πολλῶν δὲ Μακεδόνων
πιπτόντων καὶ τῶν ἄλλων ἀναχωρούντων διὰ τὸ
πλῆθος τῶν βελῶν, τοῦ τε Μέμνονος πολλαπλασίοις
στρατιώταις ἐπιβοηθοῦντος καὶ αὐτὸς ὁ βασιλεὺς
εἰς πολλὴν ἀμηχανίαν ἐνέπιπτεν.
27. Ἔνθα δὴ τῶν ἐκ τῆς πόλεως κατισχυόντων
παραδόξως ὁ κίνδυνος παλίντροπον τὴν μάχην
ἔσχεν. οἱ γὰρ πρεσβύτατοι τῶν Μακεδόνων, διὰ
μὲν τὴν ἡλικίαν ἀπολελυμένοι τῶν κινδύνων, συνεστρατευμένοι
δὲ Φιλίππῳ καὶ πολλὰς μάχας
2κατωρθωκότες, ὑπὸ τῶν καιρῶν εἰς ἀλκὴν προεκλήθησαν,
φρονήματι δὲ καὶ ταῖς κατὰ πόλεμον
ἐμπειρίαις πολὺ προέχοντες τοῖς μὲν φυγομαχοῦσι
νεωτέροις πικρῶς ὠνείδισαν τὴν ἀνανδρίαν, αὐτοὶ
δὲ συναθροισθέντες καὶ συνασπίσαντες ὑπέστησαν
3τοὺς δοκοῦντας ἤδη νενικηκέναι. τέλος δὲ τόν τε
Ἐφιάλτην καὶ πολλοὺς ἄλλους ἀνελόντες τοὺς λοιποὺς
4ἠνάγκασαν εἰς τὴν πόλιν συμφυγεῖν. οἱ δὲ
Μακεδόνες τῆς νυκτὸς ἐπιλαβούσης τοῖς φεύγουσι
συνεισέπεσον ἐντὸς τῶν τειχῶν· τοῦ δὲ βασιλέως
κελεύσαντος σημῆναι τὸ ἀνακλητικὸν ἀνεχώρησαν
5εἰς τὸ στρατόπεδον. οἱ δὲ περὶ τὸν Μέμνονα
στρατηγοὶ καὶ σατράπαι συνελθόντες ἔγνωσαν τὴν
192Book XVII

and he himself, who had far greater bodily strength 334/3 b.c. than the rest, slew with his own hand many who traded blows with him. From the top of the recently erected replacement wall, the defenders slew many of the Macedonians with dense showers of missiles—for there had been erected a wooden tower, a hundred cubits high, which was filled with dart-hurling catapults. As many Macedonians fell and the rest recoiled before the thick fire of missiles, Memnon threw himself into the battle with heavy reinforcements and even Alexander found himself quite helpless.
27. Just at that moment as the men from the city were prevailing, the tide of battle was surprisingly reversed.1 For the oldest Macedonians, who were exempt from combat duty by virtue of their age, but who had served with Philip on his campaigns and had been victorious in many battles, were roused by the emergency to show their valour, and, being far superior in pride and war experience, sharply rebuked the faintheartedness of the youngsters who wished to avoid the battle. Then they closed ranks with their shields overlapping and confronted the foe, who thought himself already victorious. They succeeded in slaying Ephialtes and many others, and finally forced the rest to take refuge in the city. Night had already fallen as the Macedonians pushed within the walls along with their fleeing enemies, but the king ordered the trumpeter to sound the recall and they withdrew to their camp.2 Memnon, however, assembled his generals and satraps, held a meeting, and


1Cp. Arrian, 1. 22. 4–6, who simply refers to Ptolemaeus with two battalions of the phalanx.2Arrian, 1. 22. 7, giving as the reason a desire to spare the citizens of Halicarnassus the horrors of a sack.193