Diodorus of Sicily

συμφέρειν διαγωνίζεσθαι παρεκάλεσε τοὺς στρατιώτας
εἰς τὸν κίνδυνον καὶ προαγαγὼν τὴν δύναμιν
ἐκτεταγμένην προεκαλεῖτο τοὺς βαρβάρους εἰς
2μάχην. εἶχε δὲ πεζοὺς μὲν τοὺς ἅπαντας ὑπολειπομένους
Ἕλληνας ἑξακισχιλίους, Κελτοὺς δὲ καὶ
Σαυνίτας καὶ Τυρρηνοὺς τούτων οὐκ ἐλάττους,
Λίβυας δὲ μικρὸν ἀπολείποντας τῶν μυρίων, οὓς
ἐφέδρους εἶναι συνέβαινε, συμμεταβαλλομένους ἀεὶ
3τοῖς καιροῖς· χωρὶς δὲ τούτων ἠκολούθουν ἱππεῖς
χίλιοι πεντακόσιοι, ζεύγη δὲ Λιβύων πλείω τῶν
ἑξακισχιλίων. οἱ δὲ Καρχηδόνιοι κατεστρατοπεδευκότες
ἐπὶ τῶν ὑπερδεξίων καὶ δυσπροσίτων διακινδυνεύειν
μὲν πρὸς ἀνθρώπους ἀπογινώσκοντας
τὴν σωτηρίαν οὐκ ἔκρινον, μένοντες δ᾿ ἐν τῇ παρεμβολῇ
καὶ πάντων εὐποροῦντες τῇ σπάνει καὶ
τῷ χρόνῳ καταπολεμήσειν τοὺς ἐναντίους ἤλπιζον.
4ὁ δ᾿ Ἀγαθοκλῆς οὐ δυνάμενος μὲν αὐτοὺς εἰς τὰ
πεδία προάγεσθαι, τῶν δὲ καιρῶν ἀναγκαζόντων
τολμᾶν τι καὶ παραβάλλεσθαι τὴν δύναμιν ἤγαγεν
ἐπὶ τὴν τῶν βαρβάρων στρατοπεδείαν. ἐπεξελθόντων
οὖν τῶν Καρχηδονίων καὶ πολὺ τῷ πλήθει καὶ
ταῖς δυσχωρίαις ὑπερεχόντων ἐπὶ μέν τινα χρόνον
οἱ περὶ τὸν Ἀγαθοκλέα διεκαρτέρουν πάντοθεν
ἐκθλιβόμενοι, μετὰ δὲ ταῦτ᾿ ἐνδόντων τῶν μισθοφόρων
καὶ τῶν ἄλλων ἠναγκάσθησαν ἀναχωρῆσαι
5πρὸς τὴν στρατοπεδείαν. οἱ δὲ βάρβαροι βαρέως
ἐπικείμενοι τοὺς μὲν Λίβυας παρήλλαττον οὐδὲν
ἐνοχλοῦντες, ἵνα τὴν εὔνοιαν αὐτῶν ἐκκαλέσωνται,
τοὺς δ᾿ Ἕλληνας καὶ μισθοφόρους γνωρίζοντες
διὰ τῶν ὅπλων ἐφόνευον, μέχρις ὅτου συνεδίωξαν
εἰς τὴν παρεμβολήν.
Τότε μὲν οὖν ἀνῃρέθησαν Ἀγαθοκλέους εἰς τρισχιλίους·
318Book XX

that it was best to fight a battle, he encouraged the 307 b.c. soldiers for the fray and, after leading forth the army in battle array, challenged the barbarians to combat. As infantry he had all the surviving Greeks, six thousand in number, at least as many Celts, Samnites, and Etruscans, and almost ten thousand Libyans, who, as it turned out, only sat and looked on, being always ready to change with changing conditions. In addition to these there followed him fifteen hundred horsemen and more than six thousand Libyan chariots. The Carthaginians, since they were encamped in high and inaccessible positions, decided not to risk a battle against men who had no thought of safety; but they hoped that, by remaining in their camp where they were plentifully supplied with everything, they would defeat their enemy by famine and the passage of time. But Agathocles, since he could not lure them down to the plain and since his own situation forced him to do something daring and chance the result, led his army against the encampment of the barbarians. Then when the Carthaginians came out against him, even though they were far superior in number and had the advantage of the rough terrain, Agathocles held out for some time although hard pressed on every side; but afterwards, when his mercenaries and the others began to give way, he was forced to withdraw toward his camp. The barbarians, as they pressed forward stoutly, passed by the Libyans without molesting them in order to elicit their goodwill; but recognizing the Greeks and the mercenaries by their weapons, they continued to slay them until they had driven them into their own camp.
Now on this occasion about three thousand of
319