Diodorus of Sicily

δυνάμεσι καὶ διαβεβαιουμένους ταῖς τῶν πρῶτον
διαβάντων ἀπωλείαις ἀποτρέψαι τοὺς ἄλλους ἐπιτίθεσθαι
3τῇ Λιβύῃ. ἔκρινεν οὖν μετ᾿ ὀλίγων λάθρᾳ
ποιήσασθαι τὴν ἀναγωγὴν καὶ συνενεβίβασε1 τὸν
νεώτερον τῶν υἱῶν Ἡρακλείδην· τὸν γὰρ Ἀρχάγαθον
εὐλαβεῖτο μήποτε συνὼν τῇ μητρυιᾷ καὶ
φύσει τολμηρὸς ὢν ἐπιβουλὴν κατ᾿ αὐτοῦ συστήσῃ.
ὁ δ᾿ Ἀρχάγαθος ὑποπτεύσας αὐτοῦ τὴν ἐπίνοιαν
παρετήρει τὸν ἔκπλουν, διανοούμενος μηνῦσαι τῶν
ἡγεμόνων τοῖς διακωλύσουσι τὴν ἐπιβολήν· ἡγεῖτο
γὰρ δεινὸν εἶναι τὸ τῶν μὲν κινδύνων ἑαυτὸν προθύμως
μετεσχηκέναι, προαγωνιζόμενον τοῦ πατρὸς
καὶ τἀδελφοῦ, τῆς δὲ σωτηρίας μόνον ἀποστερεῖσθαι,
καταλειπόμενον ἔκδοτον τοῖς πολεμίοις.
4διὸ δὴ τοὺς περὶ τὸν Ἀγαθοκλέα μέλλοντας λάθρᾳ
τὸν ἀπόπλουν ποιεῖσθαι νυκτὸς ἐμήνυσέ τισι τῶν
ἡγεμόνων. οἱ δὲ συνδραμόντες οὐ μόνον διεκώλυσαν,
ἀλλὰ καὶ τῷ πλήθει τὴν ῥᾳδιουργίαν ἐξέθηκαν·
ἐφ᾿ οἷς οἱ στρατιῶται περιαλγεῖς γενόμενοι
συνελάβοντο τὸν δυνάστην καὶ δήσαντες παρέδωκαν
εἰς φυλακήν.
69. Ἀναρχίας οὖ γενομένης ἐν τῷ στρατοπέδῳ
θόρυβος ἦν καὶ ταραχὴ καὶ τῆς νυκτὸς ἐπιλαβούσης
διεδόθη λόγος ὡς πλησίον εἰσὶν οἱ πολέμιοι.
ἐμπεσούσης2 δὲ πτόης καὶ φόβου πανικοῦ διεσκευασμένος
ἕκαστος προῆγεν ἐκ τῆς παρεμβολῆς οὐδενὸς
2παραγγέλλοντος. καθ᾿ ὃν δὴ χρόνον οἱ τὸν
δυνάστην παραφυλάττοντες οὐχ ἧττον τῶν ἄλλων
ἐκπεπληγμένοι καὶ δόξαντες ὑπό τινων καλεῖσθαι
1συνενεβίβασε Dindorf: συνεβίβασε.2ἐμπεσούσης Rhodoman: ἐκπεσούσης.326Book XX

far superior in their armies and were determined by 307 b.c. the destruction of those who had first come across to prevent others from attacking Libya. He decided, therefore, to make the return voyage with a few in secret, and he took on board with him the younger of his sons, Heracleides; for he was on his guard against Archagathus, lest at some time this son, who was on intimate terms with his step-mother and was bold by nature, should form a conspiracy against himself. Archagathus, however, suspecting his purpose watched for the sailing with care, being determined to reveal the plot to such of the leaders as would prevent the attempt; for he thought it monstrous that, although he had shared willingly in the battles, fighting in behalf of his father and brother, yet he alone should be deprived of a safe return and left behind as a victim to the enemy. He therefore disclosed to some of the leaders that Agathocles was about to sail away in secret by night. These coming quickly together not only prevented this, but also revealed Agathocles’ knavery to the rank and file; and the soldiers, becoming furious at this, seized the tyrant, bound him, and put him in custody.
69. Consequently, when discipline disappeared in the camp, there was tumult and confusion, and as night came on word was spread abroad that the enemy was near. When fright and panic fear fell upon them, each man armed himself and rushed forth from the encampment, no man giving orders. At this very time those who were guarding the tyrant, being no less frightened than the others and imagining that they were being summoned by somebody, hastily



327