Diodorus of Sicily

τοὺς ὑβριστὰς καταρασάμεναι τὸν βίον αὐτοχειρίᾳ
4κατέστρεψαν. πολλῶν δὲ καὶ ἄλλων τοιούτων λεγομένων,
καὶ τοῦ Ἐπαμεινώνδου συναγαγόντος
ἐκκλησίαν καὶ τοὺς στρατιώτας τοῖς οἰκείοις λόγοις
προτρεψαμένου πρὸς τὸν ἀγῶνα, πάντες μετέθεντο
τὰς γνώμας, καὶ τῆς μὲν δεισιδαιμονίας ἀπελύθησαν,
πρὸς δὲ τὴν μάχην εὐθαρσεῖς ταῖς ψυχαῖς
5κατέστησαν. ἦλθε δὲ καὶ συμμαχία κατὰ τοῦτον
τὸν καιρὸν τοῖς Θηβαίοις παρὰ Θετταλῶν, πεζοὶ
μὲν χίλιοι καὶ πεντακόσιοι, ἱππεῖς δὲ πεντακόσιοι,
ὧν ἡγεῖτο Ἰάσων. οὗτος δ᾿ ἔπεισε τούς τε Βοιωτοὺς
καὶ τοὺς Λακεδαιμονίους ἀνοχὰς ποιήσασθαι
6καὶ τὰ παράλογα τῆς τύχης εὐλαβηθῆναι. γενομένων
δὲ τῶν σπονδῶν Κλεόμβροτος ἀνέζευξε μετὰ
τῆς δυνάμεως ἐκ τῆς Βοιωτίας, καὶ ἀπήντησεν
αὐτῷ ἄλλη δύναμις μεγάλη Λακεδαιμονίων καὶ
τῶν συμμάχων, ἡγουμένου Ἀρχιδάμου τοῦ Ἀγησιλάου.
οἱ γὰρ Σπαρτιᾶται θεωροῦντες τὴν ἑτοιμότητα
τῶν Βοιωτῶν, καὶ τὸ θράσος καὶ τὴν ἀπόνοιαν
εὐλαβούμενοι, τὴν δευτέραν ἀπεστάλκεισαν δύναμιν,
ἵνα τῷ πλήθει τῶν ἀγωνιζομένων περιγένωνται τῆς
7τῶν πολεμίων τόλμης. συνελθουσῶν δ᾿ εἰς ταὐτὸ
τῶν δυνάμεων αἰσχρὸν εἶναι ὑπέλαβον οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι
δεδιέναι τὰς τῶν Βοιωτῶν ἀρετάς. διόπερ
τὰς σπονδὰς παρ᾿ οὐδὲν ἡγησάμενοι μετὰ πολλῆς
προθυμίας ἀνέκαμψαν εἰς Λεῦκτρα. ἑτοίμων δ᾿
ὄντων καὶ τῶν Βοιωτῶν πρὸς τὴν μάχην, ἐξέταττον
ἀμφότεροι τὰς δυνάμεις.
55. Καὶ παρὰ μὲν τοῖς Λακεδαιμονίοις οἱ ἀφ᾿


104Book XV

their ravishers and took their lives by their own hands.1 371/0 b.c. Many other such occurrences were reported, and when Epameinondas had convened an assembly and exhorted the soldiers by the appropriate pleas to meet the issue, they all shifted their resolutions, rid themselves of their superstition, and with courage in their hearts stood ready for the battle. There came also at this time to aid the Thebans an allied contingent from Thessaly, fifteen hundred infantry, and five hundred horsemen, commanded by Jason.2 He persuaded both the Boeotians and the Lacedaemonians to make an armistice and so to guard against the caprices of Fortune. When the truce came into effect, Cleombrotus set out with his army from Boeotia, and there came to meet him another large army of Lacedaemonians and their allies under the command of Archidamus,3 son of Agesilaus. For the Spartans, seeing the preparedness of the Boeotians, and taking measures to meet their boldness and recklessness in battle, had dispatched the second army to overcome by the superior number of their combatants the daring of the enemy. Once these armies had united, the Lacedaemonians thought it cowardly to fear the valour of the Boeotians. So they disregarded the truce and with high spirits returned to Leuctra. The Boeotians too were ready for the battle and both sides marshalled their forces.
55. Now on the Lacedaemonian side the descendants



1A slightly different version of this story occurs in Plutarch, Pelopidas, 20, 3–4. Pausanias, 9. 13. 5–6, is closer to Diodorus.2According to Xenophon, Hell. 6. 4. 20–26, Jason came after the battle of Leuctra, and there is no mention of an armistice.3Archidamus likewise in Xenophon, ibid. 18, was dispatched after and not before the battle.105