Diodorus of Sicily

τὰ πολυτελέστατα1 τῶν εὑρισκομένων τοῖς ξίφεσι
διακόπτοντες τὰς ἰδίας ἀπεκόμιζον μερίδας, ἔνιοι
δὲ τὰς τῶν ἐπιβαλλόντων τοῖς ἀμφισβητουμένοις2
χεῖρας ἀπέκοπτον, συνεκφερόμενοι τοῖς θυμοῖς·
6τὰς δὲ γυναῖκας σὺν αὐτοῖς τοῖς κόσμοις πρὸς βίαν
ἀπῆγον, τὴν αἰχμαλωσίαν δουλαγωγοῦντες.3
Ἡ μὲν οὖν Περσέπολις ὅσῳ τῶν ἄλλων πόλεων
ὑπερεῖχεν εὐδαιμονίᾳ, τοσοῦτον ὑπερεβάλετο τὰς ἄλλας
τοῖς ἀτυχήμασιν.
71. Ὁ δὲ Ἀλέξανδρος παρελθὼν εἰς τὴν ἄκραν
παρέλαβε τοὺς ἐν αὐτῇ θησαυρούς. οὗτοι δέ, ἀπὸ
Κύρου τοῦ πρώτου Περσῶν βασιλεύσαντος μέχρι4
τῶν ὑποκειμένων καιρῶν ἠθροισμένων τῶν προσόδων,
ἔγεμον ἀργυρίου5 τε καὶ χρυσίου· εὑρέθησαν
γὰρ ἐν αὐτοῖς δώδεκα μυριάδες ταλάντων, εἰς ἀργυρίου
2λόγον ἀγομένου τοῦ χρυσίου. βουλόμενος
δὲ τῶν χρημάτων ἃ μὲν μεθ᾿ ἑαυτοῦ κομίζειν πρὸς
τὰς εἰς τὸν πόλεμον χρείας, ἃ δ᾿ εἰς Σοῦσα καταθέσθαι
καὶ φυλάττειν ἐν ταύτῃ6 τῇ πόλει μετεπέμψατο
ἐκ Βαβυλῶνος καὶ Μεσοποταμίας, ἔτι δ᾿ ἐκ
Σούσων ἡμιόνων πλῆθος, τῶν μὲν ἀχθοφόρων, τῶν
δὲ ζευγιτῶν, πρὸς δὲ τούτοις καμήλους ἀχθοφόρους








1πολυτελέστερα RX.2ἀμφισβητοῦσι RX.3The text is that of RX; τὴν αἰχμάλωτον τύχην δουλαγωγοῦντες F.4μέχρις F.5ἀργύρου codd.; corrected by Fischer.6αὐτῇ codd.; corrected by Dindorf.320Book XVII

finds some cut through with their swords so that each 330/29 b.c. might have his own part. Some cut off the hands of those who were grasping at disputed property, being driven mad by their passions. They dragged off women, clothes and all, converting their captivity into slavery.1
As Persepolis had exceeded all other cities in prosperity, so in the same measure it now exceeded all others in misery.2
71. Alexander ascended to the citadel terrace and took possession of the treasure there. This had been accumulated from the state revenues, beginning with Cyrus, the first king of the Persians, down to that time, and the vaults were packed full of silver and gold. The total was found to be one hundred and twenty thousand talents, when the gold was estimated in terms of silver.3 Alexander wanted to take some money with him to meet the costs of the war, and to deposit the rest in Susa and keep it under guard in that city. Accordingly he sent for a vast number of mules from Babylon and Mesopotamia, as well as from Susa itself, both pack and harness animals as well as three thousand pack camels. By these



1Curtius, 5. 6. 1–8. In any captured town, it was customary
to kill the men and enslave the women. Here, because
of the prevailing level of luxury, the rich stuffs were the object of first attention, and women were abducted because of the clothing which they wore.2Diodorus does not say whether Alexander accepted the offer of Tiridates to surrender Persepolis to him (chap. 69. 1). The city was treated as if it had been taken by storm. Curtius (5. 6. 11) reports that Tiridates was rewarded for turning over the royal treasures.3Curtius (5. 6. 9) gives the same figures. The total is expressed as weight of silver and value of gold, the latter being equated to silver according to a proportion which is not stated. The usual ratio of gold to silver in antiquity was 12 or 15 to 1. Strabo (15. 3. 9. 781) reports that the treasure was ultimately assembled at Ecbatana.321