Diodorus of Sicily
5τὴν ψυχήν. ἐπὶ γὰρ τούτου βέλη τὰ μέγιστα
συνετελέσθη καὶ μηχαναὶ παντοῖαι πολὺ τὰς παρὰ
τοῖς ἄλλοις γενομένας ὑπεραίρουσαι· καὶ σκάφη
δὲ μέγιστα καθείλκυσεν οὗτος μετὰ τὴν πολιορκίαν
ταύτην καὶ τὴν τοῦ πατρὸς τελευτήν.
93. Οἱ δὲ Ῥόδιοι θεωροῦντες τὴν προκοπὴν τῶν
παρὰ τοῖς πολεμίοις ἔργων κατεσκεύασαν ἐντὸς
ἕτερον τεῖχος παράλληλον τῷ μέλλοντι πονεῖν κατὰ
τὰς προσβολάς. ἐχρῶντο δὲ λίθοις καθαιροῦντες
τοῦ θεάτρου τὸν περίβολον καὶ τὰς πλησίον οἰκίας,
ἔτι δὲ τῶν ἱερῶν ἔνια, τοῖς θεοῖς εὐξάμενοι καλλίονα
2κατασκευάσειν σωθείσης τῆς πόλεως. ἐξέπεμψαν
δὲ καὶ τῶν νεῶν ἐννέα, διακελευσάμενοι
τοὺς ἀφηγουμένους πανταχῇ πλεῖν καὶ παραδόξως
ἐπιφαινομένους ἃ μὲν βυθίζειν τῶν ἁλισκομένων
πλοίων, ἃ δὲ κατάγειν εἰς τὴν πόλιν. ἐκπλευσάντων
δὲ τούτων καὶ τριχῇ διαιρεθέντων Δαμόφιλος
μὲν ἔχων ναῦς τὰς καλουμένας παρὰ Ῥοδίοις φυλακίδας
ἔπλευσεν εἰς Κάρπαθον καὶ πολλὰ μὲν πλοῖα
τῶν Δημητρίου καταλαβών, ἃ μὲν τοῖς ἐμβόλοις
θραύων κατεπόντιζεν, ἃ δ᾿ ἐπὶ τὸν αἰγιαλὸν κομίζων
ἐνεπύριζεν, ἐκλεγόμενος τῶν σωμάτων τὰ χρησιμώτατα,
οὐκ ὀλίγα δὲ τῶν κομιζόντων τοὺς ἐκ
τῆς νήσου καρποὺς κατήγαγεν εἰς τὴν πατρίδα.
3Μενέδημος δὲ τριῶν ἀφηγούμενος τριημιολιῶν πλεύσας
τῆς Λυκίας ἐπὶ τὰ Πάταρα καὶ καταλαβὼν
ὁρμοῦσαν ναῦν τοῦ πληρώματος ἐπὶ γῆς ὄντος
ἐνεπύρισε τὸ σκάφος, πολλὰ δὲ πλοῖα τῶν κομιζόντων
τὴν ἀγορὰν ἐπὶ τὸ στρατόπεδον ὑποχείρια
388Book XX

and mind to the task. For it was in his time that the 304 b.c. greatest weapons were perfected and engines of all kinds far surpassing those that had existed among others; and this man launched the greatest ships after this siege1 and after the death of his father.
93. When the Rhodians saw the progress of the enemy’s siege works, they built a second wall inside parallel to the one that was on the point of failing under the attacks. They used stones obtained by tearing down the theatre’s outer wall and the adjacent houses, and also some of the temples, vowing to the gods that they would build finer ones when the city had been saved. They also sent out nine of their ships, giving the commanders orders to sail in every direction and, appearing unexpectedly, to sink some of the ships they intercepted and bring others to the city. After these had sailed out and had been divided into three groups, Damophilus, who had ships of the kind called by the Rhodians “guardships,” sailed to Carpathos2; and finding there many of Demetrius’ ships, he sank some, shattering them with his rams, and some he beached and burnt after selecting the most useful men from their crews, and not a few of those that were transporting the grain from the island, he brought back to Rhodes. Menedemus, who commanded three light undecked ships,3 sailed to Patara in Lycia; and finding at anchor there a ship whose crew was on shore, he set the hull on fire; and he took many of the freighters that were carrying provisions to the army and dispatched them



1Cp. Plutarch, Demetrius, 31. 1, 32. 2, 43. 3–5.2An island between Rhodes and Crete.3Literally, three “one and a halves,” perhaps ships with one and one half banks of oars; or more probably, with half the oars manned by two men, half by one.389