Diodorus of Sicily
3ἐπιφέρειν τὴν ἀπώλειαν. ἐπιπολαζούσης δὲ τῆς
ῥᾳδιουργίας καὶ πολλῶν ἀναιρουμένων τοῦτον τὸν
τρόπον, ἐπειδὴ κολάζοντες τὰς αἰτίας τῶν κακῶν
οὐκ ἠδυνήθησαν ἀποτρέψαι τὰς ἄλλας τῶν ἀδικημάτων,
νόμον ἔθεσαν ὅπως συγκατακαίωνται τοῖς
τετελευτηκόσιν ἀνδράσιν αἱ γυναῖκες πλὴν τῶν
ἐγκύων ἢ τῶν ἐχουσῶν τέκνα, τὴν δὲ μὴ βουλομένην
τῷ δόγματι πειθαρχεῖν χήραν μὲν εἶναι1 διὰ
τέλους καὶ θυσιῶν καὶ τῶν ἄλλων νομίμων εἴργεσθαι
4διὰ παντὸς ὡς ἀσεβοῦσαν. τούτων δὲ νομοθετηθέντων
εἰς τοὐναντίον τὴν παρανομίαν τῶν
γυναικῶν μεταβαλεῖν συνέβη· διὰ γὰρ τὴν ὑπερβολὴν
τῆς ἀτιμίας, ἑκάστης ὑπομενούσης ἑκουσίως
τὸν θάνατον, οὐ μόνον προνοεῖσθαι τῆς τῶν συνοικούντων
ἀσφαλείας ὡς κοινῆς οὔσης, ἀλλὰ καὶ πρὸς
ἀλλήλας ἁμιλλᾶσθαι καθάπερ ὑπὲρ τῆς μεγίστης
εὐδοξίας.
34. Ὃ καὶ τότε συνέβη· τοῦ γὰρ νόμου μίαν
κελεύοντος συγκατακάεσθαι παρῆσαν ἀμφότεραι
πρὸς τὴν τοῦ Κητέως ταφήν, ὑπὲρ τοῦ συναποθανεῖν
2ὡς ὑπὲρ ἀριστίου συμφιλοτιμούμεναι. τῶν
δὲ στρατηγῶν διακρινόντων ἡ νεωτέρα μὲν ἀπεφαίνετο
τὴν ἑτέραν ἔγκυον εἶναι καὶ διὰ τοῦτο μὴ
δύνασθαι χρήσασθαι τῷ νόμῳ, ἡ δὲ πρεσβυτέρα
δικαιότερον ἀπεφαίνετο εἶναι τὴν προέχουσαν τοῖς
χρόνοις προέχειν καὶ τῇ τιμῇ· καὶ γὰρ ἐπὶ τῶν
ἄλλων ἁπάντων θεωρεῖσθαι τοὺς πρεσβυτέρους
πολὺ προέχοντας τῶν νεωτέρων εἰς ἐντροπὴν καὶ
3τιμήν. οἱ δ᾿ οὖν στρατηγοὶ διὰ τῶν μαιεύεσθαι
δυναμένων γνόντες τὴν πρεσβυτέραν ἔγκυον οὖσαν
προέκριναν τὴν νεωτέραν. οὗ συμβάντος ἡ μὲν

1μὲν εἶναι MSS., Fischer, μένειν Dindorf.320Book XIX

the wine cups cause death. But when this evil became 317 b.c. fashionable and many were murdered in this way, the Indians, although they punished those guilty of the crime, since they were not able to deter the others from wrongdoing, established a law that wives, except such as were pregnant or had children, should be cremated along with their deceased husbands, and that one who was not willing to obey this law should not only be a widow for life but also be entirely debarred from sacrifices and other religious observances as unclean.1 When these laws had been established, the lawlessness of the women changed into the opposite, for as each one because of the great loss of caste willingly met death, they not only cared for the safety of their husbands as if it were their own, but they even vied with each other as for a very great honour.
34. Such rivalry appeared on this occasion. Although the law ordered only one of Ceteus’ wives to be cremated with him, both of them appeared at his funeral, contending for the right of dying with him as for a prize of valour. When the generals undertook to decide the matter, the younger wife claimed that the other was pregnant and for that reason could not take advantage of the law; and the elder asserted that more justly should the one who had the precedence in years have precedence also in honour, for in all other matters those who are older are regarded as having great precedence over the younger in respect and in honour. The generals, ascertaining from those skilled in midwifery that the elder was pregnant, decided for the younger. When this

1This same origin of the custom of suttee is given in Strabo, 15. 1. 30 (cp. also 15. 1. 62).321