Diodorus of Sicily

τῆς κατὰ τὸν στρατηγὸν σωτηρίας ἐπέρραξαν τοῖς
μισθοφόροις βαρείᾳ τῇ συντάξει καὶ τὸν μὲν Δίωνα
καταπονούμενον ἐξήρπασαν ἐκ τῶν κινδύνων, τοὺς
δὲ πολεμίους βιασάμενοι φυγεῖν ἠνάγκασαν. ὁμοίως
δὲ καὶ κατὰ τὸν ἄλλον τόπον τοῦ τείχους προτερούντων
τῶν Συρακοσίων οἱ τοῦ τυράννου μισθοφόροι
συνεδιώχθησαν ἐντὸς πυλῶν τῶν ἐν τῇ Νήσῳ.
ἐπιφανεῖ δὲ μάχῃ νικήσαντες οἱ Συρακόσιοι
καὶ τὴν ἐλευθερίαν βεβαίως κτησάμενοι τρόπαιον
ἔστησαν κατὰ τοῦ τυράννου.
13. Μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα Διονύσιος μὲν ἐπταικὼς καὶ
τὴν δυναστείαν ἀπογινώσκων ἤδη ἐν μὲν ταῖς
ἀκροπόλεσιν ἀπέλιπε φρουρὰς ἀξιολόγους, αὐτὸς δὲ
τοὺς τετελευτηκότας, ὀκτακοσίους ὄντας, λαβὼν
τὴν ἀναίρεσιν αὐτῶν ἔθαψε λαμπρῶς, χρυσοῖς μὲν
στεφάνοις ἐστεφανωμένους, πορφυρίσι δὲ καλαῖς
περιβεβλημένους· ἤλπιζε γὰρ διὰ τῆς τούτων
σπουδῆς προτρέψεσθαι τοὺς ἄλλους εἰς τὸ προθύμως
κινδυνεύειν ὑπὲρ τῆς τυραννίδος· τοὺς δ᾿
ἀνδραγαθήσαντας μεγάλαις δωρεαῖς ἐτίμησε. πρὸς
δὲ τοὺς Συρακοσίους διεπέμπετο περὶ διαλύσεων.
2ὁ δὲ Δίων περὶ μὲν τῶν πρεσβειῶν αἰεί τινας εὐλόγους
προφάσεις ποριζόμενος ἀνεβάλλετο, ἐν τοσούτῳ
δὲ τὸ λοιπὸν τοῦ τείχους κατασκευάσας μεθ᾿
ἡσυχίας τότε τὰς πρεσβείας μετεπέμπετο, κατεστρατηγηκὼς
τοὺς πολεμίους ταῖς τῆς εἰρήνης
ἐλπίσιν. γενομένων δὲ λόγων περὶ συλλύσεων ὁ
Δίων ἀπεκρίθη τοῖς πρέσβεσιν μίαν εἶναι σύλλυσιν,
ἐὰν ἀποθέμενος τὴν τυραννίδα βούληται τυχεῖν
τιμῶν τινων. ὁ δὲ Διονύσιος ὑπερηφάνου τῆς


274Book XVI

into the mercenaries in heavy formation and rescued 357/6 b.c. the distressed Dion from his perils, then overpowering the enemy, forced them to flee. Since likewise in the other part of the wall the Syracusans had the superiority, the tyrant’s mercenaries were chased in a body inside the gates of the Island. The Syracusans, who had now won victory in a significant battle and had securely recovered their freedom, set up a trophy to signalize the tyrant’s defeat.1
13. After this, Dionysius, who had failed and by now despaired of his tyranny, left a considerable garrison in his citadels, while he himself, having secured permission to take up his dead, eight hundred in number, gave their bodies a magnificent burial, causing them to be crowned with golden crowns and wrapped in fine purple; for he hoped by his solicitude for them to incite the survivors to fight spiritedly in defence of the tyranny; and those who had behaved gallantly he honoured with rich gifts. And he kept sending messengers to the Syracusans to confer about terms of a settlement. But Dion in the matter of his embassies, by constantly offering plausible excuses, kept making postponements, and, when he had meanwhile constructed the remainder of the wall at his leisure, he then called for the embassies, having out-manœuvred2 the enemy by encouraging their hopes of peace. When discussion arose concerning the terms of settlement, Dion replied to the ambassadors that only one settlement was possible, namely that Dionysius should resign his position as tyrant and then deign to accept certain privileges. But Dionysius,

1For this battle see Plutarch, Dion 30. 4–8.2Diodorus alone mentions ruses of Dion. Plutarch (Dion, 31–32. 1) and Polyaenus (5. 2. 8) note only those of Dionysius.275