Diodorus of Sicily

ἀνεῖλε μὲν εἰς τετρακισχιλίους, ἐζώγρησε δὲ ὑπὲρ
τοὺς πεντακισχιλίους, ἐν οἷς ἦν καὶ αὐτὸς ὁ Ἀριαράθης.
3τοῦτον μὲν οὖν καὶ τοὺς συγγενεῖς αὐτοῦ
πάντας αἰκισάμενος ἀνεσταύρωσε· τοῖς δ᾿ ἡττηθεῖσι
συγχωρήσας τὴν ἀσφάλειαν καὶ καταστήσας τὰ
κατὰ τὴν Καππαδοκίαν παρέδωκε τὴν σατραπείαν
Εὐμενεῖ τῷ Καρδιανῷ, καθάπερ ἐξ ἀρχῆς ἦν
μεμερισμένος.
4Ὑπὸ δὲ τοὺς αὐτοὺς καιροὺς καὶ Κρατερὸς ἐκ
Κιλικίας ἀναζεύξας ἧκεν εἰς Μακεδονίαν, βοηθήσων
τοῖς περὶ τὸν Ἀντίπατρον καὶ διορθωσόμενος τὰς
γεγενημένας ἥττας τῶν Μακεδόνων. ἦγε δὲ πεζοὺς
μὲν τῶν εἰς Ἀσίαν Ἀλεξάνδρῳ συνδιαβεβηκότων
ἑξακισχιλίους, τῶν δ᾿ ἐν παρόδῳ προσειλημμένων
τετρακισχιλίους, Πέρσας δὲ τοξότας καὶ σφενδονήτας
χιλίους, ἱππεῖς δὲ χιλίους καὶ πεντακοσίους.
5παρελθὼν δ᾿ εἰς τὴν Θετταλίαν καὶ τοῦ πρωτείου
παραχωρήσας ἑκουσίως Ἀντιπάτρῳ κοινῇ μετ᾿
αὐτοῦ κατεστρατοπέδευσε παρὰ τὸν Πηνειὸν ποταμόν.
οἱ δὲ πάντες ἠθροίσθησαν σὺν τοῖς μετὰ
Λεοννάτου παραγεγενημένοις πεζοὶ μὲν πλείους
τῶν τετρακισμυρίων ἐν τοῖς βαρέσιν ὅπλοις, τοξόται
δὲ καὶ σφενδονῆται τρισχίλιοι, ἱππεῖς δὲ
πεντακισχίλιοι.
17. Οἱ δὲ Ἕλληνες κατὰ τοῦτον τὸν καιρὸν
ἀντεστρατοπέδευσαν πολὺ τοῖς πλήθεσι λειπόμενοι·
πολλοὶ γὰρ αὐτῶν διὰ τὰς προγεγενημένας εὐημερίας
καταφρονοῦντες τῶν πολεμίων εἰς τὰς
πατρίδας ἦσαν ἀπεληλυθότες πρὸς τὴν τῶν ἰδίων
58Book XVIII

number of four thousand and took captive more than 322 b.c. five thousand, among them Ariarathes himself. Now the king and all his relatives Perdiccas tortured and impaled1; but to the conquered people he granted immunity, and after putting in order the affairs of Cappadocia, he gave the satrapy to Eumenes of Cardia, just as it had originally been assigned.2
About the same time Craterus also departed from Cilicia and arrived in Macedonia to reinforce Antipater
and to make good the defeats that the Macedonians had suffered.3 He brought with him six thousand foot soldiers from those who had crossed into Asia with Alexander and four thousand from those who had been enlisted on the march, one thousand Persian bowmen and slingers, and fifteen hundred horsemen. Entering Thessaly and freely yielding the chief command to Antipater, he shared a camp with him beside the Peneius River.4 Including those who had been under Leonnatus, there were gathered together in all more than forty thousand heavy armed infantry, three thousand bowmen and slingers, and five thousand cavalry.
17. The Greeks who were encamped against them at this time were far inferior in numbers; for many of them, despising the enemy because of their former good fortune, had gone away to their own cities to




1But cp. Book 31. frag. 19. 3–5 (Dindorf), according to which Ariarathes fell in the battle, and an adopted son escaped, later to recover the kingdom.2Cp. chap. 3. 1. The narrative is continued in chap. 22. 1.3For other accounts of the final campaign of the Lamian War and the settlement that followed cp. Plutarch, Phocion, 26–30; Arrian, FGrH, 156. 1. 12; Pausanias, 7. 10. 4–5.4At Crannon, from which the battle next described takes its name.59