Diodorus of Sicily
5τὸ δ᾿ ὕψος ἦν ὅλου τοῦ κατασκευάσματος πήχεις
πλείους τῶν ἑκατὸν τριάκοντα.
Καθόλου δὲ τῶν τε ἡγεμόνων καὶ τῶν στρατιωτῶν
ἁπάντων καὶ τῶν πρέσβεων, ἔτι δὲ τῶν ἐγχωρίων
φιλοτιμηθέντων εἰς τὸν τῆς ἐκφορᾶς κόσμον φασὶ
τὸ πλῆθος τῶν ἀναλωθέντων χρημάτων γεγονέναι
6πλείω τῶν μυρίων καὶ δισχιλίων ταλάντων. ἀκολούθως
δὲ ταύτῃ τῇ μεγαλοπρεπείᾳ καὶ τῶν ἄλλων
γενομένων κατὰ τὴν ἐκφορὰν τιμῶν τὸ τελευταῖον
προσέταξεν ἅπασι θύειν Ἡφαιστίωνι θεῷ παρέδρῳ1·
καὶ γὰρ κατὰ τύχην ἧκεν εἷς τῶν φίλων
Φίλιππος, χρησμὸν φέρων παρ᾿ Ἄμμωνος θύειν
Ἡφαιστίωνι θεῷ. διόπερ γενόμενος περιχαρὴς ἐπὶ
τῷ καὶ τὸν θεὸν κεκυρωκέναι τὴν αὐτοῦ γνώμην2
πρῶτος τὴν θυσίαν ἐπετέλεσεν καὶ τὸ πλῆθος λαμπρῶς
ὑπεδέξατο, μύρια τὸν ἀριθμὸν θύσας ἱερεῖα
παντοδαπά.
116. Μετὰ δὲ τὴν ἐκφορὰν εἰς ἀνέσεις καὶ πανηγυρικὸν
βίον ἐκτραπέντος τοῦ βασιλέως, δοκοῦντος
ἰσχύειν τότε πλεῖστον καὶ μάλιστ᾿ εὐδαιμονεῖν, ἡ
πεπρωμένη συνῄρει τὸν ὑπὸ τῆς φύσεως αὐτῷ
συγκεχωρημένον τοῦ ζῆν χρόνον. εὐθὺ δὲ καὶ τὸ
θεῖον ἐσήμαινε τὴν τελευτὴν αὐτοῦ, πολλῶν καὶ
παραδόξων οἰωνῶν καὶ σημείων συντελουμένων.
1The manuscripts have προέδρῳ, but cp. Lucian, Calumniae
non temere credendum, 17. 148: ἔθυον παρέδρῳ καὶ
ἀλεξικάκῳ θεῷ. Editors have correced accordingly.2ἐπὶ τῷ θεῷ κυρώσαντι τὴν αὐτοῦ γνώμην X.460Book XVII

total height of the pyre was more than one hundred 324/3 b.c and thirty cubits.
All of the generals and the soldiers and the envoys and even the natives rivalled one another in contributing to the magnificence of the funeral, so, it is said, that the total expense came to over twelve thousand talents.1 In keeping with this magnificence and the other special marks of honour at the funeral, Alexander ended by decreeing that all should sacrifice to Hephaestion as god coadjutor.2 As a matter of fact, it happened just at this time that Philip, one of the Friends, came bearing a response from Ammon that Hephaestion should be worshipped as a god. Alexander was delighted that the god had ratified his own opinion, was himself the first to perform the sacrifice, and entertained everybody handsomely. The sacrifice consisted of ten thousand victims of all sorts.
116. After the funeral, the king turned to amusements and festivals, but just when it seemed that he was at the peak of his power and good fortune, Fate cut off the time allowed him by nature to remain alive. Straightway heaven also began to foretell his death, and many strange portents and signs occurred.
1Justin (12. 12. 12) gives the same figue; Plutarch
(Alexander, 72. 3) and Arrian (7. 14. 8), 10,000 talents.2Lucian (Calumniae non temere credendum, 17) gives a
fuller account of Hephaestion’s deification; he received temples and precincts in the cities, his name was used in the most solemn of oaths, and he received sacrifice as a πάρεδρος καὶ ἀλεξίκακος θεός. No archaeological record of any of this remains (C. Habicht, Gottmenschentum und griechische Städte, 1956), and the ancient tradition was various. Justin (12. 12. 12) reports, like Diodorus, that Alexander ordered that Hephaestion was to be worshipped “ut deum.” Plutarch (Alexander, 72. 2) states that Ammon recommended that he should be honoured as a hero, and so did he also according to Arrian (7. 23. 6), after first refusing to allow him divine worship (7. 14. 7). The term πάρεδρος is odd: elsewhere it seems to mean a priest (G. E. Bean, Journal of Hellenic Studies, 72 (1952), 118.461