Diodorus of Sicily

τὰς τοῦ πλήθους εὐλαβείας. διόπερ τινῶν προσφάτως
παραγεγονότων ἐκ Θηβῶν ἔπεισεν εἰπεῖν
ὅτι τὰ κατὰ τὸν νεὼν τοῦ Ἡρακλέους ὅπλα παραδόξως
ἀφανῆ γέγονε καὶ λόγος ἐν ταῖς Θήβαις
διαδέδοται ὡς τῶν ἡρώων τῶν ἀρχαίων ἀνειληφότων
αὐτὰ καὶ βοηθεῖν τοῖς Βοιωτοῖς ἀπεληλυθότων.
ἄλλον δὲ κατέστησεν ὡς ἀπὸ Τροφωνίου προσφάτως
ἀναβεβηκότα καὶ λέγοντα διότι προστέταχεν
ὁ θεὸς αὐτοῖς, ὅταν ἐν Λεύκτροις νικήσωσιν, ἀγῶνα
τιθέναι Διὶ βασιλεῖ στεφανίτην· ἀφ᾿ οὗ δὴ Βοιωτοὶ
ταύτην ποιοῦσι τὴν πανήγυριν ἐν Λεβαδείᾳ.
54. Συνήργησε δὲ πρὸς ταύτην τὴν ἐπίνοιαν
Λεανδρίας1 ὁ Σπαρτιάτης, πεφευγὼς μὲν ἐκ Λακεδαίμονος,
τότε δὲ συστρατεύων Θηβαίοις. οὗτος
γὰρ ἐν ἐκκλησίᾳ προαχθεὶς ἀπεφήνατο2· παλαιὸν
εἶναι λόγιον τοῖς Σπαρτιάταις, ὅτι τότε τὴν ἡγεμονίαν
ἀποβαλοῦσιν, ὅταν ἐν Λεύκτροις ὑπὸ Θηβαίων
2ἡττηθῶσιν. προσῆλθον δὲ τῷ Ἐπαμεινώνδᾳ καὶ
χρησμολόγοι τινὲς ἐγχώριοι, λέγοντες ὅτι περὶ τὸν
τάφον τῶν Λεύκτρου καὶ Σκεδάσου θυγατέρων
μεγάλῃ συμφορᾷ δεῖ περιπεσεῖν Λακεδαιμονίους
3διὰ τοιαύτας αἰτίας. Λεῦκτρος ἦν, ἀφ᾿ οὗ τὸ
πεδίον τοῦτο ἔσχε τὴν προσηγορίαν. τούτου θυγατέρας
καὶ Σκεδάσου τινὸς ὁμοίως κόρας πρέσβεις
Λακεδαιμονίων ἐβιάσαντο· αἱ δὲ ὑβρισθεῖσαι τὴν
συμφορὰν οὐκ ἐνέγκασαι, τῇ πατρίδι τῇ πεμψάσῃ


1Λεανδρίδας Dindorf, Κλεανδρίδας C. Müller.2ἀπεφήνατο Wesseling: ἀπέφηνε τὸ.102Book XV

soldiery. Accordingly, a number of men having 371/0 b.c. recently arrived from Thebes, he persuaded them to say that the arms on the temple of Heracles had surprisingly disappeared and that word had gone abroad in Thebes that the heroes of old had taken them up and set off to help the Boeotians. He placed before them another man as one who had recently ascended from the cave of Trophonius,1 who said that the god had directed them, when they won at Leuctra, to institute a contest with crowns for prizes in honour of Zeus the king. This indeed is the origin of this festival which the Boeotians now celebrate at Lebadeia.
54. An aider and abettor of this device was Leandrias2 the Spartan, who had been exiled from Lace-daemon and was then a member of the Theban expedition. He was produced in the assembly and declared that there was an ancient saying amongst the Spartans, that they would lose the supremacy when they should be defeated at Leuctra at the hands of the Thebans. Certain local oracle-mongers likewise came up to Epameinondas, saying that the Lacedaemonians were destined to meet with a great disaster by the tomb of the daughters of Leuctrus and Scedasus for the following reasons. Leuctrus was the person for whom this plain was named. His daughters and those of a certain Scedasus as well, being maidens, were violated by some Lacedaemonian ambassadors. The outraged girls, unable to endure their misfortune, called down curses on the country that had sent forth


1Near Lebadeia. Trophonius designates an underworld Boeotian Zeus (Chthonius) who gave oracles from this cave. For these stories see Polyaenus, 2. 3. 8.2Not known elsewhere; perhaps an error for Cleandridas (son of Gylippus?); see P.-W. Realencyclopädie, s.vv.103