Diodorus of Sicily
7ὀλίγαις, ὡς διαρῶν1 ἐπ᾿ Ἀκράγαντος. ἀπενεχθεὶς
δ᾿ ὑπ᾿ ἀνέμων εἰς τὸν Ἀδρίαν κατῆρε μὲν εἰς τὴν
τῶν Ἀπολλωνιατῶν χώραν, καταλαβὼν δὲ τὴν
πόλιν πολιορκουμένην ὑπὸ Γλαυκίου τοῦ βασιλέως
τῶν Ἰλλυριῶν ἔλυσε τὴν πολιορκίαν, πείσας τὸν
βασιλέα συνθήκας ποιήσασθαι πρὸς τοὺς Ἀπολλωνιάτας.
8ἐντεῦθεν δὲ πλεύσας εἰς Τάραντα καὶ
παρακαλέσας τὸν δῆμον συνελευθεροῦν Συρακοσίους,
ἔπεισε ψηφίσασθαι ναυσὶν εἴκοσι βοηθεῖν·
διὰ γὰρ τὴν συγγένειαν καὶ τὸ τῆς οἰκίας σχῆμα
προσένεμον2 τοῖς λόγοις αὐτοῦ πίστιν τε μεγάλην
καὶ βάρος.
71. Τῶν δὲ Ταραντίνων περὶ τὴν παρασκευὴν
ὄντων αὐτὸς αὐτόθεν ἐκπλεύσας3 εἰς τὸν Ἀκράγαντα
παρέλαβε τὴν στρατηγίαν καὶ τὸ μὲν πρῶτον
μετεωρήσας τὰ πλήθη μεγάλαις ἐλπίσι παρεστήσατο
πάντας προσδοκᾶν σύντομον κατάλυσιν τοῦ
2τυράννου, τοῦ δὲ χρόνου προϊόντος πρᾶξιν μὲν οὐδεμίαν
οὔτε τῆς πατρίδος οὔτε τῆς περὶ τὸ γένος
ἐπιφανείας ἀξίαν διεπράξατο, τοὐναντίον δὲ φονικὸς
ὢν καὶ τῶν τυράννων ὠμότερος προσέκοπτε
3τοῖς πλήθεσι. πρὸς δὲ τούτοις τὴν πάτριον δίαιταν
μετέβαλεν καὶ ταῖς ἡδοναῖς ἐνετρύφησεν οὕτως
ἀσελγῶς ὥστε Πέρσην εἶναι δοκεῖν καὶ οὐ Σπαρτιάτην.
4ἐπεὶ δὲ τῶν προσόδων τὸ πλεῖον μέρος
ἀνήλωσεν τὰ μὲν πολιτευόμενος, τὰ δὲ διανοσφιζόμενος
τέλος Σωσίστρατον, ἐπιφανέστατον τῶν φυγάδων,





1διαρῶν Dindorf: διαίρων MSS. followed by Fischer.2προσένεμον Dindorf: προσενόουν RX, προσέπεσθαι F.3αὐτόθεν ἐκπλεύσας Capps: συνεκπλεύσας.24Book XIX

with a few ships as if to cross to Acragas. He was, 314 b.c. however, carried by the winds into the Adriatic and landed in the territory of Apollonia. Finding that city besieged by Glaucias, the king of the Illyrians, he brought the siege to an end, persuading the king to make a treaty with the people of Apollonia. Thence he sailed to Tarentum, where he urged the people to join in freeing the Syracusans; and he persuaded them to vote to assist with twenty ships; for because of ties of kinship and on account of the dignity of his family, they ascribed to his words a high degree of sincerity and great importance.
71. While the Tarentines were engaged in their preparations, Acrotatus immediately sailed to Acragas where he assumed the office of general. At first he buoyed up the common people with great expectations and caused all to anticipate a speedy overthrow of the tyrant; however, as time advanced, he accomplished nothing worthy either of his fatherland or of the distinction of his family, but on the contrary, being bloodthirsty and more cruel than the tyrants, he continually gave offence to the common people. Moreover, he abandoned his native manner of living and devoted himself so unrestrainedly to pleasure that he seemed to be a Persian and not a Spartan. When he had squandered the larger part of the revenue, partly by his public activity, partly by private peculation, he finally invited to dinner Sosistratus,1 who was the most distinguished of the

1Almost certainly identical with the Sostratus of chaps.
3–5. He was leader of the oligarchical party in Syracuse and one of the Six Hundred at the time when Agathocles became tyrant, escaping death by flight. In chap. 3. 3, Diodorus, following some democratic source, describes him as one who “had spent the greater part of his life in plots, murders, and great impieties,” in sharp contrast to the praise given him in this passage, probably based on Timaeus.25