Diodorus of Sicily

φρουρὰς ἀξιολόγους εἰσαγαγών, αὐτὸς κατεῖχε τὰς
πόλεις. ὁ δὲ Φεραῖος Ἀλέξανδρος καταδιωχθεὶς
ἅμα καὶ καταπλαγεὶς ἐπανῆλθεν εἰς τὰς Φεράς.
Καὶ τὰ μὲν κατὰ τὴν Θετταλίαν ἐν τούτοις ἦν.
62. Κατὰ δὲ τὴν Πελοπόννησον Λακεδαιμόνιοι
μὲν Πολύτροπον στρατηγὸν ἐξέπεμψαν εἰς τὴν
Ἀρκαδίαν, ἔχοντα πολιτικοὺς μὲν ὁπλίτας χιλίους,
φυγάδας δ᾿ Ἀργείων καὶ Βοιωτῶν πεντακοσίους.
οὗτος δὲ παρελθὼν εἰς Ὀρχομενὸν τὸν Ἀρκαδικὸν
παρεφύλαττε τὴν πόλιν ταύτην, οἰκείως διακειμένην
2πρὸς τοὺς Σπαρτιάτας. Λυκομήδης δ᾿ ὁ Μαντινεύς,
στρατηγὸς ὢν τῶν Ἀρκάδων, παραλαβὼν
τοὺς καλουμένους ἐπιλέκτους, ὄντας πεντακισχιλίους,
ἧκεν ἐπὶ τὸν Ὀρχομενόν. προαγαγόντων
δὲ τὴν δύναμιν Λακεδαιμονίων ἐκ τῆς πόλεως ἐγένετο
μάχη καρτερά, καθ᾿ ἣν ὅ τε στρατηγὸς τῶν
Λακεδαιμονίων ἀνῃρέθη καὶ τῶν ἄλλων εἰς διακοσίους,
οἱ δὲ λοιποὶ συνεδιώχθησαν εἰς τὴν πόλιν.
3οἱ δὲ Ἀρκάδες, καίπερ νενικηκότες, ὅμως εὐλαβοῦντο
τὸ βάρος τῆς Σπάρτης, καὶ καθ᾿ αὑτοὺς οὐχ
ὑπέλαβον δυνήσεσθαι τοῖς Λακεδαιμονίοις διαπολεμεῖν.
διὸ καὶ παραλαβόντες Ἀργείους τε καὶ
Ἠλείους, τὸ μὲν πρῶτον πρέσβεις ἀπέστειλαν εἰς
τὰς Ἀθήνας, ἀξιοῦντες συμμαχίαν ποιήσασθαι κατὰ
τῶν Σπαρτιατῶν, ὡς δ᾿ οὐδεὶς αὐτοῖς προσεῖχε,
διαπρεσβευσάμενοι πρὸς τοὺς Θηβαίους ἔπεισαν
αὐτοὺς συμμαχίαν συνθέσθαι κατὰ τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων.



122Book XV

opinion, he brought into them garrisons of considerable 369/8 b.c. strength and held the cities himself.1 Alexander of Pherae, hotly pursued and alarmed at the same time, returned to Pherae.
Such was the state of affairs in Thessaly,
62. In the Peloponnese, the Lacedaemonians dispatched Polytropus as general to Arcadia with a thousand citizen hoplites and five hundred Argive and Boeotian refugees. He reached the Arcadian Orchomenus and guarded it closely since it was on friendly terms with Sparta.2 Lycomedes of Mantineia, general of the Arcadians, with five thousand men styled the elite,3 came to Orchomenus. As the Lacedaemonians led forth their army from the city a great battle ensued in which the Lacedaemonian general was killed4 and two hundred others, while the rest were driven into the city. The Arcadians, in spite of their victory, felt a prudent respect for the strength of Sparta and believed that they would not be able by themselves to cope with the Lacedaemonians. Accordingly, associating Argives and Eleians with themselves, they first sent envoys to Athens requesting them to join in an alliance against the Spartans, but as no one heeded them, they sent an embassy to the Thebans and persuaded them to join an alliance against the Lacedaemonians.5 Immediately, then,



1See chap. 67. 4.2“The Orchomenians refused to be members of the
Arcadian League on account of their enmity toward the
Mantineans” (Xenophon, Hell. 6. 5.11, trans. by Brownson,
L.C.L.).3These were called eparitoi. See Xenophon, Hell. 7. 4. 22, 33, 36; 5. 3; and infra, chap. 67. 2.4Hell. 6. 5. 14.5See Demosthenes, 16. 12, 19, and Xenophon, Hell. 6. 5. 19. For the policy of Athens in this period see Cloché, La Politique étrangère d’ Athènes, 97–99. Cloche thinks Athens had a chance to expand her confederacy at the expense of her former ally Thebes and her former enemy Sparta, but her refusal to help (owing especially to Elis’ recalcitrancy) at this time gave Thebes the opportunity to step in.123