Diodorus of Sicily
5. Ὡς δ᾿ εὐτρεπῆ πάντ᾿ ἦν, πληρώσας ἑξήκοντα
ναῦς ἐπετήρει καιρὸν οἰκεῖον πρὸς τὸν ἔκπλουν.
ἀγνοουμένης δὲ τῆς ἐπινοίας αὐτοῦ τινὲς μὲν εἰς
τὴν Ἰταλίαν ὑπελάμβανον αὐτὸν στρατεύειν, τινὲς
δὲ πορθήσειν τῆς Σικελίας τὴν ὑπὸ Καρχηδονίους,
πάντες δὲ ἀπεγίνωσκον τῶν ἐκπλεῖν μελλόντων τὴν
σωτηρίαν καὶ τοῦ δυνάστου τὴν μανίαν κατεγίνωσκον.
2ἐφορμούντων δὲ τῶν πολεμίων πολλαπλασίαις
τριήρεσι τὸ μὲν πρῶτον ἐφ᾿ ἡμέρας τινὰς
ἠναγκάζετο συνέχειν1 ἐν ταῖς ναυσὶ τοὺς στρατιώτας,
οὐ δυναμένους ἐκπλεῦσαι· ἔπειτα δὲ σιτηγῶν
πλοίων τῇ πόλει προσθεόντων οἱ μὲν Καρχηδόνιοι
παντὶ τῷ στόλῳ πρὸς τὰς ναῦς ἀνήχθησαν, ὁ δ᾿
Ἀγαθοκλῆς ἀπελπίζων ἤδη τὴν ἐπιβολήν, ὡς ἴδεν
τὸ στόμα τοῦ λιμένος ἔρημον τῶν ἐφορμούντων,
3ἐξέπλευσεν ὁξείαις ταῖς εἰρεσίαις χρώμενος. εἶθ᾿
οἱ μὲν Καρχηδόνιοι πλησίον ἤδη τῶν φορτηγῶν
ὄντες, ὡς ἴδον τοὺς πολεμίους ἀθρόαις ταῖς ναυσὶ
πλέοντας, τὸ μὲν πρῶτον ὑπολαβόντες αὐτὸν ὡρμηκέναι
πρὸς τὴν τῶν σιτηγῶν βοήθειαν, ἀνέστρεφον
καὶ τὸν στόλον ἐξήρτυον εἰς ναυμαχίαν· ὡς δ᾿ ἐπ᾿
εὐθείας ἑώρων παραθέοντας καὶ πολὺ τοῦ πλοῦ
4προλαμβάνοντας, ἐποιοῦντο τὸν διωγμόν. ἔνθα δὴ
τούτων πρὸς ἀλλήλους φιλοτιμουμένων τὰ μὲν τὴν
ἀγορὰν κομίζοντα πλοῖα παραδόξως ἐκφυγόντα τὸν
κίνδυνον πολλὴν εὐπορίαν ἐποίησεν ἐν ταῖς Συρακούσσαις
τῶν ἐπιτηδείων, σιτοδείας ἤδη τὴν πόλιν
ἐχούσης, ὁ δ᾿ Ἀγαθοκλῆς περικατάληπτος ἤδη
γινόμενος ἐπιλαβούσης τῆς νυκτὸς ἀνελπίστου σωτηρίας
5ἔτυχεν. τῇ δ᾿ ὑστεραίᾳ τηλικαύτην ἔκλειψιν

1ἠναγκάζετο συνέχειν Wesseling, ἠνάγκάζε σ. ἑαυτοὺς Fischer:
ἠνάγκαζε συνέχειν.154Book XX
5. When everything was ready, Agathocles manned 310 b.c. sixty ships and awaited a suitable time for the voyage. Since his purpose was unknown, some supposed that he was making an expedition into Italy, and others that he was going to plunder the part of Sicily that was under Carthaginian control; but all despaired of the safety of those who were about to sail away and condemned the prince for his mad folly. But since the enemy was blockading the port with triremes many times more numerous than his own, Agathocles at first for some days was compelled to detain his soldiers in the ships since they could not sail out; but later, when some grain ships were putting in to the city, the Carthaginians with their whole fleet made for these ships, and Agathocles, who already despaired of his enterprise, as he saw the mouth of the harbour freed of the blockading ships, sailed out, his men rowing at top speed. Then when the Carthaginians, who were already close to the cargo vessels, saw the enemy sailing with their ships in close order, assuming at first that Agathocles was hastening to the rescue of the grain ships, they turned and made their fleet ready for battle; but when they saw the ships sailing straight past and getting a long start of them, they began to pursue. Thereupon, while these were contending with each other, the ships that were bringing grain, unexpectedly escaping the danger, brought about a great abundance of provisions in Syracuse, when a scarcity of food was already gripping the city; and Agathocles, who was already at the point of being overtaken and surrounded, gained unhoped-for safety as night closed in. On the next day there occurred such an eclipse of the
155