Diodorus of Sicily

καθ᾿ ὑπερβολὴν δυσῶδες, ὥστε μήτ᾿ ἰχθὺν δύνασθαι
τρέφειν μήτ᾿ ἄλλο τῶν καθ᾿ ὕδατος εἰωθότων
ζῴων εἶναι.1 ἐμβαλλόντων δ᾿ εἰς αὐτὴν ποταμῶν
μεγάλων τῇ γλυκύτητι διαφόρων τούτων μὲν περιγίνεται
κατὰ τὴν δυσωδίαν, ἐξ αὑτῆς δὲ μέσης
ἐκφυσᾷ κατ᾿ ἐνιαυτὸν ἀσφάλτου στερεᾶς μέγεθος
ποτὲ μὲν μείζον ἢ τρίπλεθρον, ἔστι δ᾿ ὅτ᾿ οὐ πολὺ
λειπόμενον πλέθρου· ἐφ᾿ ᾧ δὴ συνήθως οἱ περιοικοῦντες
βάρβαροι τὸ μὲν μεῖζον καλοῦσι ταῦρον,
τὸ δὲ ἔλασσον μόσχον. ἐπιπλεούσης δὲ τῆς ἀσφάλτου
πελαγίας ὁ τόπος φαίνεται τοῖς ἐξ ἀποστήματος
θεωροῦσιν οἱονεί τις νῆσος. τὴν δ᾿ ἔκπτωσιν
φανερὰν συμβαίνει γίνεσθαι πρὸ ἡμερῶν εἴκοσι·
κύκλῳ γὰρ τῆς λίμνης ἐπὶ πολλοὺς σταδίους ὀσμὴ
τῆς ἀσφάλτου προσπίπτει μετὰ2 πνεύματος μοχθηροῦ
καὶ πᾶς ὁ περὶ τὸν τόπον ἄργυρος καὶ χρυσὸς
καὶ χαλκὸς ἀποβάλλει τὴν ἰδιότητα τοῦ χρώματος.
ἀλλ᾿ αὕτη μὲν ἀποκαθίσταται πάλιν ἐπειδὰν ἀναφυσηθῆναι
συμβῇ πᾶσαν τὴν ἄσφαλτον· ὁ δὲ
πλησίον τόπος ἔμπυρος ὢν καὶ δυσώδης ποιεῖ τὰ
σώματα τῶν περιοικούντων ἐπίνοσα καὶ παντελῶς
ὀλιγοχρόνια. ἀγαθὴ δ᾿ ἐστὶ φοινικόφυτος ὅσην
αὐτῆς συμβαίνει διειλῆφθαι ποταμοῖς χρησίμοις ἢ
πηγαῖς δυναμέναις ἀρδεύειν. γίνεται δὲ περὶ τοὺς
τόπους τούτους ἐν αὐλῶνί τινι καὶ τὸ καλούμενον
βάλσαμον, ἐξ οὗ πρόσοδον ἁδρὰν εἶναι συμβαίνει,
οὐδαμοῦ μὲν τῆς ἄλλης οἰκουμένης εὑρισκομένου




1εἶναι added by Stephanus from Book 2. 48. 7.2μετὰ added by Wesseling form Book 2. 48. 8.100Book XIX

foul odour, so that it can support neither fish nor any 312 b.c. of the other creatures usually found in water. Although great rivers whose waters are of exceptional sweetness flow into it, it prevails over these by reason of its foulness; and from its centre each year it sends forth a mass of solid asphalt, sometimes more than three plethra in area, sometimes a little less than one plethrum.1 When this happens the barbarians who live near habitually call the larger mass a bull and the smaller one a calf. When the asphalt is floating on the sea, its surface seems to those who see it from a distance just like an island. It appears that the ejection of the asphalt is indicated twenty days in advance,2 for on every side about the sea for a distance of many stades the odour of the asphalt spreads with a noisome exhalation, and all the silver, gold, and bronze in the region lose their proper colours. These, however, are restored as soon as all the asphalt has been ejected; but the neighbouring region is very torrid and ill smelling, which makes the inhabitants sickly in body and exceedingly short-lived. Yet the land is good for raising palm trees in whatever part it is crossed by serviceable rivers3 or is supplied with springs that can irrigate it. In a certain valley in this region there grows what is called balsam,4 from which there is a great income since nowhere else in the inhabited world is this plant



1Here the plethrum is a surface measure of about 10,000
square feet. For such asphalt from lakes cp. Vitruvius,
8. 3. 8.2Twenty-two days in Book 2. 48. 8.3i.e. rivers that flow during the dry season. To-day the Jordan is the only perennial stream of any size entering the sea. There are, however, a number of oases about springs near the sea.4For the balsam cp. Theophrastus, Enquiry into Plants, 9. 6. 1–4; Pliny, Natural History, 12. 111–123; Strabo, 16, 2. 41.101