Diodorus of Sicily
5συντρέχοντας κατετίτρωσκον. οἱ δὲ περὶ τὸν
Δημήτριον, ἀνελπίστου τῆς ἐπιθέσεως γενομένης,
ἀγωνιάσαντες περὶ τῶν κατασκευασθέντων ἔργων
6συνέτρεχον ἐπὶ τὴν βοήθειαν. ἀσελήνου δὲ τῆς
νυκτὸς οὔσης οἱ μὲν πυρφόροι διέλαμπον φερόμενοι
βιαίως, οἱ δ᾿ ὀξυβελεῖς καὶ πετροβόλοι τὴν φορὰν
ἀπροόρατον ἔχοντες πολλοὺς διέφθειρον τῶν μὴ
7δυναμένων συνιδεῖν τὴν ἐπιφερομένην πληγήν. ἔτυχον
δὲ καὶ τῶν ἀπὸ τῆς μηχανῆς λεπίδων τινὲς
ἀποπεσοῦσαι, καταψιλωθέντος δὲ1 τοῦ τόπου προσέπιπτον
οἱ πυρφόροι τῷ ξυλοφανεῖ τοῦ κατασκευάσματος.
διόπερ ἀγωνιάσας ὁ Δημήτριος μήποτε
τοῦ πυρὸς ἐπινεμηθέντος ἅπασαν συμβῇ τὴν μηχανὴν
λυμανθῆναι, κατὰ τάχος ἐβοήθει καὶ τῷ
παρασκευασθέντι ὕδατι ἐν ταῖς στέγαις ἐπειρᾶτο
σβεννύναι τὴν ἐπιφερομένην φλόγα. τὸ δὲ τελευταῖον
ἀθροίσας τῇ σάλπιγγι τοὺς τεταγμένους ἐπὶ
τῆς κινήσεως τῶν ἔργων διὰ τούτων ἀπήγαγε τὰς
μηχανὰς ἐκτὸς βέλους.
97. Ἔπειτα γενομένης ἡμέρας προσέταξε τοῖς
ὑπηρέταις ἀθροῖσαι τὰ βέλη τὰ πεσόντα παρὰ τῶν
Ῥοδίων, ἐκ τούτων βουλόμενος συλλογίσασθαι τῶν
2ἐν τῇ πόλει τὴν παρασκευήν. ὧν ταχὺ τὸ προσταχθὲν
ποιησάντων ἠριθμήθησαν πυρφόροι μὲν τοῖς
μεγέθεσι παντοῖοι πλείους τῶν ὀκτακοσίων, ὀξυβελεῖς
δὲ οὐκ ἐλάττους τῶν χιλίων πεντακοσίων.
τοσούτων δὲ βελῶν ἐνεχθέντων ἐν βραχεῖ χρόνῳ
νυκτὸς ἐθαύμαζε τὴν χορηγίαν τῆς πόλεως καὶ τὴν
ἐν τούτοις δαψίλειαν.
3Τότε μὲν οὖν ὁ Δημήτριος κατεσκεύασε2 τὰ πεπονηκότα


1δὲ added by editors.2ἐπεσκεύασε Dindorf, cp. § 7 below.398Book XX

spot. Since the attack was unforeseen, Demetrius, 304 b.c. alarmed for the siege works that had been constructed, hurried to the rescue. The night was moonless; and the fire missiles shone bright as they hurtled violently through the air; but the catapults and ballistae, since their missiles were invisible, destroyed many who were not able to see the impending stroke. It also happened that some of the iron plates of the helepolis were dislodged, and where the place was laid bare the fire missiles rained upon the exposed wood of the structure. Therefore Demetrius, fearing that the fire would spread and the whole machine be ruined, came quickly to the rescue, and with the water that had been placed in readiness on the platforms he tried to put out the spreading fire. He finally assembled by a trumpet signal the men who were assigned to move the apparatus and by their efforts dragged the machine beyond range.
97. Then when day had dawned he ordered the camp followers to collect the missiles that had been hurled by the Rhodians, since he wished to estimate from these the armament of the forces within the city. Quickly carrying out his orders, they counted more than eight hundred fire missiles of various sizes and not less than fifteen hundred catapult bolts. Since so many missiles had been hurled in a short time at night, he marvelled at the resources possessed by the city and at their prodigality in the use of these weapons.
Next Demetrius repaired such of his works as had
399