Diodorus of Sicily

ἐφιλοτιμεῖτο καὶ τοὺς Ἀθηναίους καταπληξάμενος
2ἀδήριτον ἔχειν τὴν ἡγεμονίαν τῆς Ἑλλάδος. διόπερ
ἄφνω καταλαβόμενος Ἐλάτειαν πόλιν καὶ τὰς
δυνάμεις εἰς ταύτην ἀθροίσας διέγνω πολεμεῖν
τοῖς Ἀθηναίοις. ἀπαρασκεύων δ᾿ ὄντων αὐτῶν
διὰ τὴν συντεθειμένην εἰρήνην ἤλπιζε ῥᾳδίως περιποιήσεσθαι
τὴν νίκην· ὅπερ καὶ συνετελέσθη. καταληφθείσης
γὰρ τῆς Ἐλατείας ἧκόν τινες νυκτὸς
ἀπαγγέλλοντες τὴν κατάληψιν τῆς πόλεως καὶ διότι
ταχέως ἥξει Φίλιππος μετὰ τῆς δυνάμεως εἰς τὴν
3Ἀττικήν. οἱ δὲ στρατηγοὶ τῶν Ἀθηναίων διὰ
τὸ παράδοξον τῆς πράξεως καταπλαγέντες τούς τε
σαλπικτὰς μετεπέμποντο καὶ σημαίνειν προσέταττον
δι᾿ ὅλης τῆς νυκτός.
Τῆς δὲ φήμης εἰς πᾶσαν οἰκίαν διαδοθείσης ἡ μὲν
πόλις ὀρθὴ διὰ τὸν φόβον ἦν, ὁ δὲ δῆμος ἅπας ἅμ᾿
ἡμέρᾳ συνέδραμεν εἰς τὸ θέατρον πρὸ τοῦ συγκαλέσαι
4τοὺς ἄρχοντας ὡς ἦν ἔθος. ὡς δ᾿ ἧκον οἱ
στρατηγοὶ καὶ τὸν μηνύσαντα παρῆγον κἀκεῖνος
εἶπεν, σιωπὴ μὲν καὶ φόβος κατεῖχε τὸ θέατρον καὶ
τῶν εἰωθότων δημηγορεῖν οὐδεὶς ἐτόλμα συμβουλεῦσαι·
πλεονάκις δὲ τοῦ κήρυκος καλέσαντος τοὺς
ἐροῦντας ὑπὲρ τῆς κοινῆς σωτηρίας οὐδεὶς παρῄει
5σύμβουλος. ἀπορίας οὖν μεγάλης οὔσης καὶ καταπλήξεως
ἀπέβλεπε τὸ πλῆθος ἐπὶ τὸν Δημοσθένην.
ὁ δὲ καταβὰς1 καὶ τὸν δῆμον παρακαλέσας θαρρεῖν
ἀπεφαίνετο δεῖν παραχρῆμα πρέσβεις ἀποστέλλειν




1So codd.; ὁ δ᾿ ἀναβὰς Wesseling.72Book XVI

ambitious to gain the uncontested leadership of Greece 338/7 b.c. by terrifying the Athenians into submission.1Therefore he suddenly seized the city of Elateia, concentrated his forces there and adopted a policy of war with Athens. He expected to have no trouble in defeating them, since their reliance on the existing peace treaty2 made them unprepared for hostilities; and that is how it worked out. For after Elateia had been occupied, persons came at night to Athens reporting the occupation and stating that Philip would march immediately into Attica with his army.3 Taken aback by this unexpected development, the Athenian generals summoned the trumpeters and ordered them to keep blowing the alarm signal the whole night through.
The news spread into every household and the city was tense with terror, and at dawn the whole people flocked to the theatre even before the archons had made their customary proclamation. When the generals came and introduced the messenger and he had told his story, silence and terror gripped the assembly and none of the usual speakers dared propose a course of action. Again and again the herald called for someone to speak for the common safety, but no one came forward with a proposal. In utter perplexity and dismay, the crowd kept their eyes on Demosthenes. Finally he came down from his seat, and bidding the people take heart gave it as his opinion that they must straightway send envoys to Thebes


1Continued from chap. 77. 3. These events are briefly
noted in Justin, 9. 3.2This is consistent with Diodorus’s statement in chap. 77. 3. that peace was concluded on the abandonment of the siege of Byzantium. Actually, the situation seems to have been just the reverse: Athens denounced the Peace of Philocrates at that time.3This narrative follows and must ultimately derive from Demosthenes, 18 (De Corona) 169–178.73