Diodorus of Sicily

πολλαὶ διεπρεσβεύοντο πόλεις, σπεύδουσαι παραληφθῆναι
πρὸς τὴν συμμαχίαν.
3Καρχηδόνιοι δὲ τοὺς κατὰ τὴν Σικελίαν στρατηγοὺς
ὁρῶντες ἀγεννῶς τὸν πόλεμον διοικοῦντας ἔκριναν
ἑτέρους ἀποστέλλειν μετὰ δυνάμεων μεγάλων.
εὐθὺς οὖν τῶν πολιτῶν κατέλεγον τοὺς ἀρίστους
εἰς τὴν στρατείαν καὶ τῶν Λιβύων τοὺς εὐθέτους
ἐστρατολόγουν, χωρὶς δὲ τούτων προχειρισάμενοι
χρημάτων πλῆθος μισθοφόρους ἐξενολόγουν
Ἴβηρας καὶ Κελτοὺς καὶ Λίγυας· ἐναυπηγοῦντο δὲ
καὶ ναῦς μακρὰς καὶ φορτηγοὺς πολλὰς ἤθροιζον
καὶ τὴν ἄλλην παρασκευὴν ἀνυπέρβλητον ἐποιοῦντο.
74. Ἐπ᾿ ἄρχόντος δ᾿ Ἀθήνησι Νικομάχου Ῥωμαῖοι
κατέστησαν ὑπάτους Γάιον Μάρκιον καὶ Τίτον
Μάλλιον Τορκουᾶτον. ἐπὶ δὲ τούτων Φωκίων
μὲν ὁ Ἀθηναῖος κατεπολέμησε Κλείταρχον τὸν Ἐρετρίας
2τύραννον καθεσταμένον ὑπὸ Φιλίππου. κατὰ
δὲ τὴν Καρίαν Πιζώδαρος1 ὁ νεώτερος τῶν ἀδελφῶν
ἐξέβαλεν ἐκ τῆς δυναστείας Ἄδαν καὶ ἐδυνάστευσεν
ἔτη πέντε ἕως ἐπὶ τὴν Ἀλεξάνδρου
διάβασιν εἰς τὴν Ἀσίαν.
Φίλιππος δὲ ἀεὶ μᾶλλον αὐξόμενος ἐπὶ τὴν Πέρινθον
ἐστράτευσεν, ἐναντιουμένην μὲν ἑαυτῷ πρὸς
δὲ Ἀθηναίους ἀποκλίνουσαν. συστησάμενος δὲ
πολιορκίαν καὶ μηχανὰς προσάγων τῇ πόλει καθ᾿ ἡμέραν
3ἐκ διαδοχῆς προσέβαλλεν τοῖς τείχεσιν. ὀγδοηκονταπήχεις




1Πιζώδαρος PX, Πηξώδωρος R, Πηξόδορος F; Πιξώδαρος
in Arrian, 1. 23. 7; Strabo, 14. 2. 17; Head, Historia
Nummorum2, 630 (Fischer); Πιξόδαρος Plutarch, Alexander,
10. 1–2.44Book XVI

the Carthaginians approached him through embassies 342/1 b.c. in a desire to be included in his alliance.
The Carthaginians recognized that their generals in Sicily were conducting the war in a spiritless manner and decided to send out new ones, together with heavy reinforcements.1 Straightway they made a levy for the campaign from among their noblest citizens2 and made suitable drafts among the Libyans. Furthermore, appropriating a large sum of money, they enlisted mercenaries from among the Iberians, Celts, and Ligurians.3 They were occupied also with the construction of battleships. They assembled many freighters and manufactured other supplies in enormous quantities.
74. When Nicomachus was archon at Athens, the 341/0 b.c. Romans elected as consuls Gaius Marcius and Titus Manlius Torquatus.4 In this year, Phocion the Athenian defeated and expelled Cleitarchus, the tyrant of Eretria who had been installed by Philip. In Caria, Pizodarus,5 the younger of the brothers, ousted Ada from her rule as dynast and held sway for five years until Alexander’s crossing over into Asia.
Philip, whose fortunes were constantly on the increase, made an expedition against Perinthus, which had resisted him and inclined toward the Athenians.6 He instituted a siege and advancing engines to the city assailed the walls in relays day after day. He




1Plutarch, Timoleon, 25. 1.2Plutarch, Timoleon, 27. 3.3Plutarch, Timoleon, 28. 6, mentions Libyans, Iberians, and Numidians.4Nicomachus was archon at Athens from July 341 to June 340 b.c. The consuls of 344 b.c. were C. Marcius Rutilius and T. Manlius Imperiosus Torquatus (Broughton, 1. 132).5Above, chap. 69. 2.6These events in Philip’s career are barely noticed by Justin, 9. 1. 2–5, and only casual references to them occur elsewhere.45