Diodorus of Sicily

εἰς τὴν Γαβηνήν, οὖσαν ἀκέραιον καὶ δυναμένην
8πάντα δαψιλῆ ταῖς δυνάμεσι παρέχεσθαι. ἀπέχειν
δὲ συνέβαινε τὴν χώραν ταύτην τῶν περὶ Ἀντίγονον
διὰ μὲν τῆς οἰκουμένης πορευομένῳ σταθμοὺς
εἴκοσι πέντε, διὰ δὲ τῆς ἐρήμου καὶ ἀνύδρου
σταθμοὺς ἐννέα. οἱ μὲν οὖν περὶ Εὐμενῆ καὶ
τὸν Ἀντίγονον τοσοῦτον ἀλλήλων διεστῶτες ἐν
τούτοις τοῖς τόποις παρεχείμαζον ἅμα καὶ τὰς
δυνάμεις ἀνελάμβανον.
35. Κατὰ δὲ τὴν Εὐρώπην Κάσανδρος μὲν ἐν
Πελοποννήσῳ Τεγέαν πολιορκῶν καὶ πυθόμενος
τήν τε Ὀλυμπιάδος κάθοδον εἰς Μακεδονίαν καὶ
τὴν Εὐρυδίκης καὶ Φιλίππου τοῦ βασιλέως ἀναίρεσιν,
ἔτι δὲ τὰ περὶ τὸν Ἰόλλα τἀδελφοῦ τάφον1
συμβεβηκότα πρὸς μὲν τοὺς Τεγεάτας διελύσατο,
τὴν δὲ δύναμιν ἀναλαβὼν προῆγεν ἐπὶ Μακεδονίαν,
καταλιπὼν τοὺς συμμάχους ἐν πολλῇ ταραχῇ·
ἐφήδρευε γὰρ ταῖς ἐν Πελοποννήσῳ πόλεσιν
Ἀλέξανδρος ὁ Πολυπέρχοντος ἔχων στρατόπεδον.
2Αἰτωλοὶ δὲ χαρίζεσθαι βουλόμενοι τῇ τε Ὀλυμπιάδι
καὶ Πολυπέρχοντι τὰ περὶ τὰς Πύλας
στενὰ κατελάβοντο καὶ τῆς παρόδου τὸν Κάσανδρον
ἀπέκλεισαν. ὁ δὲ βιάζεσθαι μὲν πρὸς τόπους δυσεμβόλους
ἀπέγνω, παρασκευασάμενος δὲ πλοῖα
καὶ σχεδίας ἔκ τε τῆς Εὐβοίας καὶ τῆς Λοκρίδος
3ἐπεραίωσε τὴν δύναμιν εἰς τὴν Θετταλίαν. ἀκούων
δὲ περὶ τὴν Περραιβίαν προκαθῆσθαι2 Πολυπέρχοντα
μετὰ στρατοπέδου Κάλλαν μὲν ἀπέστειλε
στρατηγὸν μετὰ δυνάμεως, προστάξας διαπολεμεῖν
τοῖς μετὰ Πολυπέρχοντος. Δεινίας δὲ τὰ στενὰ

1τὰ περὶ . . . τάφον RX, Fischer, τὰ περὶ τἀδελφοῦ καὶ τὸν Ἰόλλου τάφον F, τὰ περὶ τὸν ἀδελφὸν καὶ τὸν Ἰόλλου τάφον Dindorf.2προκυθῆσθαι Wesseling: προσκαθῆσθαι.324Book XIX

into Gabenê, which was unplundered and 317 b. c. capable of supplying everything in abundance for the armies. It happened that this country was a twenty-five days’ march from Antigonus if one went through inhabited country, but if one went through waterless desert, a march of nine days. In these regions and at this distance from each other Eumenes and Antigonus passed the winter and at the same time refreshed their men.1
35. In Europe2 when Cassander, who was besieging Tegea in the Peloponnesus, learned of the return of Olympias to Macedonia and of the murder of Eurydicê and King Philip, and moreover what had befallen the tomb of his brother Iollas,3 he came to terms with the people of Tegea and set out for Macedonia with his army, leaving his allies in complete confusion; for Polyperchon’s son Alexander with an army was waiting to attack the cities of the Peloponnesus. The Aetolians, who wished to please Olympias and Polyperchon, had occupied the pass at Thermopylae and barred Cassander from the passage. Cassander decided against forcing his way through this region, which was difficult to attack, but he secured boats and barges from Euboea and Locris and transported his army to Thessaly. Hearing that Polyperchon and his army were in position in Perrhaebia, he dispatched his general Callas with an army, ordering him to carry on the war with Polyperchon. Deinias,






1The winter of 317/16. Continued in chap. 37. 1.2Continued from chap. 11. 9.3For all these events cp. chap. 11. 8.325