Diodorus of Sicily

ἁπάντων ἐνέντων τὸ πῦρ καὶ ταχὺ τῆς φλογὸς εἰς
ὕψος ἀρθείσης οἱ μὲν σαλπιγκταὶ τὸ πολεμικὸν
ἐσήμαινον, τὸ δὲ στρατόπεδον ἐπηλάλαξε, συνευχομένων
ἁπάντων ὑπὲρ τῆς εἰς οἶκον σωτηρίας.
5τοῦτο δ᾿ ἔπραξεν Ἀγαθοκλῆς μάλιστα μὲν ἕνεκα
τοῦ συναναγκάσαι τοὺς στρατιώτας ἐν τοῖς κινδύνοις
ἐπιλαθέσθαι τὸ παράπαν τῆς φυγῆς· δῆλον
γὰρ ὅτι τῆς ἐπὶ τὰς ναῦς καταφυγῆς ἀποκοπείσης
ἐν μόνῳ τῷ νικᾶν ἕξουσι τὰς ἐλπίδας τῆς σωτηρίας·
ἔπειτα καὶ δύναμιν ὀλίγην ἔχων ἐθεώρει διότι φυλάσσων
μὲν τὰς ναῦς ἀναγκασθήσεται μερίζειν τὸ
στρατόπεδον καὶ μηδαμῶς ἀξιόμαχος εἶναι, καταλιπὼν
δ᾿ ἐρήμους ὑποχειρίους ποιήσει γενέσθαι
Καρχηδονίοις.
8. Οὐ μὴν ἀλλὰ τῶν νεῶν ἁπασῶν φλεγομένων
καὶ τοῦ πυρὸς πολὺν ἐπέχοντος τόπον ἔκπληξις
κατεῖχε τοὺς Σικελιώτας. ἐν ἀρχῇ μὲν γὰρ ὑπὸ
τῆς Ἀγαθοκλέους γοητείας παραλογισθέντες καὶ
τῆς τῶν ἐγχειρουμένων ὀξύτητος ἀναθεώρησιν οὐ
διδούσης πάντες συγκατετίθεντο τοῖς πραττομένοις·
τοῦ δὲ χρόνου τὸν περὶ ἑκάστων ἀναλογισμὸν παριστάντος
εἰς μεταμέλειαν ἐνέπιπτον καὶ τὸ μέγεθος
τοῦ διείργοντος πελάγους ἀναλογιζόμενοι τὴν
2σωτηρίαν ἀπεγίνωσκον. ὁ δ᾿ Ἀγαθοκλῆς σπεύδων
ἀπαλλάξαι τῆς ἀθυμίας τοὺς στρατιώτας ἦγε τὴν
δύναμιν ἐπὶ τὴν ὀνομαζομένην Μεγάλην πόλιν,
3οὖσαν Καρχηδονίων. ἡ δ᾿ ἀνὰ μέσον χώρα, δι᾿
ἧς ἦν ἀναγκαῖον πορευθῆναι, διείληπτο κηπείαις
καὶ παντοίαις φυτουργίαις, πολλῶν ὑδάτων διωχετευμένων
καὶ πάντα τόπον ἀρδευόντων. ἀγροικίαι
τε συνεχεῖς ὑπῆρχον, οἰκοδομαῖς πολυτελέσι καὶ
κονιάμασι διαπεπονημέναι καὶ τὸν τῶν κεκτημένων
160Book XX

and the flames quickly blazed high, the trumpeters 310 b.c. sounded the signal for battle and the army raised the war-cry, while all together prayed for a safe return home. This Agathocles did primarily to compel his soldiers in the midst of dangers to have no thought at all of flight; for it was clear that, if the retreat to the ships was cut off, in victory alone would they have hope of safety. Moreover, since he had a small army, he reasoned that if he guarded the ships he would be compelled to divide his forces and so be by no means strong enough to meet the enemy in battle, and if he left the ships without defenders, he would put them into the hands of the Carthaginians.
8. Nevertheless, when all the ships were aflame and the fire was spreading widely, terror laid hold upon the Sicilians. Carried away at first by the wiles of Agathocles and by the rapidity of his undertakings, which gave no time for reflection, all acquiesced in what was being done; but when time made possible detailed consideration, they were plunged into regret, and as they considered the vastness of the sea that separated them from home, they abandoned hope of safety. Agathocles, however, in an effort to rid his soldiers of their despondency, led his army against the place called Megalepolis, a city of the Carthaginians.1 The intervening country through which it was necessary for them to march was divided into gardens and plantations of every kind, since many streams of water were led in small channels and irrigated every part. There were also country houses one after another, constructed in luxurious fashion and covered with stucco, which gave evidence of the

1The exact situation of this city is not known.161