Diodorus of Sicily

ἱκανούς, καὶ τὰς πόλεις ἐλευθεροῦν ἐνετείλατο·
τοῦτο γὰρ πράξας ἤλπιζε πίστιν κατασκευάζειν
παρὰ τοῖς Ἕλλησιν ὅτι πρὸς ἀλήθειαν φροντίζει
τῆς αὐτονομίας αὐτῶν· καὶ ἅμα γινώσκειν ὑπέβαλε1
2τὰ Κασάνδρου πράγματα. ὁ δὲ Τελεσφόρος
ἐπειδὴ τάχιστα κατέπλευσεν εἰς τὴν Πελοπόννησον,
ἐπῆλθε τὰς ὑπ᾿ Ἀλεξάνδρου φρουρουμένας πόλεις
καὶ πάσας ἠλευθέρωσε πλὴν Σικυῶνος καὶ Κορίνθου·
ἐν ταύταις γὰρ Πολυπέρχων διέτριβεν δυνάμεις
ἁδρὰς ἔχων καὶ πιστεύων ταύταις τε καὶ ταῖς τῶν
3τόπων ὀχυρότησιν. ἅμα δὲ τούτοις πραττομένοις
Φίλιππος ὑπὸ Κασάνδρου πεμφθεὶς στρατηγὸς εἰς
τὸν πρὸς Αἰτωλοὺς πόλεμον, ὡς τάχισθ᾿ ἧκεν εἰς
τὴν Ἀκαρνανίαν μετὰ τῆς δυνάμεως, τὸ μὲν πρῶτον
ἐπεχείρει λεηλατεῖν τὴν Αἰτωλίαν, μετ᾿ ὀλίγον δὲ
πυθόμενος Αἰακίδην τὸν Ἠπειρώτην εἰς τὴν βασιλείαν
κατεληλυθότα2 καὶ δύναμιν ἁδρὰν συνηθροικότα
ταχέως ὥρμησεν ἐπ᾿ αὐτόν· ἔσπευδε γὰρ
κατ᾿ ἰδίαν διαγωνίσασθαι πρὶν ἢ συμμῖξαι τὴν τῶν
4Αἰτωλῶν δύναμιν. εὑρὼν δὲ τοὺς Ἠπειρώτας
ἑτοίμους εἰς μάχην ἐξ ἐφόδου συνῆψεν εἰς χεῖρας
καὶ πολλοὺς μὲν ἀνεῖλεν, οὐκ ὀλίγους δ᾿ ἐζώγρησεν,
ἐν οἷς συνέβαινεν εἶναι καὶ τῶν αἰτίων τῆς τοῦ




1ὑπέβαλε Post: ὑπέλαβε.2κατεληλυθότα Reiske: διεληλυθότα.36Book XIX

infantry, and he ordered him to free the cities, for 313 b.c. he hoped by doing this to establish among the Greeks the belief that he truly was concerned for their independence; and at the same time he gave him a hint to note the activities of Cassander. As soon as Telesphorus had reached port in the Peloponnesus, he advanced upon the cities that were occupied by Alexander’s garrisons1 and freed all of them except Sicyon and Corinth; for in these cities Polyperchon had his quarters, maintaining strong forces and trusting in these and in the strength of the positions. While this was being done, Philip,2 who had been sent by Cassander to the war against the Aetolians as commander, immediately on arriving in Acarnania with his army undertook to plunder Aetolia, but soon, hearing that Aeacides3 the Epirote had returned to his kingdom and had collected a strong army, he set out very quickly against him, for he was eager to bring this struggle to an end separately before the army of the Aetolians joined forces with the king. Although he found the Epirotes ready for battle, he attacked them at once, slaying many and taking captive no small number, among whom there chanced to be about fifty of those responsible


1Alexander, son of Polyperchon, was dead, but his wife
still held certain cities, cp. chap. 67. 1–2.2This is probably the younger brother of Cassander, who, as one of Alexander’s cupbearers, was charged by Olympias with having given him poison (Justin, 12. 14. 6). After this campaign he returns to obscurity; a son, Antipater,
was king of Macedonia for 45 days in 281–280 b.c. (Porphyrius, FGrH, 260. 3. 10).3He was exiled with his father by Philip but returned to power by aid of Olympias. After Alexander’s death he supported Olympias and Polyperchon (chap. 11. 2), his zeal finally turning his own people against him and leading to a second exile (chap. 36. 2–4). He appears to have returned to Aetolia with Polyperchon in 316 b.c. (chap. 52. 6).37