Diodorus of Sicily

καὶ στολὰς ἀνδρείας πέντε καὶ γυναικείας
ἴσας, ζεύγη δὲ βοϊκὰ δύο καὶ πρόβατα πεντήκοντα
καὶ πυρῶν μεδίμνους πεντήκοντα· ἐποίησεν δὲ καὶ
ἀτελεῖς αὐτοὺς παντὸς βασιλικοῦ φόρου καὶ τοῖς
ἐπιστάταις προσέταξε φροντίζειν ὅπως μηδ᾿ ὑφ᾿
ἑνὸς ἀδικῶνται.
9Ἀλέξανδρος μὲν οὖν ἀκολούθως τῇ κατ᾿ αὐτὸν
ἐπιεικείᾳ τοιαύταις εὐεργεσίαις τὰς τῶν ἠτυχηκότων
συμφορὰς διωρθώσατο.
70. Τὴν δὲ Περσέπολιν, μητρόπολιν οὖσαν τῆς
Περσῶν βασιλείας, ἀπέδειξε τοῖς Μακεδόσι πολεμιωτάτην
τῶν κατὰ τὴν Ἀσίαν πόλεων καὶ τοῖς
στρατιώταις ἔδωκεν εἰς διαρπαγὴν χωρὶς τῶν βασιλείων.
2πλουσιωτάτης δ᾿ οὔσης τῶν ὑπὸ τὸν ἥλιον
καὶ τῶν ἰδιωτικῶν οἴκων πεπληρωμένων ἐκ πολλῶν
χρόνων παντοίας εὐδαιμονίας οἱ Μακεδόνες ἐπῄεσαν
τοὺς μὲν ἄνδρας πάντας φονεύοντες, τὰς δὲ κτήσεις
διαρπάζοντες, πολλὰς μὲν τοῖς πλήθεσιν ὑπαρχούσας,
κατασκευῆς δὲ καὶ κόσμου παντοίου γεμούσας.
3ἔνθα δὴ πολὺς μὲν ἄργυρος διεφορεῖτο, οὐκ ὀλίγος
δὲ χρυσὸς διηρπάζετο, πολλαὶ δὲ καὶ πολυτελεῖς
ἐσθῆτες, αἱ μὲν θαλασσίαις πορφύραις, αἱ δὲ
χρυσοῖς ἐνυφάσμασι πεποικιλμέναι, τοῖς κρατοῦσιν
ἔπαθλα καθίσταντο. τὰ δὲ μεγάλα καὶ κατὰ πᾶσαν
τὴν οἰκουμένην περιβόητα βασίλεια πρὸς ὕβριν καὶ
παντελῆ φθορὰν ἀπεδέδεικτο.
4Οἱ δὲ Μακεδόνες ἐνημερεύσαντες ταῖς ἁρπαγαῖς
τὴν ἄπληστον τοῦ πλείονος ἐπιθυμίαν οὐκ ἐδύναντο
5πληρῶσαι. τοσαύτη γὰρ ἦν τῆς πλεονεξίας ὑπερβολὴ
κατὰ τὰς τούτων ἁρπαγὰς ὥστε καὶ πρὸς
ἀλλήλους διαμάχεσθαι καὶ πολλοὺς ἀναιρεῖν τῶν
τὰ πολλὰ τῆς ἁρπαγῆς ἐξιδιοποιουμένων· τινὲς δὲ
318Book XVII

thousand drachmae, five men’s robes and the same 330/29 b.c number for women,1 two yoke of oxen, fifty sheep, and fifty bushels of wheat. He made them also exempt from all royal taxes and charged his administrative officials to see that they were harmed by no one.
Thus Alexander mitigated the lot of these unfortunate persons by such benefactions in keeping with his natural kindness.
70. Persepolis was the capital of the Persian kingdom. Alexander described it to the Macedonians as the most hateful of the cities of Asia,2 and gave it over to his soldiers to plunder, all but the palaces. It was the richest city under the sun and the private houses had been furnished with every sort of wealth over the years. The Macedonians raced into it slaughtering all the men whom they met and plundering the residences; many of the houses belonged to the common people and were abundantly supplied with furniture and wearing apparel of every kind. Here much silver was carried off and no little gold, and many rich dresses gay with sea purple or with gold embroidery became the prize of the victors. The enormous palaces, famed throughout the whole civilized world, fell victim to insult and utter destruction.
The Macedonians gave themselves up to this orgy of plunder for a whole day and still could not satisfy their boundless greed for more. Such was their exceeding lust for loot withal that they fought with each other and killed many of their fellows who had appropriated a greater portion of it. The richest of the


1The same figures are given by Curtius, 5. 5, 24,2Curtius, 5. 6. 1 (not in Arrian).319