Diodorus of Sicily
4καθόλου δ᾿ ἔγωγε νομίζω1 πολλῶν καὶ
καλῶν ἔργων ὑπ᾿ Ἀλεξάνδρου συντετελεσμένων
μηδὲν τούτων μεῖζον ὑπάρχειν μηδὲ μᾶλλον ἄξιον
5ἀναγραφῆς καὶ μνήμης ἱστορικῆς εἶναι. αἱ μὲν
γὰρ τῶν πόλεων πολιορκίαι καὶ παρατάξεις καὶ τὰ
ἄλλα τὰ κατὰ τὸν πόλεμον προτερήματα τὰ πλείονα
διὰ τύχην ἢ δι᾿ ἀρετὴν ἐπιτυγχάνεται, ὁ δ᾿ ἐν
ταῖς2 ἐξουσίαις εἰς τοὺς ἐπταικότας ἔλεος μεριζόμενος
6διὰ μόνης τῆς φρονήσεως γίνεται. οἱ
πλεῖστοι γὰρ διὰ τὴν εὐτυχίαν ἐπαίρονται μὲν ταῖς
εὐπραξίαις, ὑπερήφανοι δ᾿ ἐν ταῖς εὐτυχίαις γινόμενοι
τῆς ἀνθρωπίνης καὶ κοινῆς ἀσθενείας ἐπιλανθάνονται·
διὸ καὶ τοὺς πλείστους ὁρᾶν ἔστι τὴν
εὐτυχίαν ὥσπερ τι βαρὺ φορτίον φέρειν ἀδυνατοῦντας.
7Ἀλέξανδρος μὲν οὖν, καίπερ πολλαῖς γενεαῖς
προγεγονὼς τοῦ καθ᾿ ἡμᾶς βίου, τυγχανέτω καὶ
παρὰ τῶν μεταγενεστέρων δικαίου καὶ πρέποντος
ταῖς ἰδίαις ἀρεταῖς3 ἐπαίνου.
39. Δαρεῖος δὲ διανύσας εἰς Βαβυλῶνα καὶ τοὺς
ἀπὸ τῆς ἐν Ἰσσῷ μάχης διασωζομένους ἀναλαβὼν
οὐκ ἔπεσε τῷ φρονήματι, καίπερ μεγάλῃ περιπεπτωκὼς
συμφορᾷ, ἀλλὰ πρὸς τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον
ἔγραψεν ἀνθρωπίνως φέρειν τὴν εὐτυχίαν καὶ τοὺς
αἰχμαλώτους ἀλλάξασθαι χρημάτων πλῆθος λαβόντα·


1καθόλου δὲ γέγονεν ἔργον τοῦτο μέγα καὶ περιβόητον· ἐγὼ δὲ
νομίζω X.2Fischer suggests adding here κατὰ τὴν εὐτυχίαν from
Book 18. 59. 5. It is possible that this phrase may have been
displaced two lines below, where it is out of place. (Dindorf
conjectured reading there εὐήθειαν, Bezzel ῥαθυμίαν.)3ἀρεταῖς] ἱστορίαις RX, and F in margin.226Book XVII

In general I would say that of many good 333/2 b.c. deeds done by Alexander there is none that is greater or more worthy of record and mention in history than this. Sieges and battles and the other victories scored in war are due for the most part either to Fortune or valour, but when one in a position of power shows pity for those who have been overthrown, this is an action due only to wisdom.1 Most people are made proud by their successes because of their good fortune2 and, becoming arrogant in their success, are forgetful of the common weakness of mankind. You can see how very many are unable to bear success, just as if it were a heavy burden. Although Alexander lived many generations before our time, let him continue to receive in future ages also the just and proper praise for his good qualities.3
39. Dareius hurried to Babylon and gathered together the survivors of the battle at Issus. He was not crushed in spirit in spite of the tremendous setback he had received, but wrote to Alexander advising him to bear his success as one who was only human and to release the captives in return for a large ransom. He added that he would yield to





1This was a well-known cliché in later Greek literature; cp. Plutarch, Pericles, 38. 4; De Fortuna aut Virtute Alexandria 1. 7. 329 d; 11. 332 c; 2. 7. 339 a/b.2The words “because of their good fortune” are out of place here, and may belong after “a position of power” three lines before. See the critical note 2 on p. 226.3If we follow the manuscript reading here (critical note 3) we should translate, “he should receive from future writers also just praise proper to their narrative.” Arrian (2. 12. 8) is not sure that this incident occurred, but approves it if so. It is praised by Curtius (3. 12. 18–23) and Plutarch (Alexander, 21. 4–5).227