Diodorus of Sicily

χρυσᾶς μὲν εἰκόνας ἐφ᾿ ἅρματος στῆσαι τοῦ
τε Ἀντιγόνου καὶ Δημητρίου πλησίον Ἁρμοδίου
καὶ Ἀριστογείτονος, στεφανῶσαι δὲ ἀμφοτέρους
ἀπὸ ταλάντων διακοσίων καὶ βωμὸν ἱδρυσαμένους
προσαγορεῦσαι Σωτήρων, πρὸς δὲ τὰς δέκα φυλὰς
προσθεῖναι δύο, Δημητριάδα καὶ Ἀντιγονίδα, καὶ
συντελεῖν αὐτοῖς κατ᾿ ἐνιαυτὸν ἀγῶνας καὶ πομπὴν
καὶ θυσίαν, ἐνυφαίνειν τε1 αὐτοὺς εἰς τὸν τῆς
3Ἀθηνᾶς πέπλον.2 ὁ μὲν οὖν δῆμος ἐν τῷ Λαμιακῷ
πολέμῳ καταλυθεὶς ὑπ᾿ Ἀντιπάτρου μετ᾿ ἔτη
πεντεκαίδεκα παραδόξως ἐκομίσατο τὴν πάτριον
πολιτείαν· ὁ δὲ Δημήτριος, φρουρουμένης τῆς
Μεγαρέων πόλεως, ἐκπολιορκήσας αὐτὴν ἀπέδωκεν
τὴν αὐτονομίαν τῷ δήμῳ καὶ τιμῶν ἀξιολόγων
ἔτυχεν ὑπὸ τῶν εὖ παθόντων.
4Ἀντίγονος δέ, παραγενομένων πρὸς αὐτὸν Ἀθήνηθεν
πρεσβευτῶν καὶ τό τε περὶ τῶν τιμῶν ἀναδόντων
ψήφισμα καὶ περὶ σίτου καὶ ξύλων εἰς
ναυπηγίαν διαλεχθέντων, ἔδωκεν αὐτοῖς πυροῦ μὲν
μεδίμνων πεντεκαίδεκα μυριάδας, ὕλην δὲ τὴν
ἱκανὴν ναυσὶν ἑκατόν· ἐξ Ἴμβρου δὲ τὴν φρουρὰν
5ἐξαγαγὼν ἀπέδωκεν αὐτοῖς τὴν πόλιν. πρὸς δὲ
τὸν υἱὸν Δημήτριον ἔγραψε κελεύων τῶν μὲν συμμαχίδων
πόλεων συνέδρους συστήσασθαι τοὺς
βουλευσομένους κοινῇ περὶ τῶν τῇ Ἑλλάδι συμφερόντων,
αὐτὸν δὲ μετὰ τῆς δυνάμεως εἰς Κύπρον
πλεῦσαι καὶ διαπολεμῆσαι τὴν ταχίστην πρὸς τοὺς




1ἐνυφαίνειν τε Dindorf: ἐνυφαινόντων.2κατ᾿ ἐνιαυτόν after πέπλον omitted by Wesseling.268Book XX

writing the decree,1 voted to set up golden statues 307 b.c. of Antigonus and Demetrius in a chariot near the statues of Harmodius and Aristogeiton, to give them both honorary crowns at a cost of two hundred talents, to consecrate an altar to them and call it the altar of the Saviours, to add to the ten tribes two more, Demetrias and Antigonis, to hold annual games in their honour with a procession and a sacrifice, and to weave their portraits in the peplos of Athena. Thus the common people, deprived of power in the Lamian War by Antipater,2 fifteen years afterwards unexpectedly recovered the constitution of the fathers. Although Megara was held by a garrison, Demetrius took it by siege, restored their autonomy to its people, and received noteworthy honours from those whom he had served.3
When an embassy had come to Antigonus from Athens and had delivered to him the decree concerning the honours conferred upon him and discussed with him the problem of grain and of timber for ships, he gave to them one hundred and fifty thousand medimni4 of grain and timber sufficient for one hundred ships; he also withdrew his garrison from Imbros and gave the city back to the Athenians. He wrote to his son Demetrius ordering him to call together counsellors from the allied cities who should consider in common what was advantageous for Greece, and to sail himself with his army to Cyprus and finish the war with




1For the honours conferred on Demetrius and Antigonus
cp. Plutarch, Demetrius, 10–12. For Stratocles, an old
political ally of Hypereides, who had acted as an accuser in the affair of Harpalus and had played an important rôle in Athens during the Lamian War, cp. Plutarch, Demetrius, 11–12. A number of decrees which he introduced in the Assembly in this period are extant, e.g. IG, 2. 240, 247.2Cp. Book 18. 18.3But cp. the note on chap. 45. 7.4About 230,000 bushels.269