Diodorus of Sicily

δὲ ταῦτα νυκτὸς εὐδίας λαβόμενος ἔλαθε παραπλεύσας
καὶ καταλαβόμενος ἄκρον τὸ χῶμα τοῦ μεγάλου
λιμένος εὐθὺς περιεχαράκωσε τὸν τόπον καὶ διέφραξε
θυρώμασι καὶ πέτροις, ἐξεβίβασε δ᾿ εἰς
αὐτὸν στρατιώτας τετρακοσίους καὶ βελῶν πλῆθος
παντοδαπῶν, ἀπέχοντος ἀπὸ τῶν τειχῶν τοῦ τόπου
2τούτου πέντε πλέθρα. ἔπειθ᾿ ἡμέρας γενομένης
παρεκόμισε1 τὰς μηχανὰς εἰς τὸν λιμένα μετὰ
σάλπιγγος καὶ κραυγῆς· καὶ τοῖς μὲν ἐλάττοσιν
ὀξυβελέσι μακρὰν φερομένοις ἀνεῖργε τοὺς ἐργαζομένους
τὸ παρὰ τὸν λιμένα τεῖχος, τοῖς δὲ πετροβόλοις
τάς τε μηχανὰς τῶν πολεμίων καὶ τὸ διὰ
τοῦ χώματος τεῖχος τῇ μὲν διέσεισε, τῇ δὲ κατέβαλεν,
ἀσθενὲς ὑπάρχον καὶ ταπεινὸν ἐκείνοις τοῖς
3καιροῖς. ἀμυνομένων δὲ καὶ τῶν ἐκ τῆς πόλεως
εὐρώστως τότε μὲν ὅλην τὴν ἡμέραν διετέλεσαν
ἀμφότεροι πολλὰ κακὰ καὶ δρῶντες καὶ πάσχοντες·
τῆς δὲ νυκτὸς ἤδη καταλαμβανούσης ὁ μὲν Δημήτριος
ταῖς ῥυμουλκούσαις ναυσὶν ἀπήγαγε τὰς μηχανὰς
πάλιν ἔξω βέλους· οἱ δὲ Ῥόδιοι ξηρᾶς ὕλης
καὶ δᾳδὸς ἀκάτια πληρώσαντες καὶ πῦρ ἐνθέμενοι
τὸ μὲν πρῶτον ἐπιδιώξαντες προσέπλεον ταῖς μηχαναῖς
ταῖς τῶν πολεμίων καὶ τὴν ὕλην ὑφῆψαν,
μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα τῷ πλωτῷ χάρακι καὶ τοῖς βέλεσιν
ἀνειρχθέντες συνηναγκάσθησαν χωρεῖν εἰς τοὐπίσω.
4τῆς δὲ φλογὸς ἐπισχυούσης ὀλίγοι μὲν κατασβέσαντες
ἐπανῆλθον σὺν τοῖς σκάφεσιν, οἱ πλεῖστοι
δὲ καιομένων τῶν ἀκατίων ἐξεκολύμβησαν. τῇ δ᾿
ὑστεραίᾳ κατὰ μὲν θάλατταν ὁ Δημήτριος παραπλησίαν
ἐποιήσατο τὴν ἐπίθεσιν, κατὰ δὲ τὴν γῆν
προσέταξεν ἅμα πανταχόθεν προσβάλλειν μετ᾿ ἀλαλαγμοῦ
καὶ σάλπιγγος, ὅπως εἰς ἀγωνίαν καὶ
1παρεκόμισε Wesseling: παρεκόμισαν.368Book XX

however, taking advantage of calm weather at night, 305 b.c. he sailed in secretly, and after seizing the end of the mole of the great harbour he at once fortified the place, cutting it off with walls of planks and stones, and landed there four hundred soldiers and a supply of ordnance of all kinds. This point was five plethra1 distant from the city walls. Then at daybreak he brought his engines into the harbour with the sound of trumpets and with shouts; and with the lighter catapults, which had a long range, he drove back those who were constructing the wall along the harbour, and with the ballistae he shook or destroyed the engines of the enemy and the wall across the mole, for it was weak and low at this time. But since those from the city also fought stoutly, during that whole day both sides continued to inflict and suffer severe losses; and when night was already closing in, Demetrius by means of towboats drew his engines back out of range. The Rhodians, however, filled light boats with dry pitchy wood and placed fire in them; at first they went in pursuit and, drawing near to the engines of the enemy, lighted the wood, but afterwards, repelled by the floating boom and by the missiles, they were forced to withdraw. As the fire gained force a few put it out and sailed back with their boats, but most of them plunged into the sea as their boats were consumed. On the following day Demetrius made a similar attack by sea, but he also gave orders to assail the city at the same time by land from all sides with shouts and sound of trumpet



1About 500 feet.369