Diodorus of Sicily

τοῖς Ἀθηναίοις. ὁ δὲ δῆμος μετεωρισθεὶς ἐπὶ τῇ
τῶν πόλεων1 εὐνοίᾳ κοινὸν συνέδριον ἁπάντων τῶν
συμμάχων συνεστήσαντο καὶ συνέδρους ἀπέδειξαν
4ἑκάστης πόλεως. ἐτάχθη δ᾿ ἀπὸ τῆς κοινῆς γνώμης
τὸ μὲν συνέδριον ἐν ταῖς Ἀθήναις συνεδρεύειν,
πόλιν δὲ ἐπ᾿ ἴσης καὶ μεγάλην καὶ μικρὰν μιᾶς
ψήφου κυρίαν εἶναι, πάσας δ᾿ ὑπάρχειν αὐτονόμους,
ἡγεμόσι χρωμένας Ἀθηναίοις. οἱ δὲ Λακεδαιμόνιοι
τὴν ὁρμὴν τῶν πόλεων2 ὁρῶντες ἀκατάσχετον
οὖσαν πρὸς τὴν ἀπόστασιν, ὅμως πρεσβείαις καὶ
λόγοις φιλανθρώποις, ἔτι δ᾿ ἐπαγγελίαις εὐεργετικαῖς
ἐφιλοτιμοῦντο διορθοῦσθαι τὰς ἀλλοτριότητας
5τῶν ἀνθρώπων. ὁμοίως δὲ καὶ τῆς εἰς τὸν
πόλεμον παρασκευῆς ἐποιοῦντο πολλὴν φροντίδα,
προσδοκῶντες μέγαν καὶ πολυχρόνιον αὑτοῖς ἔσεσθαι
τὸν Βοιωτικὸν πόλεμον, συμμαχούντων τοῖς
Θηβαίοις τῶν Ἀθηναίων καὶ τῶν ἄλλων Ἑλλήνων
τῶν κοινωνούντων τοῦ συνεδρίου.
29. Ἅμα δὲ τούτοις πραττομένοις Ἄκορις ὁ τῶν
Αἰγυπτίων βασιλεύς, ἀλλοτρίως διακείμενος πρὸς
τὸν Περσῶν βασιλέα, δυνάμεις ξενικὰς ἀξιολόγους
ἤθροισε· μεγάλους γὰρ μισθοὺς τοῖς ὑπακούουσι
προτιθείς,3 συχνοὺς δ᾿4 εὐεργετῶν, ταχὺ πολλοὺς
ἔσχε τῶν Ἑλλήνων ὑπακούοντας πρὸς τὴν στρατείαν.



1πόλεων Sherman; ἀποστάντων Post: συμμάχων.2πόλεων Wesseling: πολλῶν Vogel justifies MSS. (cp.
Book 13. 91. 5), but there τῶν πολλῶν means “the (!) hoi
polloi.”3προτιθείς Reiske: προστιθείς.4δ᾿ added by Dindorf.22Book XV

attached themselves to the Athenians.1 The democracy, 377/6 b.c. elated by the loyalty of the cities, established a common council of all the allies and appointed representatives of each state. It was agreed by common consent that, while the council should hold its sessions in Athens, every city great and small should be on an equal basis and enjoy but one vote, and that all should continue independent, accepting the Athenians as leaders. The Lacedaemonians, aware that the movement of their cities to secede could not be checked, nevertheless strove earnestly by means of diplomatic missions, friendly words and promises of benefits to win back the peoples who had become estranged. Likewise they devoted themselves assiduously to their preparations for war, for they expected the Boeotian War to be a hard and tedious affair for them, since the Athenians and the rest of the Greeks who participated in the council were allied with the Thebans.
29. While these things were going on, Acoris, the king of the Egyptians, being on unfriendly terms with the Persian King, collected a large mercenary force; for by offering high pay to those who enrolled and doing favours to many of them, he quickly induced many of the Greeks to take service with him for the



1This is the formation of the second Athenian maritime confederacy which aimed at the overthrow of Spartan supremacy in Greece. The accounts here and in Xenophon, Hell. 5. 4. 34–6. 3, are the essential literary texts. Important inscriptional evidence exists, IG, 22. 43, also 40–42, 44, 45, 82, 95–101. The formation of the confederacy should probably be placed after Sphodrias’ attempt to surprise the Peiraeus (see chap. 29. 6 and Ed. Meyer, Geschichte des Altertums, 5. 384).23