Diodorus of Sicily

Αἴγυπτον βασιλείαν, ὁ δ᾿ Ἀγησίλαος ὡς μόνος
κατωρθωκὼς τὴν βασιλείαν ἐτιμήθη προσηκούσαις
δωρεαῖς. ἐπανιὼν δὲ εἰς τὴν πατρίδα διὰ Κυρήνης
ἐτελεύτησε, καὶ τοῦ σώματος ἐν μέλιτι κομισθέντος
εἰς τὴν Σπάρτην ἔτυχε τῆς βασιλικῆς ταφῆς τε
καὶ τιμῆς.
Καὶ τὰ μὲν κατὰ τὴν Ἀσίαν μέχρι τούτων προέβη
κατὰ τοῦτον τὸν ἐνιαυτόν.
94. Κατὰ δὲ τὴν Πελοπόννησον τοῖς Ἀρκάσι
γενομένης εἰρήνης κοινῆς μετὰ τὴν ἐν Μαντινείᾳ
μάχην, ἐνιαυτὸν μόνον ἐμμείναντες τοῖς ὅρκοις
πάλιν κατέστησαν τὸν1 πόλεμον. ἐν μὲν γὰρ τοῖς
ὅρκοις ἦν γεγραμμένον ἑκάστους εἰς τὴν ἑαυτῶν
ἀπιέναι πατρίδα μετὰ τὴν μάχην, εἰς δὲ τὴν
Μεγάλην πόλιν ὑπῆρχον αἱ περιοικοῦσαι πόλεις
μετῳκισμέναι καὶ δυσχερῶς φέρουσαι τὴν ἐκ τῆς
πατρίδος μετάστασιν. διόπερ αὐτῶν ἐπανελθόντων
εἰς τὰς προγεγενημένας πόλεις, οἱ Μεγαλοπολῖται
2συνηνάγκαζον ἐκλιπεῖν τὰς πατρίδας. διὰ δὲ ταύτην
τὴν αἰτίαν γενομένης διαφορᾶς, οἱ μὲν ἐκ τῶν
πολισμάτων ἠξίουν αὐτοῖς βοηθεῖν Μαντινεῖς καὶ
τῶν ἄλλων Ἀρκάδων τινάς,2 ἔτι δὲ Ἠλείους καὶ
τοὺς ἄλλους τοὺς μετεσχηκότας τοῖς Μαντινεῦσι
συμμαχίας· οἱ δὲ Μεγαλοπολῖται τοὺς Θηβαίους3
παρεκάλουν συμμαχεῖν. οἷς ἀπέστειλαν συντόμως
ὁπλίτας μὲν τρισχιλίους, ἱππεῖς δὲ τριακοσίους,
3ὧν τὴν στρατηγίαν εἶχε Παμμένης. οὗτος δὲ παρελθὼν
εἰς Μεγάλην πόλιν, καὶ τῶν πολισμάτων ἃ





1τὸν MSS., except PALK which omit; εἰς τὸν Wesseling εἰς Vogel.2τινάς added by Capps.3So Dindorf (cp. Book 16. 34. 1, 39. 2): Ἀθηναίους.216Book XV

Egyptian kingship,1 and Agesilaiis, as the one who 362/1 b.c. single-handed had restored his kingdom, was honoured with appropriate gifts. On his journey back to his native land by way of Cyrenê Agesilaüs died, and his body packed in honey2 was conveyed to Sparta where he received kingly burial and honour.
So far did events in Asia progress to the end of the year.
94. In the Peloponnese, though the Arcadians had agreed on a general peace after the battle of Mantineia, they adhered to their covenant only a year before they renewed the war. In the covenant it was written that each should return to his respective native country after the battle, but there had come into the city of Megalopolis3 the inhabitants of neighbouring cities who had been moved to new homes and were finding transplantation from their own homes difficult to bear. Consequently when they had returned to the cities which had formerly been theirs, the Megalopolitans tried to compel them to abandon their homelands. And when for this reason a quarrel arose, the townsfolk asked the Mantineians and certain other Arcadians to help them, and also the Eleians and the other peoples that were members of the alliance with the Mantineians, whereas the Megalopolitans besought the Thebans to fight with them as allies. The Thebans speedily dispatched to them three thousand hoplites and three hundred cavalry with Pammenes as their commander. He came to Megalopolis, and by



1Contrary to Plutarch, Agesilaüs, 38. 1 and 40. 1, who seems more reliable. Tachos fled, Agesilaüs established Nectanebôs and left with gifts from the latter.2Contrary to Plutarch, Agesilaüs, 40. 3: “. . . enclosed his dead body in melted wax, since they had no honey . . .” (Perrin, L.C.L.). Nepos, Agesilaüs, 8. 7 agrees with Plutarch.3For the founding of Megalopolis see chap. 72. 4.217