Diodorus of Sicily

Λιβύῃ κατὰ νοῦν ἅπαντα τὰ πράγματα τοῖς περὶ
τὸν Ἀρχάγαθον ἦν. μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα τῆς γερουσίας
ἐν Καρχηδόνι βουλευσαμένης περὶ τοῦ πολέμου
καλῶς ἔδοξε τοῖς συνέδροις τρία στρατόπεδα ποιήσαντας
ἐκ τῆς πόλεως ἐκπέμψαι, τὸ μὲν ἐπὶ τὰς
παραθαλαττίους πόλεις, τὸ δ᾿ εἰς τὴν μεσόγειον,
2τὸ δ᾿ εἰς τοὺς ἄνω τόπους. ἐνόμιζον γὰρ τοῦτο
πράξαντες πρῶτον μὲν τὴν πόλιν ἀπαλλάξειν τῆς
πολιορκίας ἅμα δὲ καὶ τῆς σιτοδείας· πολλῶν γὰρ
καὶ παντοδαπῶν ὄχλων συμπεφευγότων εἰς τὴν
Καρχηδόνα συνέβαινε πάντων γεγονέναι σπάνιν,
ἐξανηλωμένων ἤδη τῶν ἐπιτηδείων· ἀπὸ1 δὲ τῆς
πολιορκίας οὐκ ἦν κίνδυνος, ἀπροσίτου τῆς πόλεως
οὔσης διὰ τὴν ἀπὸ τῶν τειχῶν καὶ τῆς θαλάττης
3ὀχυρότητα· ἔπειθ᾿ ὑπελάμβανον καὶ τοὺς συμμάχους
διαμένειν μᾶλλον πλειόνων στρατοπέδων ὄντων
ἔν ὑπαίθρῳ τῶν παραβοηθούντων· τὸ δὲ μέγιστον,
ἤλπιζον καὶ τοὺς πολεμίους ἀναγκασθήσεσθαι μερίζειν
τὰς δυνάμεις καὶ μακρὰν ἀποσπᾶσθαι τῆς
Καρχηδόνος. ἅπερ ἅπαντα κατὰ τὴν ἐπίνοιαν αὐτῶν
4συνετελέσθη· τρισμυρίων μὲν γὰρ στρατιωτῶν
ἐκ τῆς πόλεως ἐκπεμφθέντων οἱ καταλειπόμενοι
ἔμφρουροι2 οὐχ οἷον ἱκανὰ πρὸς αὐτάρκειαν εἶχον,
ἀλλ᾿ ἐκ περιουσίας ἐχρῶντο δαψιλέσι πᾶσιν, οἵ τε
σύμμαχοι τὸ πρὸ τοῦ διὰ τὸν ἀπὸ τῶν πολεμίων
φόβον ἀναγκαζόμενοι προστίθεσθαι τοῖς πολεμίοις
τότε πάλιν θαρρήσαντες ἀνέτρεχον εἰς τὴν
προυπάρχουσαν φιλίαν.
60. Ὁ δ᾿ Ἀρχάγαθος ὁρῶν διειλημμένην ἅπασαν
τὴν Λιβύην πολεμίοις στρατοπέδοις καὶ αὐτὸς διεῖλε
τὴν δύναμιν καὶ μέρος μὲν ἐξέπεμψεν εἰς τὴν
1ἀπὸ Fischer: ὁ.2ἔμφρουροι Madvig; ἐν τῇ πόλει Dindorf; εὐπόρως Post: ἔμποροι.304Book XX

been satisfactory to Archagathus. But after this the 307 b.c. senate in Carthage took good counsel about the war and the senators decided to form three armies and send them forth from the city, one against the cities of the coast, one into the midland regions, and one into the interior. They thought that if they did this they would in the first place relieve the city of the siege and at the same time of the scarcity of food; for since many people from all parts had taken refuge in Carthage, there had resulted a general scarcity, the supply of provisions being already exhausted, but there was no danger from the siege since the city was inaccessible because of the protection afforded by the walls and the sea. In the second place, they assumed that the allies would continue more loyal if there were more armies in the field aiding them. And, what was most important, they hoped that the enemy would be forced to divide his forces and to withdraw to a distance from Carthage. All of these aims were accomplished according to their purpose; for when thirty thousand soldiers had been sent out from the city, the men who were left behind as a garrison not only had enough to maintain themselves, but out of their abundance they enjoyed everything in profusion; and the allies, who hitherto, because of their fear of the enemy, were compelled to make terms with him, again gained courage and hastened to return to the formerly existing friendship.
60. When Archagathus saw that all Libya was being occupied in sections by hostile armies, he himself also divided his army; part he sent into the



1About 23 miles.2Or “weasels.”3“Ape-cities”; cp. the Πιθηκοῦσαι νῆσοι, “Ape Islands,” off the coast of Campania (chap. 44. 7).4Cp. Book 1, chap. 83. 1.305