Diodorus of Sicily
7διακοσίων, ἱππέων δὲ τετρακοσίων. Στάσανδρος
δ᾿ ὁ τῆς Ἀρίας καὶ Δραγγινῆς σατράπης, προσειληφὼς
καὶ τοὺς ἐκ τῆς Βακτριανῆς, εἶχε πεζοὺς
8μὲν χιλίους πεντακοσίους, ἱππεῖς δὲ χιλίους. ἐκ δὲ
τῆς Ἰνδικῆς Εὔδαμος παρεγένετο μεθ᾿ ἱππέων μὲν
πεντακοσίων, πεζῶν δὲ τριακοσίων, ἐλεφάντων δὲ
ἑκατὸν εἴκοσι· τὰ δὲ θηρία ταῦτα παρέλαβε μετὰ
τὴν Ἀλεξάνδρου τελευτὴν δολοφονήσας Πῶρον
τὸν βασιλέα. οἱ δὲ πάντες μετὰ τῶν σατραπῶν
ἠθροίσθησαν πεζοὶ μὲν πλείους τῶν μυρίων ὀκτακισχιλίων
ἑπτακοσίων, ἱππεῖς δὲ τετρακισχίλιοι
ἑξακόσιοι.
15. Ἐπεὶ δὲ παρεγενήθησαν εἰς τὴν Σουσιανὴν
πρὸς τοὺς περὶ τὸν Εὐμενῆ, συνήγαγον ἐκκλησίαν
κοινήν, ἐν ᾗ πολλὴν συνέβη γενέσθαι φιλοτιμίαν
ὑπὲρ τῆς ἡγεμονίας. Πευκέστης μὲν γὰρ διά τε τὸ
πλῆθος τῶν συναγωνιζομένων καὶ τὴν παρ᾿ Ἀλεξάνδρου
προαγωγὴν ἑαυτὸν ᾤετο δεῖν ἔχειν τὴν τῶν
2πάντων ἡγεμονίαν, Ἀντιγένης δὲ τῶν ἀργυρασπίδων
Μακεδόνων στρατηγῶν ἔφη δεῖν δοθῆναι τὴν
ἐξουσίαν τῆς αἱρέσεως τοῖς μετ᾿ αὐτοῦ Μακεδόσιν,
συγκαταπεπολεμηκόσιν Ἀλεξάνδρῳ τὴν Ἀσίαν
3καὶ γεγονόσι διὰ τὰς ἀρετὰς ἀνικήτοις. Εὐμενὴς
δὲ φοβούμενος μὴ διὰ τὴν πρὸς ἀλλήλους
στάσιν εὐχείρωτοι κατασταθῶσιν Ἀντιγόνῳ, συνεβούλευεν
ἕνα μὲν μὴ καθιστᾶν ἡγεμόνα, πάντας δὲ
τοὺς προκεκριμένους ὑπὸ τοῦ πλήθους σατράπας
καὶ στρατηγοὺς εἰς τὴν βασιλικὴν αὐλὴν συνιόντας


268Book XIX

cavalry. Stasander, the satrap of Aria and Dranginê, 317 b.c. who brought also the troops from Bactrianê, had fifteen hundred infantry and a thousand horse. From India came Eudamus with five hundred horsemen, three hundred footmen, and one hundred and twenty elephants. These beasts he had secured after the death of Alexander by treacherously slaying King Porus.1 In all there were assembled with the satraps more than eighteen thousand seven hundred infantry and four thousand six hundred cavalry.2
15. When the satraps had come into Susianê and had joined Eumenes, they called together a general assembly in which there was found to be a good deal of rivalry for the chief command.3 Peucestes thought that because of the number of soldiers who followed him on the campaign and because of his high rank under Alexander he ought to have the supreme command; but Antigenes, who was general of the Silver Shields, said that the right to make the selection ought to be granted to his Macedonians, since they had conquered Asia with Alexander and had been unconquered because of their valour. Eumenes, however, fearing that through their rivalry with each other they would become an easy prey for Antigonus, advised that they should not set up a single commander, but that all the satraps and generals who had been selected by the mass of the army should gather in the royal tent each day and take counsel


1Eudamus had been left by Alexander as a Macedonian
“resident” with Taxiles (Arrian, Anabasis, 6. 27. 2). We
know nothing further of the attack on Porus. This Eudamus
is not the brother of Pithon mentioned at the beginning of
this chapter.2The sums of the figures given are 18,500 foot and 4210 horse, but we must add also the forces brought by Amphimachus of Mesopotamia (600 horse and probably some infantry although none is mentioned) who is present at the battle of Gabienê (chap. 27. 4).3Cp. Plutarch, Eumenes, 13. 4.269