Diodorus of Sicily
73. Τῶν δὲ κατὰ τοῦτον τὸν ἐνιαυτὸν πράξεων
τέλος ἐχουσῶν Ἀθήνησι μὲν παρέλαβε τὴν ἀρχὴν
Θεόφραστος, ἐν Ῥώμῃ δ᾿ ὕπατοι κατεστάθησαν
Μάρκος Πόπλιος καὶ Γάιος Σουλπίκιος. ἐπὶ δὲ
τούτων Καλλαντιανοὶ κατοικοῦντες ἐν τοῖς ἐν ἀριστερᾷ
μέρεσι τοῦ Πόντου καὶ φρουρὰν ἔχοντες παρὰ
Λυσιμάχου ταύτην ἐξέβαλον καὶ τῆς αὐτονομίας
2ἀντείχοντο. ὡσαύτως δὲ τήν τε τῶν Ἰστριανῶν
πόλιν καὶ τὰς ἄλλας τὰς πλησιοχώρους ἐλευθερώσαντες
συνέθεντο συμμαχίαν ὡς κοινῇ πολεμεῖν τῷ
δυνάστῃ· προσελάβοντο δ᾿ εἰς τὴν φιλίαν τῶν τε
Θρᾳκῶν καὶ Σκυθῶν τοὺς ὁμοροῦντας, ὥστε τὸ πᾶν
εἶναι σύστημα βάρος ἔχον καὶ δυνάμενον ἁδραῖς
3δυνάμεσιν ἀντιτάσσεσθαι. ὁ δὲ Λυσίμαχος πυθόμενος
τὰ πεπραγμένα μετὰ τῆς δυνάμεως ὥρμησεν
ἐπὶ τοὺς ἀφεστηκότας. ποιούμενος δὲ τὴν πορείαν
διὰ τῆς Θρᾴκης καὶ τὸν Αἷμον ὑπερβαλὼν κατεστρατοπέδευσε
πλησίον τῆς Ὀδησσοῦ. πολιορκίαν
δὲ συστησάμενος ταχὺ τοὺς ἔνδον κατεπλήξατο καὶ
4δι᾿ ὁμολογίας παρέλαβε τὴν πόλιν. μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα
τῷ παραπλησίῳ τρόπῳ τοὺς Ἰστριανοὺς ἀνακτησάμενος
ἀνέζευξεν ἐπὶ Καλλαντιανούς. καθ᾿ ὃν δὴ
χρόνον ἧκον οἵ τε Σκύθαι καὶ Θρᾷκες σὺν πολλῇ
δυνάμει βοηθήσοντες τοῖς συμμάχοις κατὰ τὰς
5συνθήκας. οἷς ἀπαντήσας Λυσίμαχος καὶ συμβαλὼν
ἐξ ἐφόδου τοὺς μὲν Θρᾷκας καταπληξάμενος
ἔπεισε μεταθέσθαι, τοὺς δὲ Σκύθας ἐκ παρατάξεως
νικήσας καὶ πολλοὺς ἀνελὼν τούτων μὲν τοὺς
ὑπολειφθέντας ἐδίωξεν ἐκτὸς τῶν ὅρων, τὴν δὲ τῶν


32Book XIX
73. When the activities of this year had come to 313 b.c. an end, Theophrastus obtained the archonship in Athens, and Marcus Publius and Gaius Sulpicius became consuls in Rome.1 While these were in office, the people of Callantia, who lived on the left side of the Pontus2 and who were subject to a garrison that had been sent by Lysimachus, drove out this garrison and made an effort to gain autonomy. In like manner they freed the city of the Istrians and the other neighbouring cities, and formed an alliance with them binding them to fight together against the prince. They also brought into the alliance those of the Thracians and Scythians whose lands bordered upon their own, so that the whole was a union that had weight and could offer battle with strong forces. As soon, however, as Lysimachus learned what had taken place, he set out with his army against the rebels. After marching through Thrace and crossing the Haemus Mountains, he encamped near Odessus. Beginning a siege, he quickly frightened the inhabitants and took the city by capitulation. Next, after recovering the Istrians in a similar way, he set out against the Callantians. At this very time the Scythians and the Thracians arrived with large forces to aid their allies in accordance with the treaty. Lysimachus, meeting them and engaging them at once, terrified the Thracians and induced them to change sides; but the Scythians he defeated in a pitched battle, slaying many of them and pursuing the survivors beyond the frontiers.


1Theophrastus was archon in 313/12 b.c. In the Fasti
Capitolini the consuls for 314 b.c. are M. Poetelius Libo and C. Sulpicius Longus for the third time (CIL, 1, p. 130; cp. Livy, 9. 24. 1).2i.e. on the left as one enters the Euxine from the Bosporus. The city is called Callatis by Strabo, 7. 5. 12. The narrative is continued from chap. 69.33