Diodorus of Sicily

διαπολεμοῦντες πρὸς ἀλλήλους ὑπὲρ τῆς ἡγεμονίας,
2Εὔμηλός τε καὶ Σάτυρος καὶ Πρύτανις. τούτων
δὲ ὁ μὲν Σάτυρος ὢν πρεσβύτατος1 παρὰ τοῦ πατρὸς
παρειλήφει τὴν ἀρχήν, βεβασιλευκότος ἔτη τριάκοντα
ὀκτώ· ὁ δ᾿ Εὔμηλος φιλίαν συντεθειμένος
πρός τινας τῶν πλησιοχώρων βαρβάρων καὶ δύναμιν
ἁδρὰν ἠθροικὼς ἠθροικὼς ἠμφισβήτει τῆς βασιλείας.
3ἃ δὴ πυθόμενος ὁ Σάτυρος ἀνέζευξεν ἐπ᾿ αὐτὸν
μετὰ δυνάμεως ἁδρᾶς καὶ διαβὰς τὸν Θάτην ποταμόν,
ἐπειδὴ πλησίον ἐγένετο τῶν πολεμίων, τὴν μὲν
παρεμβολὴν ταῖς ἁμάξαις περιλαβὼν αἷς ἦν κεκομικὼς
τὰς ἀγορὰς οὔσας παμπληθεῖς, τὴν δὲ δύναμιν
ἐκτάξας αὐτὸς κατὰ μέσην ὑπῆρχε τὴν φάλαγγα,
4καθάπερ ἐστὶ Σκύθαις νόμιμον. συνεστρατεύοντο
δ᾿ αὐτῷ μισθοφόροι μὲν Ἕλληνες οὐ πλείους δισχιλίων
καὶ Θρᾷκες ἴσοι τούτοις, οἱ δὲ λοιποὶ πάντες
ὑπῆρχον σύμμαχοι Σκύθαι, πλείους τῶν δισμυρίων,
ἱππεῖς δὲ οὐκ ἐλάττους μυρίων. τῷ δ᾿ Εὐμήλῳ
συνεμάχει2 Ἀριφάρνης ὁ τῶν Σιρακῶν3 βασιλεύς,
ἱππεῖς μὲν ἔχων δισμυρίους, πεζοὺς δὲ δισχιλίους
5πρὸς τοῖς δισμυρίοις. γενομένης δὲ μάχης ἰσχυρᾶς
Σάτυρος μὲν ἔχων περὶ ἑαυτὸν ἐπιλέκτους ἄνδρας
ἱππομαχίαν συνεστήσατο πρὸς τοὺς περὶ Ἀριφάρνην
ἀνθεστηκότας κατὰ μέσην τὴν τάξιν καὶ πολλῶν
παρ᾿ ἀμφοτέροις πεσόντων τέλος ἐκβιασάμενος
6ἐτρέψατο τὸν βασιλέα τῶν βαρβάρων. καὶ τὸ μὲν
πρῶτον ἐπέκειτο φονεύων τοὺς ἀεὶ καταλαμβανομένους·
μετ᾿ ὀλίγον δὲ πυθόμενος τὸν ἀδελφὸν


1πρεσβύτατος Dindorf: πρεσβύτερος.2μὲν after συνεμάχει omitted by Fischer.3Σιρακῶν Mueller: Θρᾳκῶν.198Book XX

and Prytanis were engaged in a struggle against each 310 b.c. other for the primacy. Of these, Satyrus, since he was the eldest, had received the government from his father, who had been king for thirty-eight years; but Eumelus, after concluding a treaty of friendship with some of the barbarians who lived near by and collecting a strong army, set up a rival claim to the throne. On learning this, Satyrus set out against him with a strong army; and, after he had crossed the river Thates1 and drawn near the enemy, he surrounded his camp with the waggons in which he carried his abundant supplies, and drew up his army for battle, taking his own place in the centre of the phalanx as is the Scythian custom. Enrolled in his army were not more than two thousand Greek mercenaries and an equal number of Thracians, but all the rest were Scythian allies, more than twenty thousand foot-soldiers and not less than ten thousand horse. Eumelus, however, had as ally Aripharnes, the king of the Siraces,2 with twenty thousand horse and twenty-two thousand foot. In a stubborn battle that took place, Satyrus with picked cavalry about him charged against Aripharnes, who had stationed himself in the middle of the line; and after many had fallen on both sides, he finally forced back and routed the king of the barbarians. At first he pushed on, slaying the enemy as he overtook them; but after a little, hearing that his brother Eumelus was gaining




1One of the streams flowing into the Maeotic Lake (the Sea of Azov). The name is also given as Thapsis and Psathis.2A strong Sarmatian people living between Lake Maeotis and the Caucasus Mountains (but cp. the critical note).199