Diodorus of Sicily

λέγοντες μὴ κοινὸν τῶν Ἀχαιῶν, ἀλλ᾿ ἴδιον αὑτῶν1
εἶναι τὸ τέμενος· συνέπραττον δὲ τούτοις καὶ οἱ τὴν
3Βοῦραν οἰκοῦντες. τῶν δὲ Ἀχαιῶν κοινῷ δόγματι
συγχωρησάντων, οἱ μὲν Ἴωνες ἔθυσαν ἐπὶ τοῦ
βωμοῦ τοῦ Ποσειδῶνος κατὰ τὸν χρησμόν, οἱ δ᾿
Ἑλικεῖς τὰ χρήματα2 διαρρίψαντες τῶν Ἰώνων
τούς τε θεωροὺς συνήρπασαν, ἠσέβησάν τε εἰς τὸ
θεῖον. ἀνθ᾿ ὧν φασι μηνίσαντα τὸν Ποσειδῶνα
διὰ τοῦ σεισμοῦ καὶ τοῦ κατακλυσμοῦ τὰς ἀσεβούσας
4πόλεις λυμήνασθαι. τοῦ δ᾿ ἐκ Ποσειδῶνος
γεγονέναι τὴν μῆνιν ταῖς πόλεσί φασιν ἐμφανεῖς
ἀποδείξεις ὑπάρχειν διὰ τὸ τῶν σεισμῶν καὶ τῶν
κατακλυσμῶν τοῦτον τὸν θεὸν ἔχειν διειλῆφθαι τὴν
ἐξουσίαν, καὶ διὰ τὸ δοκεῖν τὸ παλαιὸν τὴν Πελοπόννησον
οἰκητήριον γεγονέναι Ποσειδῶνος, καὶ
τὴν χώραν ταύτην ὥσπερ ἱερὰν τοῦ Ποσειδῶνος
νομίζεσθαι, καὶ τὸ σύνολον πάσας τὰς ἐν Πελοποννήσῳ
πόλεις μάλιστα τῶν ἀθανάτων τὸν θεὸν
5τιμᾶν τοῦτον. πρὸς δὲ τούτοις τὴν Πελοπόννησον
κατὰ βάθους ἔχειν μεγάλα κοιλώματα καὶ συστάσεις
ὑδάτων ναματιαίων μεγάλας. εἶναι γὰρ ἐν
αὐτῇ δύο ποταμοὺς φανεροὺς ῥέοντας ὑπὸ γῆν· ὅ
τε γὰρ περὶ Φένεον ποταμὸς εἰς τὴν γῆν καταδυόμενος
ἐν τοῖς προτέροις χρόνοις ἠφανίζετο, τῶν
κατὰ γῆς ἄντρων αὐτὸν ὑποδεχομένων, ὅ τε περὶ


1αὑτῶν Vogel: αὐτῶν.2χρήματα Vogel (cp. chap. 82. 1)] θύματα Dindorf, Bekker.86Book XV

not the common property of the Achaeans, but 373/2 b.c. their own particular possession. The inhabitants of Bura also took part with them in this. But since the Achaeans by common decree had concurred, the Ionians sacrificed at the altar of Poseidon as the oracle directed, but the people of Helicê scattered the sacred possessions of the Ionians and seized the persons of their representatives,1 thus committing sacrilege. It was because of these acts, they say, that Poseidon in his anger brought ruin upon the offending cities through the earthquake and the flood. That it was Poseidon’s wrath that was wreaked upon these cities they allege that clear proofs are at hand: first, it is distinctly conceived that authority over earthquakes and floods belongs to this god,2 and also it is the ancient belief that the Peloponnese was an habitation of Poseidon; and this country is regarded as sacred in a way to Poseidon, and, speaking generally, all the cities in the Peloponnese pay honour to this god more than to any other of the immortals. Furthermore, the Peloponnese has beneath its surface huge caverns and great underground accumulations of flowing water. Indeed there are two rivers in it which clearly have underground courses; one of them, in fact, near Pheneüs, plunges into the ground, and in former times completely disappeared, swallowed up by underground caves, and the other, near Stymphalus,1
1See particularly Pausanias, 7, 24. 3–7. Frazer (4. 165) gives other references for this story. (For Bura, ibid. 168.)2When the generation to which Zeus belonged overthrew the older gods the universe was apportioned to Zeus, sky and dry land, to Poseidon, the water, to Dis, the underworld. With his trident Poseidon controlled the waters and by smiting the earth with it produced earthquakes (“Poseidon the earth-shaker”).87