Diodorus of Sicily

καὶ πλῆθος ἤδη διεφθαρκὼς τῶν ἐπαγγελλομένων
συναποστήσεσθαι, γραφόντων δ᾿ αὐτῷ τῶν φίλων
περὶ τῶν Ἀντιγόνου προαιρέσεων καὶ μεγάλας
ὑπογραφόντων ἐλπίδας ἐξαπατηθεὶς κεναῖς προσδοκίαις
4ἧκε πρὸς Ἀντίγονον. ὁ δὲ κυριεύσας τοῦ
σώματος καὶ κατηγορίαν ποιησάμενος ἐν τοῖς
μετέχουσι τοῦ συνεδρίου ῥᾳδίως κατεδίκασε καὶ
5παραχρῆμα ἀπέκτεινεν. συναγαγὼν δὲ τὸ στρατόπεδον
εἰς ἕνα τόπον σατράπην μὲν ἀπέδειξε τῆς
Μηδίας Ὀροντοβάτην Μῆδον, στρατηγὸν δὲ Ἱππόστρατον,
ἔχοντα πεζοὺς μὲν ξένους τρισχιλίους πεντακοσίους . . .1
6αὐτὸς δὲ ἀναλαβὼν τὴν δύναμιν
παρῆλθεν εἰς Ἐκβάτανα. ἐνταῦθα δὲ παραλαβὼν
ἀσήμου ἀργύρου τάλαντα πεντακισχίλια προῆγεν
ἐπὶ τῆς Περσίδος, οὔσης τῆς ἀναβάσεως ὡς ἂν
εἴκοσιν ἡμερῶν εἰς τὸ βασίλειον, ὃ καλεῖται Περσέπολις.
47. Τοῦ δ᾿ Ἀντιγόνου καθ᾿ ὁδὸν ὄντος οἱ τοῦ
Πίθωνος φίλοι καὶ μετεσχηκότες τῆς ἐπιβουλῆς,
ὧν ἦσαν ἐπιφανέστατοι Μελέαγρος καὶ Μενοίτας,
ἤθροισαν τοὺς πλανωμένους τῶν Εὐμενοῦς τε καὶ
2Πίθωνος συνήθων, εἰς ὀκτακοσίους ἱππεῖς. καὶ
τὸ μὲν πρῶτον τὴν χώραν ἐλεηλάτουν τῶν μὴ
βουλομένων συναφίστασθαι Μήδων, μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα
πυθόμενοι καταπεφρονηκότως2 στρατοπεδεύειν τόν
τε Ἱππόστρατον καὶ τὸν Ὀροντοβάτην ἐπέθεντο
νυκτὸς τῇ παρεμβολῇ. καὶ παρ᾿ ὀλίγον μὲν ἐκράτησαν
τῆς περιβολῆς,3 ὑπὸ δὲ τοῦ πλήθους κατισχυόμενοι
καί τινας τῶν στρατιωτῶν πείσαντες


1So Fischer. Dindorf adds ἱππεῖς δὲ before πεντακοσίους.2καταπεφρονηκότως added by Fischer, cp. chaps. 93. 2,
95. 5.3περιβολῆς Capps: ἐπιβολῆς.356Book XIX

already corrupted a large number who promised to 316 b.c. join him in the revolt, but when his friends wrote to him about the plans of Antigonus and hinted at his own great prospects, he was deceived by empty expectations and came to Antigonus. The latter, when he had gained possession of his person and had accused him before the members of the council, easily won a conviction and had him executed at once. Then, gathering the army into one place, he appointed Orontobates, a Mede, satrap of Media, but he made Hippostratus general with an infantry force of thirty-five hundred mercenaries. . .1 Antigonus himself moved to Ecbatana with his army. There he took possession of five thousand talents of uncoined silver and then led the army into Persia, the march to the capital, which is called Persepolis, lasting about twenty days.
47. While Antigonus was on the march, Pithon’s friends who had shared in his conspiracy, of whom the most notable were Meleager and Menoetas, collected the scattered comrades of Eumenes and of Pithon to the number of eight hundred mounted men. At first they harried the territory of those Medes who refused to join the revolt, but afterwards, on learning that Hippostratus and Orontobates were encamped with no thought of danger, they set upon the camp by night. They almost took the outer works, but were overcome by numbers and withdrew after



1Fischer suggests that some indication of the cavalry strength has been lost from the manuscripts at this point.357