Diodorus of Sicily
7τῶν δὲ κατὰ τὴν Κύπρον οἱ περὶ τὸν Μενέλαον
ἡττημένοι τῇ μάχῃ τὰ μὲν βέλη καὶ τὰς
μηχανὰς παρεκόμισαν ἐπὶ τὰ τείχη καὶ τοῖς στρατιώταις
διαλαβόντες τὰς ἐπάλξεις παρεσκευάζοντο
πρὸς τὸν κίνδυνον, ὁρῶντες καὶ τὸν Δημήτριον πρὸς
8πολιορκίαν ἑτοιμαζόμενον, πρὸς δὲ Πτολεμαῖον
ἀπέστειλαν εἰς Αἴγυπτον τοὺς δηλώσοντας περὶ
τῶν ἐλαττωμάτων καὶ ἀξιώσοντας βοηθεῖν, ὡς
κινδυνευόντων αὐτῷ τῶν ἐν τῇ νήσῳ πραγμάτων.
48. Δημήτριος δὲ τήν τε τῶν Σαλαμινίων ὁρῶν
πόλιν οὐκ εὐκαταφρόνητον οὖσαν καὶ στρατιωτῶν
πλῆθος ὑπάρχον ἐν αὐτῇ τῶν ἀμυνομένων ἔκρινε
μηχανάς τε τοῖς μεγέθεσιν ὑπεραιρούσας κατασκευάζειν
καὶ καταπέλτας ὀξυβελεῖς καὶ λιθοβόλους
παντοίους καὶ τὴν ἄλλην κατασκευὴν καταπληκτικήν.
μετεπέμψατο δὲ καὶ τεχνίτας ἐκ τῆς Ἀσίας
καὶ σίδηρον, ἔτι δ᾿ ὕλης πλῆθος καὶ τῆς ἄλλης χορηγίας
2τὴν ἐπιτήδειον κατασκευήν. ταχὺ δὲ πάντων
εὐτρεπῶν αὐτῷ γενομένων συνέπηξε μηχανὴν τὴν
ὀνομαζομένην ἑλέπολιν, τὸ πλάτος ἔχουσαν ἑκάστην
πλευρὰν τεσσαράκοντα καὶ πέντε πήχεις, τὸ δ᾿
ὕψος πηχῶν ἐννενήκοντα, διειλημμένην στέγαις
ἐννέα, ὑπότροχον δὲ πᾶσαν τροχοῖς στερεοῖς τέσσαρσιν
3ὀκταπήχεσι τὸ ὕψος. κατεσκεύασε δὲ καὶ
κριοὺς ὑπερμεγέθεις καὶ χελώνας δύο κριοφόρους.
τῆς δ᾿ ἑλεπόλεως εἰς μὲν τὰς κάτω στέγας εἰσήνεγκε
πετροβόλους παντοίους, ὧν ἦσαν οἱ μέγιστοι
τριτάλαντοι, εἰς δὲ τὰς μέσας καταπέλτας ὀξυβελεῖς



274Book XX

come to the proper time.1 As to affairs in Cyprus, 307 b.c. Menelaüs, after having been defeated in the battle, had missiles and engines brought to the walls, assigned positions on the battlements to his soldiers, and made ready for the fight; and since he saw that Demetrius was also making preparations for siege, he sent messengers into Egypt to Ptolemy to inform him about the defeat and to ask him to send aid as his interests on the island were in danger.
48. Since Demetrius saw that the city of the Salaminians was not to be despised and that a large force was in the city defending it, he determined to prepare siege engines of very great size, catapults for shooting bolts and ballistae of all kinds, and the other equipment that would strike terror.2 He sent for skilled workmen from Asia, and for iron, likewise for a large amount of wood and for the proper complement of other supplies. When everything was quickly made ready for him, he constructed a device called the “helepolis,”3 which had a length of forty-five cubits on each side and a height of ninety cubits. It was divided into nine storeys, and the whole was mounted on four solid wheels each eight cubits high. He also constructed very large battering rams and two penthouses to carry them. On the lower levels of the helepolis he mounted all sorts of ballistae, the largest of them capable of hurling missiles weighing three talents4; on the middle levels he placed the largest


1No further reference to this is found in the extant portions
of the history.2For this campaign cp. Plutarch, Demetrius, 15–17.3Literally, “city-taker.” Cp. chap. 91. If the cubit used is the standard Attic measure of about 1| feet, the dimensions given are about 68 feet on each side and 135 feet in height, with wheels 12 feet in diameter; but a shorter Macedonian cubit, perhaps about one foot long, is possible (Tarn, Hellenistic Military and Naval Developments, 15–16).4About 180 lbs.275