Diodorus of Sicily

καὶ τὴν ὅλην κρίσιν τοῦ πολέμου ἄδηλον ὑπάρχειν.
5μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα Τηίους μὲν καὶ Κολοφωνίους προσηγάγετο,
Ἐρυθραίοις δὲ καὶ Κλαζομενίοις ἐλθούσης
κατὰ θάλατταν βοηθείας τὰς μὲν πόλεις ἑλεῖν οὐκ
ἠδυνήθη, τὴν δὲ χώραν αὐτῶν πορθήσας ἀνέζευξεν
ἐπὶ Σάρδεις. ἐνταῦθα δὴ τὸν Ἀντιγόνου στρατηγὸν
Φοίνικα1 πείσας ἀποστῆναι τοῦ βασιλέως
παρέλαβε τὴν πόλιν πλὴν τῆς ἄκρας· ταύτην γὰρ
φυλάττων Φίλιππος εἷς τῶν Ἀντιγόνου φίλων
βεβαίαν ἐτήρει τὴν εὔνοιαν τὴν πρὸς τὸν πεπιστευκότα.
Τὰ μὲν οὖν περὶ Λυσίμαχον ἐν τούτοις ἦν.
108. Ἀντίγονος δὲ προκεχειρισμένος ἀγῶνα μέγαν
καὶ πανήγυριν ἐν Ἀντιγονίᾳ συντελεῖν πάντοθεν
ἀθλητάς τε καὶ τεχνίτας τοὺς ἐπιφανεστάτους
ἐπὶ μεγάλοις ἄθλοις καὶ μισθοῖς ἦθροίκει. ὡς δ᾿
ἤκουσε τὴν Λυσιμάχου διάβασιν καὶ τῶν στρατηγῶν
τὴν ἀπόστασιν, τὸν μὲν ἀγῶνα διέλυσε, τοῖς δ᾿
ἀθληταῖς καὶ τοῖς τεχνίταις ἀπέδωκε μισθοὺς οὐκ
2ἐλάττους διακοσίων ταλάντων. αὐτὸς δὲ τὴν δύναμιν
ἀναλαβὼν ὥρμησεν ἐκ τῆς Συρίας σύντομον
τὴν πορείαν ποιούμενος ἐπὶ τοὺς πολεμίους. εἰς
δὲ Ταρσὸν τῆς Κιλικίας ἀφικόμενος ἐξ ὧν κατεκόμισε
χρημάτων ἐκ τῶν Κυΐνδων2 τὸ στρατόπεδον
3εἰς τρεῖς μῆνας ἐμισθοδότησεν. χωρὶς δὲ τούτων
τρισχίλια τάλαντα μετὰ τῆς δυνάμεως ἐκόμιζεν,
ὅπως τοιαύτην ἔχῃ τὴν χορηγίαν, ὅταν αὐτῷ χρεία
γένηται χρημάτων. ἔπειτα τὸν Ταῦρον ὑπερβαλὼν

1καὶ Δόκιμον after Φοίνικα omitted by Wesseling.2Κυΐνδων, cp. Books 18. 62. 2; 19. 56. 5; Κουΐνδων RF. Κουϊνδῶν X.428Book XX

and the whole outcome of the war was uncertain. 302 b.c. After this he secured the adherence of the people of Teos and of Colophon, but since reinforcements came by sea to Erythrae and Clazomenae, he could not capture these cities; however, he plundered their territory and then set out for Sardis. There, by persuading Antigonus’ general Phoenix to desert the king, he gained control of the city except the acropolis; for Philip,1 one of the friends of Antigonus, who was guarding the citadel, held firm his loyalty toward the man who had placed trust in him.
The affairs of Lysimachus were in this position.
108. Antigonus, who had made preparations to celebrate great games and a festival in Antigonia, had collected from all sides the most famous athletes and artists to compete for great prizes and fees. But when he heard of the crossing of Lysimachus and the desertion of his own generals, he abandoned the games but distributed to the athletes and artists not less than two hundred talents as compensation. He himself taking his army set out from Syria and made a rapid march against the enemy. Arriving at Tarsus in Cilicia, he paid the army for three months from the money he had brought down from Cyinda.2 Apart from this fund, he was carrying three thousand talents with the army in order that he might have this provision whenever he had need of money. Then, crossing the Taurus Range, he marched toward




1This is probably the same Philip as the adviser given to Demetrius by Antigonus in 314 b.c., Book 19. 69. 1.2For the treasury of Alexander at Cyinda cp. Book 18. 62. 2; 19. 56. 5.429