Diodorus of Sicily

πεντακοσίων ἔσχε στρατιώτας ἐθελοντὴν1 ὑπακούοντας
πλείους τῶν δισχιλίων. τῆς τύχης δ᾿ αὐτῷ
συνεργούσης τηλικαύτην ἔλαβεν αὔξησιν ὥστε
παραλαβεῖν τὰς βασιλικὰς δυνάμεις καὶ προστῆναι
τῶν βασιλέων πρὸς τοὺς καταλύειν αὐτῶν τὴν ἀρχὴν
τετολμηκότας. ἀλλὰ ταῦτα μὲν μικρὸν ὕστερον
ἀκριβέστερον διέξιμεν ἐν τοῖς οἰκείοις καιροῖς.
54. Νυνὶ δ᾿ ἀρκούντως τὰ κατὰ τὴν Ἀσίαν
διεληλυθότες μεταβησόμεθα πρὸς τὰς κατὰ τὴν
Εὐρώπην συντελεσθείσας πράξεις. Κάσανδρος γὰρ
ἀποτετευχὼς τῆς κατὰ τὴν Μακεδονίαν ἡγεμονίας
οὐκ ἔπτηξεν, ἀλλ᾿ ἔκρινεν ἀντέχεσθαι ταύτης, αἰσχρὸν
εἶναι διαλαμβάνων τὴν τοῦ πατρὸς ἀρχὴν
2ὑφ᾿ ἑτέρων διοικεῖσθαι. ὁρῶν δὲ τὴν τῶν Μακεδόνων
ὁρμὴν κεκλιμένην πρὸς τὸν Πολυπέρχοντα
τῶν μὲν φίλων οἷς ἐπίστευε κατ᾿ ἰδίαν προσδιαλεγόμενος
ἐξέπεμπεν ἐπὶ τὸν Ἑλλήσποντον ἀνυπόπτως,
αὐτὸς δ᾿ ἐφ᾿ ἡμέρας τινὰς σχολάσας ἐπὶ
τῆς χώρας καὶ κυνήγια συνιστάμενος ἐγέννησε περὶ
αὑτοῦ διάληψιν ὡς οὐκ ἀντιποιούμενος τῆς ἀρχῆς.
3ὡς δ᾿ εὐτρεπῆ πάντα ἦν αὐτῷ τὰ πρὸς τὴν ἀποδημίαν,
ἔλαθεν ἀναζεύξας ἐκ τῆς Μακεδονίας. καταντήσας
δ᾿ εἰς τὴν Χερρόνησον κἀκεῖθεν ἀναζεύξας
παρῆλθεν εἰς Ἑλλήσποντον. διαπλεύσας δ᾿ εἰς τὴν
Ἀσίαν πρὸς Ἀντίγονον ἠξίου βοηθεῖν αὐτῷ, φήσας
καὶ Πτολεμαῖον ἐπηγγέλθαι συμμαχήσειν. ὁ δ᾿
Ἀντίγονος προθύμως αὐτὸν προσδεξάμενος ἐπηγγείλατο
πάντα συμπράξειν προθύμως αὐτῷ καὶ
δύναμιν παραχρῆμα δώσειν πεζικήν τε καὶ ναυτικήν.



1ἐθελοντὴν Kaelker: ἐθελοντὶ MSS., editors.160Book XVIII

had more than two thousand soldiers1 who followed 319 b.c. him of their own free will. With the aid of Fortune he gained so great an increase in power that he took over the royal armies and championed the kings against those who had boldly tried to end their rule. But we shall relate these events in more detail a little later in their proper place.2
54. Now that we have said enough about affairs throughout Asia, we shall turn our attention to what had taken place at the same time in Europe.3 Although Cassander had failed to gain the ruling position in Macedonia, he was not dismayed; but he determined to maintain his claim to it, holding it disgraceful that his father’s office should be administered by others. Since he perceived that the favour of the Macedonians inclined to Polyperchon, he had further private conversations with the friends in whom he most trusted and sent them to the Hellespont without arousing suspicion; and he himself, by spending several days at leisure in the country and organizing a hunt, created the general opinion that he would not try to gain the office. When everything necessary for his departure was ready, however, he set out from Macedonia unobserved.4 He came to the Chersonese and departing thence arrived at the Hellespont. Sailing across into Asia to Antigonus he begged him to aid him, saying that Ptolemy also had promised to be an ally. Antigonus eagerly received him and promised to co-operate with him actively in every way and to give him at once a force of infantry and a




1In chap. 41. 3 the number to take refuge on Nora is
given as six hundred. According to Plutach (Eumenes), 12. 3), Eumenes gathered almost a thousand horsemen after Nora.2Cp. chaps. 58 ff.3Continued from chap. 49. 4.4Cp. Marmor Parium for 319/18.161