Diodorus of Sicily

δύναμις ἔκ τινων ὄφεων θηρευομένων καὶ
5τούτων εἰς τὸν ἥλιον νεκρῶν τιθεμένων. τῆς δ᾿ ἐκ
τοῦ καύματος θερμασίας τηκούσης τὴν τῆς σαρκὸς
φύσιν ἱδρῶτας ἐκπίπτειν συνέβαινε καὶ διὰ τῆς
νοτίδος συνεκκρίνεσθαι1 τὸν τῶν θηρίων ἰόν. διὸ
καὶ τοῦ τρωθέντος εὐθὺς ἐνάρκα τὸ σῶμα καὶ μετ᾿
ὀλίγον ὀξεῖαι συνηκολούθουν ὀδύναι καὶ σπασμὸς
καὶ τρόμος τὸν ὅλον ὄγκον κατεῖχεν, ὅ τε χρὼς
ψυχρὸς καὶ πελιδνὸς2 ἐγίνετο καὶ διὰ τῶν ἐμέτων
ἐξέπιπτεν χολή, πρὸς δὲ τούτοις ἀπὸ τοῦ τραύματος
μέλας ἀφρὸς ἀπέρρει καὶ σηπεδὼν ἐγεννᾶτο. αὕτη
δὲ γενομένη ταχέως ἐπέτρεχε τοῖς κυρίοις τόποις
τοῦ σώματος καὶ δεινοὺς θανάτους ἀπειργάζετο.
6διὸ συνέβαινε τὰ ἴσα τοῖς μεγάλα τραύματ᾿ εἰληφόσι
καὶ τοῖς μικρὰν καὶ τὴν τυχοῦσαν ἀμυχὴν
ἀναδεξαμένοις.
Τοιαύτῃ δ᾿ ἀπωλείᾳ τῶν τρωθέντων ἀπολλυμένων
ἐπὶ μὲν τοῖς ἄλλοις οὐχ οὕτως ὁ βασιλεὺς
ἐλυπήθη, ἐπὶ δὲ Πτολεμαίῳ τῷ ὕστερον μὲν βασιλεύσαντι,
τότε δὲ ἀγαπωμένῳ μεγάλως ἠχθέσθη.
7ἴδιον γὰρ τι καὶ παράδοξον συνέβη γενέσθαι περὶ
τὸν Πτολεμαῖον, ὅ τινες εἰς θεῶν πρόνοιαν ἀνέπεμπον.
ἀγαπώμενος γὰρ ὑφ᾿ ἁπάντων διά τε τὴν
ἀρετὴν καὶ ὑπερβολὴν τῆς εἰς πάντας εὐεργεσίας,
οἰκείας τῆς φιλανθρώπου βοηθείας ἔτυχεν. ὁ γὰρ
βασιλεὺς ἶδεν ὄψιν κατὰ τὸν ὕπνον, καθ᾿ ἣν ἔδοξεν
ὁρᾶν δράκοντα βοτάνην ἐν τῷ στόματι κρατεῖν καὶ
δεῖξαι ταύτης τὴν φύσιν καὶ τὴν δύναμιν καὶ τὸν
8τόπον ἐν ᾧ φύεται. ἐγερθεὶς οὖν ὁ Ἀλέξανδρος
καὶ τὴν βοτάνην ἀναζητήσας καὶ τρίψας τό τε


1ἐκκρίνεσθαι RX.2πελιὸς XQ.416Book XVII

was derived from certain snakes which were caught 326/5 b.c. and killed and left in the sun. The heat melted the substance of the flesh and drops of moisture formed; in this moisture the poison of the animals was secreted. When a man was wounded, the body became numb immediately and then sharp pains followed, and convulsions and shivering shook the whole frame. The skin became cold and livid and bile appeared in the vomit, while a black froth was exuded from the wound and gangrene set in. As this spread quickly and overran to the vital parts of the body, it brought a horrible death to the victim. The same result occurred to those who had received large wounds and to those whose wounds were small, or even a mere scratch.
So the wounded were dying in this fashion, and for the rest Alexander was not so much concerned, but he was deeply distressed for Ptolemy, the future king, who was much beloved by him. An interesting and quite extraordinary event occurred in the case of Ptolemy, which some attributed to divine Providence. He was loved by all because of his character and his kindnesses to all, and he obtained a succour appropriate to his good deeds. The king saw a vision in his sleep. It seemed to him that a snake appeared carrying a plant in its mouth, and showed him its nature and efficacy and the place where it grew. When Alexander awoke, he sought out the plant, and grinding it up plastered it on Ptolemy’s body. He
417