Diodorus of Sicily

συνεβούλευε μὲν σώζειν τοὺς κινδυνεύοντας,
παρανέγνω δὲ ψήφισμα γεγραμμένον φιλοτέχνως·
περιεῖχε γὰρ παραίτησιν τῶν ἀνδρῶν καὶ ἐπαγγελίαν
τοῦ κολάζειν κατὰ τοὺς νόμους, ἂν ὦσιν
4ἄξιοι τιμωρίας. ὁ μὲν οὖν δῆμος ἀποδεξάμενος
τὴν ἐπίνοιαν τοῦ Δημάδου τό τε ψήφισμα ἐκύρωσε
καὶ τὸν Δημάδην μεθ᾿ ἑτέρων ἀπέστειλε πρεσβευτὴν
πρὸς τὸν βασιλέα, δοὺς ἐντολὴν καὶ περὶ τῶν Θηβαίων
φυγάδων ἀξιῶσαι τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον συγχωρῆσαι
τῷ δήμῳ τοὺς πεφευγότας Θηβαίους ὑποδέχεσθαι.
5ὁ δὲ Δημάδης πρεσβεύσας καὶ τῇ τοῦ
λόγου δεινότητι πάντα κατεργασάμενος ἔπεισε τὸν
Ἀλέξανδρον ἀπολῦσαι τοὺς ἄνδρας τῶν ἐγκλημάτων
καὶ τἄλλα πάντα συγχωρῆσαι τοῖς Ἀθηναίοις.
16. Μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα ὁ μὲν βασιλεὺς ἐπανελθὼν
μετὰ τῆς δυνάμεως εἰς τὴν Μακεδονίαν συνήγαγε
τοὺς ἡγεμόνας τῶν στρατιωτῶν καὶ τοὺς ἀξιολογωτάτους
τῶν φίλων καὶ προέθηκε βουλὴν περὶ τῆς
εἰς τὴν Ἀσίαν διαβάσεως, πότε χρὴ στρατεύειν καὶ
2τίνι τρόπῳ χειριστέον τὸν πόλεμον. τῶν δὲ περὶ
τὸν Ἀντίπατρον καὶ Παρμενίωνα συμβουλευόντων
πρότερον παιδοποιήσασθαι καὶ τότε τοῖς τηλικούτοις
ἐγχειρεῖν ἔργοις, δραστικὸς ὢν καὶ πρὸς πᾶσαν
πράξεως ἀναβολὴν ἀλλοτρίως διακείμενος ἀντεῖπε
τούτοις· αἰσχρὸν γὰρ ὑπάρχειν ἀπεφαίνετο τὸν
ὑπὸ τῆς Ἑλλάδος ἡγεμόνα καθεσταμένον τοῦ πολέμου
καὶ πατρικὰς ἀνικήτους δυνάμεις παρειληφότα
καθῆσθαι γάμους ἐπιτελοῦντα καὶ τέκνων
3γενέσεις ἀναμένοντα. διδάξας οὖν αὐτοὺς περὶ τοῦ


160Book XVII

counselled them to save those whose lives 335/4 b.c. were threatened, and read a decree that had been subtly worded. It contained a plea for the men and a promise to impose the penalty prescribed by the law, if they deserved punishment. The people approved the suggestion of Demades, passed the decree and dispatched a delegation including Demades as envoys to the king, instructing them to make a plea to Alexander in favour of the Theban fugitives as well, that he would allow the Athenians to provide a refuge for them. On this mission, Demades achieved all his objectives by the eloquence of his words and prevailed upon Alexander to absolve the men from the charges against them and to grant all the other requests of the Athenians.1
16. Thereupon the king returned with his army to Macedonia, assembled his military commanders and his noblest Friends and posed for discussion the plan for crossing over to Asia. When should the campaign be started and how should he conduct the war? Antipater and Parmenion advised him to produce an heir first and then to turn his hand to so ambitious an enterprise, but Alexander was eager for action and opposed to any postponement, and spoke against them. It would be a disgrace, he pointed out, for one who had been appointed by Greece to command the war, and who had inherited his father’s invincible forces, to sit at home celebrating a marriage and awaiting the birth of children.2 He then proceeded


1Justin (11. 4. 9–12) adds that the exiled Athenian leaders
went off to Persia, and Arrian (1. 10. 6) speaks particularly of
Charidemus, while failing to mention the part played in this embassy by Demades. Plutarch (Alexander, 13) states that Alexander was moved by his own clemency. The mission of Demades is described by Plutarch, Demosthenes, 23. 5.2This incident is not mentioned by Justin or Arrian, or by Plutarch in the Alexander, but is given in the Demosthenes, 23. 5.161