Diodorus of Sicily

τῶν δὲ Βοιωτῶν διὰ τὴν εὐημερίαν μετεωρισθέντων,
καί τινων προχείρως τολμησάντων διὰ
τῆς πύλης εἰς τὴν πόλιν εἰσβιάζεσθαι, οἱ μὲν
Κορίνθιοι δείσαντες ἐτράπησαν εἰς τὰς οἰκίας,
Χαβρίας δ᾿ ὁ τῶν Ἀθηναίων στρατηγὸς ἐμφρόνως
ἅμα καὶ τεθαρρηκότως ὑποστὰς τοὺς μὲν ἐξέβαλεν
ἐκ τῆς πόλεως, πολλοὺς δὲ τῶν Βοιωτῶν κατέβαλεν.
2γενομένης δὲ φιλοτιμίας, οἱ μὲν Βοιωτοὶ
πᾶσαν τὴν δύναμιν συντάξαντες ἐπῆγον ἐπὶ τὴν
Κόρινθον καταπληκτικῶς, ὁ δὲ Χαβρίας ἀναλαβὼν
τοὺς Ἀθηναίους προῆγεν ἐκ τῆς πόλεως, καὶ καταλαβόμενος
τοὺς ὑπερδεξίους τόπους ὑπέστη τὴν
3τῶν πολεμίων ἔφοδον. οἱ μὲν οὖν Βοιωτοί, πεποιθότες
ταῖς τῶν σωμάτων ῥώμαις καὶ ταῖς ἐν
τοῖς συνεχέσι πολέμοις ἐμπειρίαις, τῇ βίᾳ τοὺς
Ἀθηναίους ἤλπιζον χειρώσασθαι,1 οἱ δὲ περὶ τὸν
Χαβρίαν ἐκ τόπων ὑπερδεξίων ἀγωνιζόμενοι, καὶ
πολλῶν ἐκ τῆς πόλεως χορηγουμένων, οὓς μὲν
ἀνῄρουν τῶν βιαζομένων, τοὺς δὲ κατετίτρωσκον.
4οἱ δὲ Βοιωτοί, πολλὰ μὲν κακοπαθήσαντες, οὐδὲν
δὲ πρᾶξαι δυνάμενοι, τὴν ἀναχώρησιν ἐποιήσαντο.
Χαβρίας μὲν οὖν ἐπὶ ἀνδρείᾳ καὶ στρατηγικῇ συνέσει2
θαυμασθεὶς τοῦτον τὸν τρόπον ἀπετρίψατο
τοὺς πολεμίους.
70. Ἐκ δὲ τῆς Σικελίας Κελτοὶ καὶ Ἴβηρες
δισχίλιοι κατέπλευσαν εἰς Κόρινθον, ἐκπεμφθέντες
ὑπὸ Διονυσίου τοῦ τυράννου συμμαχῆσαι Λακεδαιμονίοις,
εἰς μῆνας πέντε τοὺς μισθοὺς εἰληφότες.
οἱ δ᾿ Ἕλληνες πεῖραν αὐτῶν βουλόμενοι λαβεῖν
προῆγον αὐτούς, καὶ κατὰ τὰς συμπλοκὰς καὶ
μάχας ἀνδραγαθούντων αὐτῶν πολλοί τε τῶν
Βοιωτῶν καὶ τῶν συμμάχων ὑπ᾿ αὐτῶν ἀνῃροῦντο.
1χειρώσασθαι] χειρώσεσθαι Dindorf.2So P, Faber: δυνάμει144Book XV

Boeotians were so elated by their success that some of 369/8 b.c. them rashly ventured to force their way through the gates into the city, the Corinthians, frightened, took refuge in their houses, but Chabrias the Athenian general made an intelligent and determined resistance, and succeeded in driving the Boeotians out of the city, having also struck down many of them. In the rivalry which followed, the Boeotians gathered all their army in line of battle and directed a formidable blow at Corinth; but Chabrias with the Athenians advanced out of the city, took his station on superior terrain and withstood the attack of the enemy. The Boeotians, however, relying upon the hardihood of their bodies and their experience in continuous warfare, expected to worst the Athenians by sheer might, but Chabrias’ corps, having the advantage of superior ground in the struggle and of abundant supplies from the city, slew some of the attackers and severely wounded others. The Boeotians, having suffered many losses and being unable to accomplish anything, beat a retreat. So Chabrias won great admiration for his courage and shrewdness as a general and got rid of the enemy in this fashion.
70. From Sicily, Celts and Iberians to the number of two thousand sailed to Corinth, for they had been sent by the tyrant Dionysius to fight in alliance with the Lacedaemonians, and had received pay for five months. The Greeks, in order to make trial of them, led them forth; and they proved their worth in hand-to-hand fighting and in battles and many both of the Boeotians and of their allies were slain by them.



145