Diodorus of Sicily

τὴν διήγησιν καὶ τοῖς ἅμα συντελουμένοις μερίζειν
τοὺς χρόνους παρὰ φύσιν, ὥστε τὴν μὲν ἀλήθειαν
τῶν πεπραγμένων τὸ πάθος ἔχειν, τὴν δ᾿ ἀναγραφὴν
ἐστερημένην τῆς ὁμοίας ἐξουσίας μιμεῖσθαι μὲν
τὰ γεγενημένα, πολὺ δὲ λείπεσθαι τῆς ἀληθοῦς
διαθέσεως.
44. Ὁ δ᾿ οὖν Βορμίλκας ἐξετασμὸν τῶν στρατιωτῶν
ποιησάμενος ἐν τῇ καλουμένῃ Νέᾳ πόλει,
μικρὸν ἔξω τῆς ἀρχαίας Καρχηδόνος οὔσῃ, τοὺς
μὲν ἄλλους διαφῆκε, τοὺς δὲ συνειδότας περὶ τῆς
ἐπιθέσεως, ὄντας πολίτας μὲν πεντακοσίους, μισθοφόρους
δὲ περὶ χιλίους ἀναλαβών,1 ἀνέδειξεν ἑαυτὸν
2τύραννον. εἰς πέντε δὲ μέρη τοὺς στρατιώτας
διελόμενος ἐπῄει πάντας τοὺς ἐν ταῖς ὁδοῖς ἀπαντῶντας
ἀποσφάττων. γενομένης δὲ κατὰ τὴν πόλιν
ταραχῆς ἐξαισίου τὸ μὲν πρῶτον οἱ Καρχηδόνιοι
τοὺς πολεμίους ὑπέλαβον παρεισπεπτωκέναι προδιδομένης
τῆς πόλεως· ὡς δ᾿ ἐπεγνώσθη τἀληθές,
συνέτρεχον οἱ νέοι καὶ εἰς τάξεις καταστάντες
3ὥρμησαν ἐπὶ τὸν τύραννον. ὁ δὲ Βορμίλκας τοὺς
ἐν ταῖς ὁδοῖς ἀναιρῶν ὥρμησεν εἰς τὴν ἀγορὰν καὶ
πολλοὺς τῶν πολιτῶν ἀνόπλους καταλαβὼν ἀπέκτεινε.
4τῶν δὲ Καρχηδονίων καταλαβομένων τὰς
περὶ τὴν ἀγορὰν οἰκίας ὑψηλὰς οὔσας καὶ τοῖς
βέλεσι πυκνοῖς χρωμένων οἱ μετέχοντες τῆς ἐπιθέσεως
κατετραυματίζοντο, τοῦ τόπου παντὸς ἐμβελοῦς
5ὄντος. διόπερ κακοπαθοῦντες συνέφραξαν
ἑαυτοὺς καὶ διὰ τῶν στενωπῶν συνεξέπεσαν εἰς
τὴν Νέαν πόλιν, βαλλόμενοι συνεχῶς ἀπὸ τῶν
1ἀναλαβών added by Rhodoman, who also suggests παρακαλεσάμενος, παρακελευσάμενος, and συναγαγών; παρακατασχών Reiske.260Book XX

narrative and to parcel out different times to simultaneous 308 b.c. events contrary to nature, with the result that, although the actual experience of the events contains the truth, yet the written record, deprived of such power, while presenting copies of the events, falls far short of arranging them as they really were.
44. Be that as it may, when Bormilcar had reviewed the soldiers in what was called the New City, which is a short distance from Old Carthage, he dismissed the rest, but holding those who were his confederates in the plot, five hundred citizens and about a thousand mercenaries, he declared himself tyrant. Dividing his soldiers into five bands, he attacked, slaughtering those who opposed him in the streets. Since an extraordinary tumult broke out everywhere in the city, the Carthaginians at first supposed that the enemy had made his way in and that the city was being betrayed; when, however, the true situation became known, the young men ran together, formed companies, and advanced against the tyrant. But Bormilcar, killing those in the streets, moved swiftly into the market place; and finding there many of the citizens unarmed, he slaughtered them. The Carthaginians, however, after occupying the buildings about the market place, which were tall, hurled missiles thick and fast, and the participants in the uprising began to be struck down since the whole place was within range. Therefore, since they were suffering severely, they closed ranks and forced their way out through the narrow streets into the New City, being continuously struck with missiles from


261