Diodorus of Sicily

ἡγεμόνας τῶν πολεμίων καὶ δυνάμεις
ἔχοντας Ἀλκέταν τε τὸν ἀδελφὸν τοῦ Περδίκκου
καὶ Ἄτταλον τὸν τοῦ στόλου παντὸς κυριεύοντα.
42. Μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα ὁ Εὐμενὴς πρὸς τὸν Ἀντίπατρον
πρεσβευτὰς ἀπέστειλε περὶ τῶν ὁμολογιῶν,
ὧν ἦν ἡγούμενος Ἱερώνυμος ὁ τὰς τῶν διαδόχων
ἱστορίας γεγραφώς. αὐτὸς δὲ πολλαῖς καὶ ποικίλαις
κεχρημένος τοῦ βίου μεταβολαῖς οὐκ ἐταπεινοῦτο
τῷ φρονήματι, σαφῶς εἰδὼς τὴν τύχην ὀξείας
τὰς εἰς ἀμφότερα τὰ μέρη ποιουμένην μεταβολάς.
2ἑώρα γὰρ τοὺς μὲν τῶν Μακεδόνων βασιλεῖς κενὸν
ἔχοντας τὸ τῆς βασιλείας πρόσχημα, πολλοὺς δὲ
καὶ μεγάλους τοῖς φρονήμασιν ἄνδρας διαδεχομένους
τὰς ἡγεμονίας, πάντας δὲ ἰδιοπραγεῖν βουλομένους.
ἤλπιζεν οὖν, ὅπερ ἦν πρὸς ἀλήθειαν,
πολλοὺς αὐτοῦ χρείαν ἕξειν διά τε τὴν φρόνησιν καὶ
τὴν ἐμπειρίαν τῶν πολεμικῶν, ἔτι δὲ τὴν ὑπερβολὴν
τῆς ἐν τῇ πίστει βεβαιότητος.
3Ὁρῶν δὲ τοὺς ἵππους, διὰ τὴν ἐν τῇ στενοχωρίᾳ
τραχύτητα μὴ δυναμένους γυμνάζεσθαι, πρὸς τὴν
ἐν ταῖς ἱππομαχίαις χρείαν ἀχρήστους ἐσομένους
ἐπενοήσατό τινα ξένην καὶ παρηλλαγμένην τῶν
4ἵππων γυμνασίαν. τὰς γὰρ κεφαλὰς αὐτῶν ταῖς
σειραῖς ἀναδεσμεύων ἔκ τινων δοκίων ἢ παττάλων
καὶ δύο ἢ τρεῖς διχάδας ἐωρήσας συνηνάγκαζεν2
τοῖς ὀπισθίοις ποσὶν ἐπιβεβηκέναι, τοῖς δ᾿ ἔμπροσθεν


1περιγενομένους Geer, πλανωμένους Unger, ὑπολειπομένους
Reiske, ἐπιπορευομένους Rhodoman, Dindorf, Fischer: πορευομένους.2καὶ δύο ἢ τρεῖς διχάδας ἐωρήσας συνηνάγκαζεν Fischer: δύο
ἢ τρεῖς δοκίδας ἐωρήσας καὶ συναναγκάζων.130Book XVIII

survived and had troops, namely Alcetas, who was 320 b.c. brother of Perdiccas, and Attalus, who commanded the whole fleet.1
42. Eumenes later sent envoys to Antipater to discuss the terms of surrender. Their leader was Hieronymus, who has written the history of the Successors.2 Eumenes himself, who had experienced many and various changes in the circumstances of his life, was not cast down in spirit, since he knew well that Fortune makes sudden changes in both directions. He saw, on the one hand, that the kings of the Macedonians held an empty pretence of royalty, and on the other, that many men of lofty ambitions were succeeding to the positions of command, and that each of them wished to act in his own interests. He hoped, therefore, as truly happened, that many would have need of him because of his judgement and his experience in warfare, and even more because of his unusual steadfastness to any pledge.
Seeing that the horses, unable to exercise themselves because of the rough and confined space, would become unfit for use in mounted battle, Eumenes devised a certain strange and extraordinary exercise for them.3 Attaching their heads by ropes to beams or pegs and lifting them two or three double palms,4 he forced them to rest their weight upon their hind




1Cp. chap. 37. 2–3.2Diodorus’ account of the Successors of Alexander is based chiefly on the work of Hieronymus. Cp. the Introduction to this volume.3Cp. Plutarch, Eumenes, 11. 3–5; Nepos, Eumenes, 5. 4–6.4The beams and pegs seem to have been part of the framework of the stable roof. The dichas or double palm was a measure of about six inches.131