Diodorus of Sicily
113. Ἐπ᾿ ἄρχοντος δ᾿ Ἀθήνησιν Ἀγησίου Ῥωμαῖοι
κατέστησαν ὑπάτους Γάιον Πόπλιον καὶ
Παπίριον, ὀλυμπιὰς δ᾿ ἤχθη τετάρτη πρὸς ταῖς
ἑκατὸν καὶ δέκα, καθ᾿ ἣν ἐνίκα στάδιον Μικίνας
Ῥόδιος. κατὰ δὲ τοῦτον τὸν χρόνον ἐξ ἁπάσης
σχεδὸν τῆς οἰκουμένης ἧκον πρέσβεις, οἱ μὲν συγχαίροντες
ἐπὶ τοῖς κατορθώμασιν, οἱ δὲ στεφανοῦντες,
ἄλλοὶ δὲ φιλίας καὶ συμμαχίας τιθέμενοι,
πολλοὶ δὲ δωρεὰς μεγαλοπρεπεῖς κομίζοντες, τινὲς
2δὲ ὑπὲρ τῶν ἐγκαλουμένων ἀπολογούμενοι. χωρὶς
γὰρ τῶν ἀπὸ τῆς Ἀσίας ἐθνῶν καὶ πόλεων, ἔτι δὲ
δυναστῶν, πολλοὶ καὶ τῶν ἐκ τῆς Εὐρώπης καὶ
Λιβύης κατήντησαν, ἐκ μὲν Λιβύης Καρχηδόνιοι καὶ
Λιβυφοίνικες καὶ πάντες οἱ τὴν παράλιον οἰκοῦντες
μέχρι τῶν Ἡρακλείων στηλῶν, ἐκ δὲ τῆς Εὐρώπης
αἵ τε τῶν Ἑλλήνων πόλεις ἐξέπεμψαν καὶ Μακεδόνες,
ἔτι δὲ Ἰλλυριοὶ καὶ τῶν περὶ τὸν Ἀδρίαν
οἰκούντων οἱ πλείους, τά τε Θρᾴκια γένη καὶ τῶν
πλησιοχώρων Γαλατῶν, ὧν τότε πρῶτον τὸ γένος
ἐγνώσθη παρὰ τοῖς Ἕλλησιν.
3Ὁ δὲ Ἀλέξανδρος ἀπογραφὴν λαβὼν τῶν πρέσβεων
διέταξε τοῖς μὲν πρώτοις διδόναι τὰς ἀποκρίσεις
καὶ τοῖς ἑξῆς ἅπασι. καὶ πρώτοις μὲν ἐχρημάτισε
τοῖς ὑπὲρ τῶν ἱερῶν παραγεγενημένοις,
δευτέροις δὲ τοῖς περὶ τῶν δωρεῶν ἥκουσιν, ἑξῆς
δὲ τοῖς ἀμφισβητήσεις ἔχουσι πρὸς τοὺς ὁμόρους,


452Book XVII
113. When Agesias was archon at Athens, the 324/3 b.c. Romans installed as consuls Gaius Publius and Papirius, and the one hundred and fourteenth celebration of the Olympic Games took place, in which Micinas of Rhodes won the foot race.1 Now from practically all the inhabited world came envoys on various missions, some congratulating Alexander on his victories, some bringing him crowns, others concluding treaties of friendship and alliance, many bringing handsome presents, and some prepared to defend themselves against accusations. Apart from the tribes and cities as well as the local rulers of Asia, many of their counterparts in Europe and Libya put in an appearance; from Libya, Carthaginians and Libyphoenicians and all those who inhabit the coast as far as the Pillars of Heracles; from Europe, the Greek cities and the Macedonians also sent embassies, as well as the Illyrians and most of those who dwell about the Adriatic Sea, the Thracian peoples and even those of their neighbours the Gauls, whose people became known then first in the Greek world.2
Alexander drew up a list of the embassies and arranged a schedule of those to whom first he would give his reply and then the others in sequence.3 First he heard those who came on matters concerning religion; second, those who brought gifts; next, those who had disputes with their neighbours; fourth,


1Hegesias (as the name appears in the Attic inscriptions)
was archon from July 324 to June 323 b.c. The consuls of
326 b.c. were C. Poetelius Libo Visolus and L. Papirius
Cursor (Broughton, 1. 146). The Olympic Games were held
in the summer of 324 b.c. (chap. 109. 1). The name of the
victor is given as Macinnas by Eusebius. The time was
actually the spring of 323 b.c.2Justin, 12. 13. 1–2; Arrian, 7. 15. 4–6 (embassies from the west); 19. 1–2 (embassies from the Greeks). Arrian (7. 15. 5–6) expresses doubt about the embassy from Rome, reported among others by Cleitarchus (Jacoby, Fragmente der griechischen Historiker, no. 137, F 31; from Pliny, Naturalis Historia, 3. 57).3These ingenious and methodical arrangements of Alexander’s court are not otherwise reported.453