Diodorus of Sicily

ἀλλοτριότητα τῶν σπονδῶν οὐ προείλοντο
κοινωνεῖν1 καὶ μόνοι τῶν Ἑλλήνων ὑπῆρχον ἔκσπονδοι.
3Τῶν δὲ συγγραφέων Ξενοφῶν μὲν ὁ Ἀθηναῖος
τὴν τῶν Ἑλληνικῶν σύνταξιν εἰς τοῦτον τὸν ἐνιαυτὸν
κατέστροφεν2 ἐπὶ τὴν Ἐπαμεινώνδου τελευτήν·
Ἀναξιμένης δὲ ὁ Λαμψακηνὸς τὴν πρώτην τῶν
Ἑλληνικῶν ἀνέγραψεν ἀρξάμενος ἀπὸ θεογονίας
καὶ ἀπὸ τοῦ πρώτου γένους τῶν ἀνθρώπων, κατέστροφε
δ᾿ εἰς τὴν ἐν Μαντινείᾳ μάχην καὶ τὴν
Ἐπαμεινώνδου τελευτήν· περιέλαβε δὲ πάσας σχεδὸν
τάς τε τῶν Ἑλλήνων καὶ βαρβάρων πράξεις ἐν
βύβλοις δώδεκα. Φίλιστος δὲ τὰ περὶ Διονύσιον
τὸν νεώτερον ὧδε κατέστροφε, διελθὼν ἔτη πέντε
ἐν βύβλοις δυσίν.
90. Ἐπ᾿ ἄρχοντος δ᾿ Ἀθήνησι Μόλωνος ἐν Ῥώμῃ
κατεστάθησαν ὕπατοι Λεύκιος Γενούκιος καὶ
Κόιντος Σερουίλιος. ἐπὶ δὲ τούτων οἱ τὴν παράλιον
οἰκοῦντες τῆς Ἀσίας ἀπέστησαν ἀπὸ Περσῶν, καί
τινες τῶν σατραπῶν καὶ στρατηγῶν ἐπαναστάντες
2πόλεμον ἐξήνεγκαν πρὸς Ἀρταξέρξην. ὁμοίως δὲ
τούτοις καὶ Ταχὼς ὁ βασιλεὺς τῶν Αἰγυπτίων κρίνας
πολεμεῖν τοῖς Πέρσαις, ναῦς τε κατεσκεύασε
καὶ πεζὰς3 δυνάμεις ἤθροισεν. πολλοὺς δὲ ξενολογήσας







1After κοινωνεῖν Bekker deletes διὰ τοὺς Μεσσηνίους.2So Stephanus: κατέστρεφεν.3πεζικὰς MSS.200Book XV

of the irreconcilable quarrel with them, chose not to 363/2 b.c. be parties to the truce and alone of the Greeks remained out of it.1
Among the historians Xenophon the Athenian brings the narrative of “Greek Affairs”2 down into this year, closing it with the death of Epameinondas, while Anaximenes of Lampsacus, who composed the “First Inquiry of Greek Affairs”3 beginning with the birth of the gods and the first generation of man, closed it with the battle of Mantineia and the death of Epameinondas. He included practically all the doings of the Greeks and non-Greeks in twelve volumes. And Philistus4 brought his history of Dionysius the Younger down to this year, narrating the events of five years in two volumes.
90. When Molon was archon at Athens, in Rome 362/1 b.c. there were elected as consuls Lucius Genucius and Quintus Servilius. During their term of office the inhabitants of the Asiatic coast revolted from Persia, and some of the satraps and generals rising in insurrection made war on Artaxerxes.5 At the same time Tachôs the Egyptian king decided to fight the Persians and prepared ships and gathered infantry forces.6
1See chap. 94. 1; Plutarch, Agesilaüs, 35; Polybius,
4. 33. 8–9.2The Hellenica.3Anaximenes (c. 380–320 b.c.) was a student under Zoïlus
and Diogenes and later a teacher. He accompanied Alexander
the Great. This work had the title πρῶται ἱστορίαι
(Athenaeus, 6. 231 c) or πρώτη Ἑλληνικῶν (Harpocration, s.v.
Ἀμφικτύονες). Other works were Φιλιππικά and τὰ περὶ Ἀλέξ- ανδρον. (See Christ-Schmidt6, Gr. Litt. 534.) See chap. 76. 4.4Philistus, besides an earlier work, wrote a History of Sicily from the fall of Acragas (406/5) to the death of the elder Dionysius (367/6) in four books (see Book 13. 103. 3). This work on Dionysius the Younger was much read down to Cicero’s time but has come to us in very few fragments: FHG, 1. 185; 4. 639 (see Beloch, Griechische Geschichte2 3. 2. 42).5This was the Satraps’ Revolt. See Tarn, Cambridge Ancient History, 6. 20–21; Olmstead, History of the Persian Empire, 411 ff.6For the earlier Persian expedition against Egypt see chaps. 29, 41–43,201