Diodorus of Sicily

παραδιδόναι καὶ βούλεσθαί ποτε τῶν πόνων ἀπολυθεὶς
2ἰδιωτεύειν ἴσος ὢν πᾶσι. καὶ ταῦτα λέγων
τὸ μὲν χλαμύδιον αὑτοῦ περιέσπασε, τὸ δ᾿ ἱμάτιον
μεταλαβὼν ἀπῄει, τῶν πολλῶν ἑαυτὸν ἀποδείξας
ἕνα. ταῦτα δ᾿ ἔπραττε τὸν δημοτικὸν ὑποκρινόμενος
καὶ σαφῶς εἰδὼς τοὺς πλείους τῶν ἐκκλησιαζόντων
μετεσχηκότας τῶν ἀσεβημάτων καὶ διὰ
τοῦτο μηδέποτ᾿ ἂν βουληθέντας ἄλλῳ τὴν στρατηγίαν
3ἐγχειρίσαι. εὐθὺ γοῦν οἱ διαπεφορηκότες τὰ
τῶν ἠτυχηκότων ἐβόων μὴ καταλιπεῖν ἑαυτούς,
ἀλλὰ προσδέξασθαι τὴν τῶν ὅλων ἐπιμέλειαν. ὁ
δὲ τὸ μὲν πρῶτον ἡσυχίαν εἶχεν, εἶτα τοῦ πλήθους
βιαιότερον ἐγκειμένου προσδέχεσθαι1 μὲν ἔφησε τὴν
4στρατηγίαν, μὴ μέντοι γε μετ᾿ ἄλλων ἄρξειν· οὐ
γὰρ ὑπομενεῖν,2 ὧν ἂν ἕτεροι παρανομήσωσι, τούτων
αὐτὸν συνάρχοντα λόγον ἀποδιδόναι κατὰ τοὺς
νόμους. συγχωρήσαντος δὲ τοῦ πλήθους μοναρχεῖν
οὗτος μὲν ἐχειροτονήθη στρατηγὸς αὐτοκράτωρ καὶ
τὸ λοιπὸν φανερῶς ἐδυνάστευε καὶ τῆς πόλεως
5ἐπιμέλειαν ἐποιεῖτο, τῶν δ᾿ ἀκεραίων Συρακοσίων
οἱ μὲν διὰ τὸν φόβον ἠναγκάζοντο καρτερεῖν, οἱ δ᾿
ὑπὸ τοῦ πλήθους κατισχυόμενοι τὴν ἔχθραν εἰς
κενὸν οὐκ ἐτόλμων ἐνδείκνυσθαι. πολλοὶ δὲ καὶ
τῶν ἀπόρων καὶ κατάχρεων ἄσμενοι τὴν μεταβολὴν
προσεδέξαντο· ἐπηγγέλλετο γὰρ Ἀγαθοκλῆς
κατὰ τὴν ἐκκλησίαν καὶ χρεῶν ἀποκοπὰς ποιήσεσθαι
6καὶ τοῖς πένησι χώραν δωρήσεσθαι. ἀπὸ δὲ
τούτων γενόμενος τοῦ μὲν ἔτι φονεύειν ἢ κολάζειν
τινὰς ἀπέστη, μεταβαλόμενος δ᾿ εἰς τοὐναντίον


1προσδέχεσθαι Capps, προσδέξεσθαι Dindorf: προσδέξασθαι
MSS., Fischer.2ὑπομενεῖν Dindorf: ὑπομένειν.250Book XIX

wished to be relieved at last of his burdens and become 317 b.c. a private citizen on terms of equality with all. As he said this, he tore off his military cloak and, assuming civil garb, set out to leave, showing that he himself was one of the many. But in doing this he was merely playing the part of a democrat with full knowledge that the majority of the members of the Assembly had had a share in his unholy acts and for this reason would not be willing to vote the generalship to anyone else. At any rate, those who had plundered the property of the victims instantly cried out, begging him not to leave them but to accept the general administration of the state. At first he maintained silence; then, as the mob pressed more insistently upon him, he said that he accepted the generalship, but that he would not rule jointly with others, for he would not consent as one member of a board to be held legally accountable for acts illegally committed by the others. Since the majority agreed that he should rule alone, he was elected general with absolute power,1 and thereafter he openly exercised authority and governed the city. Of the Syracusans who were uncorrupted, some were forced to endure in patience because of their fears, and others, outmatched by the mob, did not venture to make an unavailing display of their hostility. On the other hand, many of those who were poor and involved in debt welcomed the revolution, for Agathocles promised in the Assembly both to abolish debts and to distribute land to the poor. When he had finished with these matters, he made an end of further slaughter and punishment. With a complete change of humour he showed himself affable to the common

1In 317.251