Diodorus of Sicily

ἐπαινούμενος, ὡς εἶδεν τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον ἀκατασχέτως
ἱέμενον ἐπὶ τὸν Δαρεῖον, ἐφιλοτιμήθη τῆς
3αὐτῆς τύχης κοινωνῆσαι τἀδελφῷ. ἀναλαβὼν οὖν
τοὺς ἀρίστους τῶν ἱππέων τῶν μεθ᾿ ἑαυτοῦ τεταγμένων
μετὰ τούτων ἐπέρραξε τοῖς περὶ τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον
καὶ νομίσας τὸ φιλάδελφον τῆς ψυχῆς οἴσειν
αὐτῷ περιβόητον παρὰ Πέρσαις δόξαν προεμάχετο
τοῦ Δαρείου τεθρίππου καὶ μετ᾿ ἐμπειρίας εὐτόλμως
τοῖς πολεμίοις συμπλεκόμενος πολλοὺς ἀπέκτεινε.
4τῶν δὲ περὶ τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον ὑπερβαλλομένων
ταῖς ἀνδραγαθίαις περὶ μὲν τὸν τοῦ Δαρείου
τέθριππον ταχὺ νεκρῶν ἐσωρεύθη πλῆθος· πάντες
γὰρ ἐφιέμενοι τοῦ βσσιλέως ψαῦσαι πρὸς ἀλλήλους
ἐκθυμότατα διηγωνίζοντο καὶ τοῦ ζῆν οὐδεμίαν
ἐποιοῦντο φειδώ.
5Ἔπεσον δ᾿ ἐν τῷ κινδύνῳ τούτῳ πολλοὶ τῶν
παρὰ Πέρσαις ἐπιφανῶν ἡγεμόνων, ἐν οἷς ὑπῆρχεν1
Ἀντιξύης2 καὶ Ῥεομίθρης καὶ ὁ τῆς Αἰγύπτου
σατράπης Τασιάκης.3 ὁμοίως δὲ πολλῶν καὶ παρὰ
τοῖς Μακεδόσι πεσόντων συνέβη καὶ αὐτὸν τὸν
Ἀλέξανδρον τρωθῆναι τὸν μηρόν, περιχυθέντων
6αὐτῷ τῶν πολεμίων. οἱ δὲ τὸν τοῦ Δαρείου τεθρίππου
ζυγὸν ἐπέχοντες ἵπποι, τραυματιζόμενοι
πυκνῶς καὶ διὰ τὸ πλῆθος τῶν περὶ αὐτοὺς σωρευομένων
νεκρῶν πτυρόμενοι, τὰ μὲν χαλινὰ διεσείοντο,



1So RX; ὑπῆρχον cet.2Wesseling would correct to Ἀτιζύης from chap. 21. 3.3Τασιάκης RX; Στασιάκης F; Σαβάκης Arrian (2. 11. 8).212Book XVII

fighting qualities; when he saw Alexander riding at 333/2 b.c. Dareius and feared that he would not be checked, he was seized with the desire to share his brother’s fate. Ordering the best of the horsemen in his company to follow him, he threw himself with them against Alexander, thinking that this demonstration of brotherly love would bring him high renown among the Persians. He took up the fight directly in front of Dareius’s chariot and there engaging the enemy skilfully and with a stout heart slew many of them. The fighting qualities of Alexander’s group were superior, however, and quickly many bodies lay piled high about the chariot. No Macedonian had any other thought than to strike the king, and in their intense rivalry to reach him took no thought for their lives.1
Many of the noblest Persian princes perished in this struggle, among them Antixyes and Rheomithres and Tasiaces, the satrap of Egypt.2 Many of the Macedonians fell also, and Alexander himself was wounded3 in the thigh, for the enemy pressed about him. The horses which were harnessed to the yoke of Dareius’s chariot were covered with wounds and terrified by the piles of dead about them. They refused



1Curtius, 3. 11. 8. This is the scene pictured in the Alexander Mosaic from the House of the Faun at Pompeii.2Rheomithres was mentioned as a cavalry commander on the Persian right wing at the Granicus (chap. 19. 4). Curtius (3. 11. 10) mentions the death of Atizyes, Rheomithres, and Sabaces, satrap of Egypt; Arrian (2. 11. 8) names Arsames, Rheomithres, Atizyes, Sabaces of Egypt, and Bubaces. Although Diodorus has reported Atizyes dead at the Granicus (chap. 21.3), it is possible that he is the otherwise unknown Antixyes here.3By Dareius himself, according to Chares (Plutarch, De Fortuna aut Virtute Alexandria 2. 9. 341 b). Alexander’s wound is mentioned by Curtius (3. 11. 10), Justin (11. 9. 9), Plutarch (Alexander, 20. 5), and Arrian (2. 12. 1).213