Diodorus of Sicily
Τάδε ἔνεστιν ἐν τῇ εἰκοστῇ τῶν Διοδώρου βίβλων
Ὡς Ἀγαθοκλῆς διαβὰς εἰς Λιβύην ἐνίκησεν παρατάξει
Καρχηδονίους καὶ πολλῶν πόλεων ἐκυρίευσεν.
Ὡς Κάσανδρος Αὐδολέοντι μὲν ἐβοήθησε, πρὸς δὲ
Πτολεμαῖον τὸν Ἀντιγόνου στρατηγὸν ἀποστάτην γενόμενον
συμμαχίαν ἐποιήσατο.
Ὡς Πτολεμαῖος μὲν τῶν περὶ Κιλικίαν πόλεών τινας
εἷλε, Δημήτριος δ᾿ ὁ Ἀντιγόνου ταύτας ἀνεκτήσατο.
Ὡς Πολυπέρχων μὲν Ἡρακλέα τὸν ἐκ Βαρσίνης ἐπεχείρησε
κατάγειν ἐπὶ τὴν πατρῴαν βασιλείαν, Πτολεμαῖος
δὲ Νικοκρέοντα τὸν βασιλέα τῶν Παφίων ἐπανείλατο.
Περὶ τῶν πραχθέντων ἐν μὲν τῷ Βοσπόρῳ τοῖς βασιλεῦσιν,
κατὰ δὲ τὴν Ἰταλίαν Ῥωμαίοις καὶ Σαμνίταις.
Πτολεμαίου στρατεία ἐπὶ Κιλικίαν καὶ τὴν ἑξῆς
παραθαλάττιον.
Ἡρακλέους ἀναίρεσις ὑπὸ Πολυπέρχοντος.
Ἀμίλκου τοῦ στρατηγοῦ τῶν Καρχηδονίων ἅλωσις
ὑπὸ Συρακοσίων.
Ως Ἀκραγαντῖνοι τοὺς Σικελιώτας ἐλευθεροὖν
ἐπεχείρησαν.
Ὡς τῶν Συρακοσίων εἴκοσι ναῦς ἥλωσαν.
136Book XX


Contents of the Twentieth Book of Diodorus
How Agathocles crossed into Libya, defeated the Carthaginians in a battle, and became master of many cities (chaps. 3–18).
How Cassander went to the aid of Audoleon; and how he made an alliance with Ptolemaeus, Antigonus’ general, who had become a rebel (chap. 19).
How Ptolemy took some of the cities of Cilicia, and how Antigonus’ son Demetrius recovered them (chap. 19).
How Polyperchon attempted to bring Heracles, the son of Barsinê, back to his ancestral kingdom; and how Ptolemy made away with Nicocreon,1 the king of Paphos (chaps. 20–21).
Concerning the actions of the kings in the Bosporus, and of the Romans and Samnites in Italy (chaps.
22–26).
The campaign of Ptolemy against Cilicia and the adjacent coast (chap. 27).
Assassination of Heracles by Polyperchon (chap. 28).
Capture of Hamilcar, the general of the Carthaginians, by the Syracusans (chaps. 29–30).
How the people of Acragas attempted to liberate the Sicilians (chap. 31).
How they captured twenty2 ships of the Syracusans (chap. 32).
1In chap. 21 this king is called Nicocles, probably
incorrectly.2In chap. 32. 5 only ten ships are captured.137