Diodorus of Sicily

κατὰ τὴν Ἰταλίαν τῇ αὐτῇ ἡμέρᾳ καὶ ὥρᾳ
διαπολεμούντων μὲν Ταραντίνων πρὸς Λευκανοὺς
συναγωνιζομένου δὲ τοῖς Ταραντίνοις Ἀρχιδάμου
τοῦ Λακεδαιμονίων βασιλέως, ὅτε συνέβη καὶ αὐτὸν
4ἀναιρεθῆναι τὸν Ἀρχίδαμον. οὗτος μὲν οὖν ἦρξε
τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων ἔτη εἴκοσι τρία, τὴν δὲ βασιλείαν
διαδεξάμενος ὁ υἱὸς Ἄγις ἦρξεν ἔτη ἐννέα.
5Ἅμα δὲ τούτοις πραττομένοις Τιμόθεος ὁ τῆς
Ἡρακλείας τῆς ἐν τῷ Πόντῳ τύραννος ἐτελεύτησε
δυναστεύσας ἔτη πεντεκαίδεκα, τὴν δὲ τυραννίδα
διαδεξάμενος ὁ ἀδελφὸς Διονύσιος ἦρξεν ἔτη δυσὶ
πλείω τῶν τριάκοντα.
89. Ἐπ᾿ ἄρχοντος δ᾿ Ἀθήνησι Φρυνίχου Ῥωμαῖοι
κατέστησαν ὑπάτους Τῖτον Μάλλιον Τορκουᾶτον
καὶ Πόπλιον Δέκιον. ἐπὶ δὲ τούτων
Φίλιππος ὁ βασιλεὺς πεφρονηματισμένος τῇ περὶ
Χαιρώνειαν νίκῃ καὶ τὰς ἐπιφανεστάτας πόλεις
καταπεπληγμένος ἐφιλοτιμεῖτο γενέσθαι πάσης τῆς
2Ἑλλάδος ἡγεμών. διαδοὺς δὲ λόγον ὅτι βούλεται
πρὸς Πέρσας ὑπὲρ τῶν Ἑλλήνων πόλεμον ἄρασθαι
καὶ λαβεῖν παρ᾿ αὐτῶν δίκας ὑπὲρ τῆς εἰς τὰ ἱερὰ
γενομένης παρανομίας ἰδίους τοὺς Ἕλληνας ταῖς
εὐνοίαις ἐποιήσατο· φιλοφρονούμενος δὲ πρὸς ἅπαντας
καὶ ἰδίᾳ καὶ κοινῇ ταῖς πόλεσιν ἀπεφαίνετο
βούλεσθαι διαλεχθῆναι περὶ τῶν συμφερόντων.
3διόπερ ἐν Κορίνθῳ τοῦ κοινοῦ συνεδρίου συναχθέντος
διαλεχθεὶς περὶ τοῦ πρὸς Πέρσας πολέμου καὶ
μεγάλας ἐλπίδας ὑποθεὶς προετρέψατο τοὺς συνέδρους


84Book XVI

same day and at the same hour between the people of 338/7 b.c. Tarentum and the Lucanians.1 In the service of Tarentum was Archidamus, the Lacedaemonian king, and it happened that he was himself killed. He had ruled the Lacedaemonians for twenty-three years; his son Agis succeeded to the throne and ruled for nine years.2
At this time, also, Timotheüs the tyrant of Heracleia-Pontica died after having been in power for fifteen years. His brother Dionysius succeeded to the tyranny and ruled for thirty-two years.3
89. When Phrynichus was archon at Athens, the 337/6 b.c. Romans installed as consuls Titus Manlius Torquatus and Publius Decius.4 In this year King Philip, proudly conscious of his victory at Chaeroneia and seeing that he had dashed the confidence of the leading Greek cities, conceived of the ambition to become the leader of all Greece. He spread the word that he wanted to make war on the Persians in the Greeks’ behalf and to punish them for the profanation of the temples,5 and this won for him the loyal support of the Greeks. He showed a kindly face to all in private and in public, and he represented to the cities that he wished to discuss with them matters of common advantage. A general congress was, accordingly, convened at Corinth. He spoke about the war against Persia and by raising great expectations won the




1This battle has already been mentioned, chaps. 62. 4–63. 1.2For Archidamus see chap. 63. 2; for Agis, Book 17. 63. 2–4.3See chap. 36. 3 and Book 20. 77. 1.4Phrynichus was archon at Athens from July 337 to June 336 b.c. The consuls of 340 b.c. were T. Manlius Imperiosus Torquatus and P. Decius Mus (Broughton, 1. 135).5Cp. Books 11. 29. 3 and 17. 72. 6. For the events at Corinth cp. Justin, 9. 5. 1–2.85