Diodorus of Sicily

φάλαγξ τῶν πεζῶν ἀπαλλοτριωθεῖσα φανερὰν διὰ
τῆς ἀπειλούσης φωνῆς τὴν ἰδίαν κατεσκεύασεν
5ἀλλοτριότητα. διόπερ πρῶτοι τῶν ἡγεμόνων ἀπέστησαν
ὡς ἑκατόν, ὧν ἦν ἐπιφανέστατος Πίθων
ὁ τοὺς ἀποστάντας Ἕλληνας καταπολεμήσας, οὐδενὸς
δὲ τῶν Ἀλεξάνδρου λειπόμενος φίλων ἀρετῇ
τε καὶ δόξῃ· μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα καὶ τῶν ἱππέων τινὲς
συμφρονήσαντες ἐπὶ τὴν σκηνὴν τοῦ Περδίκκου
κατήντησαν καὶ προσπεσόντες ἀθρόοι κατέσφαξαν
τὸν Περδίκκαν.
6Τῇ δ᾿ ὑστεραίᾳ γενομένης ἐκκλησίας ὁ Πτολεμαῖος
καταβὰς καὶ τοὺς Μακεδόνας ἀσπασάμενος
περί τε τῶν καθ᾿ αὑτὸν ἀπελογήσατο καὶ τῶν
ἐπιτηδείων ἐκλελοιπότων ἐχορήγησε σῖτόν τε δαψιλῆ
ταῖς δυνάμεσι καὶ τῶν ἄλλων ἐπιτηδείων
ἐπλήρωσε τὴν παρεμβολήν. μεγάλης δὲ τυγχάνων
ἀποδοχῆς καὶ δυνάμενος παραλαβεῖν τὴν ἐπιμέλειαν
τῶν βασιλέων διὰ τὴν τοῦ πλήθους εὔνοιαν τούτου
μὲν οὐκ ὠρέχθη, τῷ δὲ Πίθωνι καὶ Ἀρριδαίῳ
χάριτας ὀφείλων συγκατεσκεύασε τὴν τῶν ὅλων
7ἡγεμονίαν· οἱ γὰρ Μακεδόνες βουλῆς προτεθείσης
περὶ τῆς ἡγεμονίας καὶ συμβουλεύσαντος Πτολεμαίου
πάντες προθύμως εἵλοντο τῶν βασιλέων
ἐπιμελητὰς αὐτοκράτορας Πίθωνα καὶ Ἀρριδαῖον
τὸν τὸ σῶμα τοῦ βασιλέως κατακομίσαντα. Περδίκκας
μὲν οὖν ἄρξας ἔτη τρία τοῦτον τὸν τρόπον
ἀπέβαλε τὴν ἡγεμονίαν ἅμα καὶ τὴν ψυχήν.
37. Μετὰ δὲ τὴν τούτου τελευτὴν εὐθὺς ἧκόν
τινες ἀπαγγέλλοντες ὅτι παρατάξεως γενομένης
περὶ Καππαδοκίαν Εὐμενὴς νενίκηκε, Κρατερὸς δὲ
καὶ Νεοπτόλεμος ἡττηθέντες ἀνῄρηνται. τοῦτο δ᾿
114Book XVIII

phalanx of the infantry, now alienated from him, 321 b.c. made clear their own hostility with threatening shouts. Consequently about a hundred of the commanders were the first to revolt from him, of whom the most illustrious was Pithon, who had suppressed the rebellious Greeks, a man second to none of the Companions of Alexander in courage and reputation; next, some also of the cavalry conspired together and went to the tent of Perdiccas, where they fell on him in a body and stabbed him to death.
On the next day when there was an assembly of the soldiers, Ptolemy came, greeted the Macedonians, and spoke in defence of his own attitude; and as
then-supplies had run short, he provided at his own expense grain in abundance for the armies and filled the camp with the other needful things. Although he gained great applause and was in position to assume the guardianship of the kings through the favour of the rank and file, he did not grasp at this, but rather, since he owed a debt of gratitude to Pithon and Arrhidaeus, he used his influence to give them the supreme command. For the Macedonians, when the question of the primacy was raised in the assembly and Ptolemy advocated this course, without a dissenting voice enthusiastically elected as guardians of the kings and regents Pithon and that Arrhidaeus who had conveyed the body of Alexander. So Perdiccas, after he had ruled for three years, lost both his command and his life in the manner described.
37. Immediately after the death of Perdiccas there came men announcing that, in a battle fought near Cappadocia, Eumenes had been victorious and
Craterus and Neoptolemus had been defeated and killed.1
1Cp. chaps. 30–31 and footnote on chap. 33. 1.115