Diodorus of Sicily

γέγραφε τριάκοντα, προοίμιον ἑκάστῃ προθείς.
6Δίυλλος δ᾿ ὁ Ἀθηναῖος τῆς δευτέρας συντάξεως ἀρχὴν
πεποίηται τῆς Ἐφόρου ἱστορίας τὴν τελευτὴν
καὶ τὰς ἑξῆς πράξεις συνείρει τάς τε τῶν Ἑλλήνων
καὶ τῶν βαρβάρων μέχρι τῆς Φιλίππου τελευτῆς.
77. Ἐπ᾿ ἄρχοντος δ᾿ Ἀθήνησι Θεοφράστου Ῥωμαῖοι
μὲν ὑπάτους κατέστησαν Μάρκον Οὐαλέριον
καὶ Αὖλον Κορνήλιον, ὀλυμπιὰς δ᾿ ἤχθη
δεκάτη πρὸς ταῖς ἑκατόν, καθ᾿ ἣν ἐνίκα στάδιον
2Ἀντικλῆς Ἀθηναῖος. ἐπὶ δὲ τούτων Φιλίππου
Βυζάντιον πολιορκοῦντος Ἀθηναῖοι μὲν ἔκριναν τὸν
Φίλιππον λελυκέναι τὴν πρὸς αὐτοὺς συντεθεῖσαν
εἰρήνην· εὐθὺς δὲ καὶ δύναμιν ναυτικὴν ἀξιόλογον
ἐξέπεμψαν βοηθήσουσαν τοῖς Βυζαντίοις. ὁμοίως
δὲ τούτοις Χῖοι καὶ Κῷοι καὶ Ῥόδιοι καί τινες
ἕτεροι τῶν Ἑλλήνων συμμαχίαν ἐξέπεμψαν τοῖς
3Βυζαντίοις. διόπερ ὁ Φίλιππος καταπλαγεὶς τῇ
συνδρομῇ τῶν Ἑλλήνων τήν τε πολιορκίαν τῶν
πόλεων ἔλυσε καὶ πρὸς Ἀθηναίους καὶ τοὺς ἄλλους
Ἕλληνας τοὺς ἐναντιουμένους συνέθετο τὴν
εἰρήνην.
4Κατὰ δὲ τὴν Σικελίαν Καρχηδόνιοι μὲν μεγάλας
παρασκευὰς εἰς τὸν πόλεμον πεποιημένοι διεβίβασαν
τὰς δυνάμεις εἰς τὴν Σικελίαν. εἶχον δὲ




52Book XVI

prefacing each with an introduction. Diyllus1 the 341/0 b.c. Athenian began the second section of his history with the close of Ephorus’s and made a connected narrative of the history of Greeks and barbarians from that point to the death of Philip.2
77. When Theophrastus was archon at Athens, the 340/39 b.c. Romans elected as consuls Marcus Valerius and Aulus Cornelius, and the one hundred and tenth Olympiad was celebrated, in which Anticles the Athenian won the foot-race.3 In this year, seeing that Philip was besieging Byzantium, the Athenians voted that he had broken his treaty with them and promptly dispatched a formidable fleet to aid that city. Besides them, the Chians, Coans, Rhodians, and some others of the Greeks sent reinforcements also. Philip was frightened by this joint action, broke off the siege of the two cities, and made a treaty of peace with the Athenians and the other Greeks who opposed him.4
In the west, the Carthaginians prepared great stores of war materials and transported their forces to Sicily.5 They had all told, including the forces



1His history was referred to above, chap. 14. 5.2That is, Philip the son of Cassander, who died in 297/6
b. c.3Theophrastus was archon at Athens from July 340 to
June 339 b. c. The Olympic Games were celebrated in midsummer
of 340 b. c. Broughton (1. 132) lists the consuls of 343.b.c. as M. Valerius Corvus and A. Cornelius Cossus Arvina.4This account of Diodorus differs from the presumably correct one given elsewhere, going back over Philochorus to Theopompus (in Didymus: Jacoby, Fragmente der griechischen Historiker, no. 115, F 292), Byzantium was assisted by Chios, Cos, and Rhodes, her old allies in the Social War, as well as by the Persians. The Athenian fleet under Chares arrived only to ensure the safe passage of the grain fleet from the Black Sea. Philip’s capture of this fleet was a major factor in Athens’ decision to abrogate the peace treaty; the result was war, not peace, Cp. Demosthenes, 18 (De Corona) 87–94; Plutarch, Phocion, 14.5Continued from chap. 73. Plutarch, Timoleon, 25. 1, gives the same figures, but fails to mention the cavalry and the chariots.53