Diodorus of Sicily

τρισχιλίας καὶ διὰ τούτων πάντα ἀπεκόμισεν εἰς
3τοὺς προκριθέντας τόπους· σφόδρα γὰρ ἀλλοτρίως
ἔχων πρὸς τοὺς ἐγχωρίους ἠπίστει τε αὐτοῖς καὶ
τὴν Περσέπολιν εἰς τέλος ἔσπευδε καταφθεῖραι.
Οὐκ ἀνοίκειον δ᾿ εἶναι νομίζομεν περὶ τῶν ἐν
ταύτῃ τῇ πόλει βασιλείων διὰ τὴν πολυτέλειαν τῆς
4κατασκευῆς βραχέα διελθεῖν. οὔσης γὰρ ἄκρας
ἀξιολόγου περιείληφεν αὐτὴν τριπλοῦν τεῖχος, οὗ
τὸ μὲν πρῶτον ἀναλήμματι πολυδαπάνῳ κατεσκεύαστο
καὶ τὸ ὕψος εἶχε πηχῶν ἑκκαίδεκα ἐπάλξεσι1
5κεκοσμημένον, τὸ δὲ δεύτερον τὴν μὲν ἄλλην
κατασκευὴν ὁμοίαν ἔχει τῷ προειρημένῳ, τὸ δ᾿
ὕψος διπλάσιον. ὁ δὲ τρίτος περίβολος τῷ σχήματι
μέν ἐστι τετράπλευρος, τὸ δὲ τούτου τεῖχος
ὕψος ἔχει πηχῶν ἑξήκοντα, λίθῳ σκληρῷ καὶ πρὸς
διαμονὴν αἰωνίαν εὖ πεφυκότι κατεσκευασμένον.
6ἑκάστη δὲ τῶν πλευρῶν ἔχει πύλας χαλκᾶς καὶ
παρ᾿ αὐτὰς σταυροὺς χαλκοῦς εἰκοσιπήχεις, οὓς
μὲν πρὸς τὴν ἐκ τῆς θέας κατάπληξιν, ἃς δὲ πρὸς
ἀσφάλειαν ἡρμοσμένας.
7Ἐν δὲ τῷ πρὸς ἀνατολὰς μέρει τῆς ἄκρας τέτταρα
πλέθρα διεστηκὸς ὄρος ἐστὶν τὸ καλούμενον
βασιλικόν, ἐν ᾧ τῶν βασιλέων ὑπῆρχον οἱ τάφοι.
πέτρα γὰρ ἦν κατεξαμμένη καὶ κατὰ μέσον οἴκους
ἔχουσα πλείονας, ἐν οἷς σηκοὶ τῶν τετελευτηκότων
ὑπῆρχον, πρόσβασιν μὲν οὐδεμίαν ἔχοντες



1εἶχεν ἑξκαίδεκα πύργων ταῖς ἐπάλξεσι κεκοσμημένων F (with
πηχῶν added in the margin by a second hand).322Book XVII

means Alexander transported everything to the 330/29 b.c. desired places. He felt bitter enmity to the inhabitants.1 He did not trust them, and he meant to destroy Persepolis utterly.
I think that it is not inappropriate to speak briefly about the palace area of the city because of the richness of its buildings.2 The citadel is a noteworthy one, and is surrounded by a triple wall. The first part of this is built over an elaborate foundation. It is sixteen cubits in height and is topped by battlements. The second wall is in all other respects like the first but of twice the height. The third circuit is rectangular in plan, and is sixty cubits in height,3 built of a stone hard and naturally durable. Each of the sides contains a gate with bronze doors, beside each of which stand bronze poles twenty cubits high4; these were intended to catch the eye of the beholder, but the gates were for security.
At the eastern side of the terrace at a distance of four plethra5 is the so-called royal hill in which were the graves of the kings. This was a smooth rock hollowed out into many chambers in which were the sepulchres of the dead kings. These have no other




1By the term “natives” here Diodorus means the people
of Persepolis and the vicinity. Alexander was more and more
to employ other Persians in his service.2This description of Persepolis is not given elsewhere. It is to be compared with the remains of the city as excavated by the University of Chicago.3Ninety feet. The highest foundations of walls preserved at Persepolis are eighteen metres or about sixty feet. No stone walls remain in the city.4The purpose of these is unknown, but they suggest the flagstaff’s which stood by the pylons of the Egyptian temples.5Fischer asked relevantly, “Distance from where?” This space of four hundred feet is rather less than the west-east width of the terrace from the appadana to the steep mountain side. This last is full of caves suitable for burials, many of them very old.323