Diodorus of Sicily

Καρχηδονίων· τοὺς γὰρ ἐπιφανεστάτους τῶν ἀνδρῶν
ἐν μὲν τοῖς πολέμοις προάγουσιν ἐπὶ τὰς ἡγεμονίας,
νομίζοντες δεῖν αὐτοὺς τῶν ὅλων προκινδυνεύειν·
ὅταν δὲ τύχωσι τῆς εἰρήνης, τοὺς αὐτοὺς τούτους
συκοφαντοῦσι καὶ κρίσεις ἀδίκους ἐπιφέροντες διὰ
4τὸν φθόνον τιμωρίαις περιβάλλουσι. διὸ καὶ τῶν
ἐπὶ τὰς ἡγεμονίας ταττομένων τινὲς μὲν φοβούμενοι
τὰς ἐν τῷ δικαστηρίῳ κρίσεις ἀποστάται
γίνονται τῆς ἡγεμονίας,1 τινὲς δ᾿ ἐπιτίθενται τυραννίσιν·
ὅπερ καὶ τότε Βορμίλκας ὁ ἕτερος τῶν
στρατηγῶν ἐποίησε· περὶ οὗ μικρὸν ὕστερον ἐροῦμεν.
5Οἱ δ᾿2 οὖν στρατηγοὶ τῶν Καρχηδονίων ὁρῶντες
τὸν καιρὸν οὐδαμῶς ἀναβολῆς οἰκεῖον τοὺς μὲν
ἀπὸ τῆς χώρας καὶ τῶν συμμαχίδων πόλεων στρατιώτας
οὐκ ἀνέμειναν, αὐτοὺς δὲ τοὺς πολιτικοὺς
ἐξήγαγον εἰς ὕπαιθρον, ὄντας πεζοὺς μὲν οὐκ
ἐλάττους τετρακισμυρίων, ἱππεῖς δὲ χιλίους, ἅρματα
6δὲ δισχίλια. καταλαβόμενοι δέ τινα γεώλοφον οὐ
μακρὰν τῶν πολεμίων ἐξέταττον τὴν δύναμιν εἰς
μάχην· καὶ τοῦ μὲν δεξιοῦ κέρατος Ἄννων εἶχε τὴν
ἡγεμονίαν, συναγωνιζομένων αὐτῷ τῶν εἰς τὸν
ἱερὸν λόχον συντεταγμένων, τοῦ δ᾿ εὐωνύμου Βορμίλκας
ἡγούμενος βαθεῖαν ἐποίει τὴν φάλαγγα,
κωλύοντος τοῦ τόπου παρεκτείνειν ἐπὶ πλεῖον· τὰ
δ᾿ ἅρματα καὶ τοὺς ἱππεῖς πρὸ τῆς φάλαγγος
ἔστησαν, διεγνωκότες τούτοις πρῶτον ἐμβαλεῖν καὶ
τῶν Ἑλλήνων ἀποπειραθῆναι.
11. Ὁ δ᾿ Ἀγαθοκλῆς κατασκεψάμενος τὰς τῶν
βαρβάρων τάξεις τὸ μὲν δεξιὸν κέρας ἔδωκεν Ἀρχαγάθῳ


1τῆς ἡγεμονίας omitted by Madvig.2δ᾿ F, Dindorf: γ᾿ RX, Fischer.168Book XX

In their wars they advance their leading men 310 b.c. to commands, taking it for granted that these should be first to brave danger for the whole state; but when they gain peace, they plague these same men with suits, bring false charges against them through envy, and load them down with penalties. Therefore some of those who are placed in positions of command, fearing the trials in the courts, desert their posts, but others attempt to become tyrants; and this is what Bormilcar, one of the two generals, did on this occasion; about him we shall speak a little later.1
But to resume, the generals of the Carthaginians, seeing that the situation was not at all consistent with delay, did not await soldiers from the country and from the allied cities; but they led the citizen soldiers themselves into the field, in number not less than forty thousand foot-soldiers, one thousand horsemen, and two thousand chariots.2 Occupying a slight elevation not far from the enemy, they drew up their army for battle. Hanno had command of the right wing, those enrolled in the Sacred Band3 fighting beside him; and Bormilcar, commanding the left, made his phalanx deep since the terrain prevented him from extending it on a broader front. The chariots and the cavalry they stationed in front of the phalanx, having determined to strike with these first and test the temper of the Greeks.
11. After Agathocles had viewed the array of the barbarians, he entrusted the right wing to his son



1Cp chaps. 12. 5; 43–44.2According to Justin, 22. 6. 5, the army consisted of 30,000 men from the country districts (pagani) under the leadership of Hanno alone, cp. Orosius, 4. 6. 25.3In Book 16. 80. 4 we are told that the Sacred Band consisted of 2500 men, outstanding for valour and wealth.169