Diodorus of Sicily

μέτωπον ἐν ἴσοις διαστήμασιν ἔστησεν· ἀνὰ μέσον
δὲ τῶν θηρίων τοὺς λοιποὺς ὁπλίτας ἔταξεν, οἷς
συντεταγμένον ἦν παραβοηθεῖν τοῖς θηρίοις καὶ
5διακωλύειν ἐκ τῶν πλαγίων εἰσακοντίζειν. ἡ μὲν
οὖν ὅλη σύνταξις αὐτῶν ὑπῆρχε πόλει παραπλήσιος
τὴν πρόσοψιν· ἡ μὲν γὰρ τῶν ἐλεφάντων στάσις
τοῖς πύργοις, οἱ δὲ ἀνὰ μέσον τούτων στρατιῶται
τοῖς μεσοπυργίοις ὡμοίωντο· ὁ δὲ Ἀλέξανδρος
κατανοήσας τὴν τῶν πολεμίων τάξιν πρὸς ταύτην
τὴν διακόσμησιν οἰκείως ἐξέταξε τὴν δύναμιν.
88. Γενομένης δὲ μάχης τὸ μὲν πρῶτον τοῖς
ἱππεῦσιν ἅπαντα σχεδὸν τὰ ἅρματα τῶν Ἰνδῶν
διεφθάρη· μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα τῶν ἐλεφάντων ταῖς τε
τῶν σωμάτων ὑπεροχαῖς καὶ ταῖς ἀλκαῖς δεόντως
χρωμένων οἱ μὲν ὑπὸ τῶν θηρίων συμπατούμενοι
μετὰ τῶν ὅπλων θραυομένων τῶν ὀστῶν ἀπώλλυντο,
οἱ δὲ ταῖς προνομαῖς περιλαμβανόμενοι καὶ
πρὸς ὕψος ἐξαρθέντες πάλιν πρὸς τὴν γῆν ἐράττοντο
καὶ δεινοῖς θανάτοις περιέπιπτον, πολλοὶ δὲ τοῖς
ὀδοῦσι συγκεντούμενοι καὶ δι᾿ ὅλων τῶν σωμάτων
τιτρωσκόμενοι παραχρῆμα τοῦ ζῆν ἐστερίσκοντο.
2τῶν δὲ Μακεδόνων εὐρώστως ὑπομενόντων τὸ
δεινὸν καὶ τοὺς ἀνὰ μέσον τῶν θηρίων ταῖς σαρίσαις
3ἀναιρούντων ἰσόρροπος ἦν ἡ μάχη. μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα
τῶν θηρίων συνακοντιζομένων καὶ διὰ τὸ πλῆθος
τῶν τραυμάτων περιοδύνων γινομένων οἱ μὲν περιβεβηκότες
αὐτοῖς Ἰνδοὶ κρατεῖν τῆς ὁρμῆς τῶν
ζῴων οὐκ ἴσχυον· ἐκνεύοντα γὰρ εἰς τοὺς ἰδίους
ταῖς ὁρμαῖς ἀκατασχέτως ἐφέρετο καὶ τοὺς φίλους
συνεπάτει.
4Ταραχῆς δὲ πολλῆς γινομένης ὁ Πῶρος συνιδὼν
τὸ γινόμενον καὶ τεταγμένος ἐπὶ τοῦ κρατίστου τῶν
374Book XVII

at equal intervals along his front. Between these 326/5 b.c. beasts he placed the rest of his infantry, with the mission of helping them and preventing their being attacked with javelins from the sides. His whole array looked very much like a city, for the elephants resembled towers, and the soldiers between them curtain walls.1 Alexander viewed the enemy’s dis positions and arranged his own troops appropriately.
88. The fighting began, and practically all of the Indians’ chariots were put out of action by Alexander’s cavalry. Then the elephants came into play, trained to make good use of their height and strength. Some of the Macedonians were trodden under foot, armour and all, by the beasts and died, their bones crushed. Others were caught up by the elephants’ trunks and, lifted on high, were dashed back down to the ground again, dying a fearful death.2 Many soldiers were pierced through by the tusks and died instantly, run through the whole body. Nevertheless the Macedonians faced the frightening experience manfully. They used their long spears to good effect against the Indians stationed beside the elephants, and kept the battle even,3 Then, as javelins began to find their marks in the sides of the great beasts and they felt the pain of the wounds, the Indian riders were no longer able to control their movements. The elephants veered and, no longer manageable, turned upon their own ranks and trampled friendly troops.4
As his formations grew more confused, Porus observed what was happening. He was mounted on the




1The same comparison in Curtius, 8. 14. 13. The other writers do not place infantry between the elephants.2Curtius, 8. 14. 27.3Curtius, 8. 14. 16.4Arrian, 5. 17. 6.375