Diodorus of Sicily

παρ᾿ ὀλίγον δὲ καὶ αὐτὸν τὸν Δαρεῖον εἰς τοὺς
πολεμίους ἐξήνεγκαν. διὸ καὶ κινδυνεύων ἐσχάτως
ὁ βασιλεὺς αὐτὸς ἥρπασε τοὺς ῥυτῆρας, συναναγκαζόμενος
λῦσαι τὴν σεμνότητα τῆς προστασίας
καὶ τὸν παρὰ Πέρσαις τοῖς βασιλεῦσι κείμενον νόμον
7ὑπερβῆναι. προσήχθη δὲ καὶ τέθριππον ἕτερον
ὑπὸ τῶν ὑπηρετῶν τῷ Δαρείῳ καὶ κατὰ τὴν εἰς
τοῦτο μετάβασιν ταραχῆς γενομένης ὁ μὲν Δαρεῖος
ἐπικειμένων τῶν πολεμίων εἰς ἔκπληξιν καὶ δέος
ἐνέπιπτεν.
Οἱ δὲ Πέρσαι τὸν βασιλέα κατανοήσαντες ταραττόμενον
εἰς φυγὴν ὥρμησαν. τὸ δ᾿ αὐτὸ καὶ τῶν
ἐχομένων ἱππέων ποιησάντων ταχὺ πάντες ἐτράπησαν.
8τῆς δὲ φυγῆς οὔσης ἐν τόποις στενοῖς καὶ
τραχέσι συμπίπτοντες ἀλλήλους συνεπάτουν καὶ πολλοὶ
χωρὶς πολεμίας πληγῆς ἀπέθνησκον. ἔκειντο
γὰρ ὁμοῦ σωρευθέντες οἱ μὲν ἄνευ τῶν ὅπλων,
οἱ δὲ τηροῦντες τὰς πανοπλίας· τινὲς δὲ γεγυμνωμένα
τὰ ξίφη διαφυλάξαντες τοὺς περὶ ταῦτα ἀναπειρομένους
ἀνῄρουν· οἱ δὲ πλεῖστοι εἰς τὰ πεδία
διεκπεσόντες διὰ τούτων ἀπὸ κράτους ἐλαύνοντες
τοὺς ἵππους εἰς τὰς συμμαχίδας πόλεις κατέφευγον.
9ἡ δὲ τῶν Μακεδόνων φάλαγξ καὶ τὸ τῶν Περσῶν
πεζὸν στράτευμα βραχὺν χρόνον ἐν τῇ μάχῃ διέμεινεν·
προηττημένων γὰρ τῶν ἱππέων οἱονεί τις


214Book XVII

to answer to their bridles,1 and came close to 333/2 b.c. carrying off Dareius into the midst of the enemy, but the king himself, in extreme peril, caught up the reins, being forced to throw away the dignity of his position and to violate the ancient custom of the Persian kings. A second chariot was brought up by Dareius’s attendants and in the confusion as he changed over to it in the face of constant attack he fell into a panic terror.2
Seeing their king in this state, the Persians with him turned to flee, and as each adjacent unit in turn did the same, the whole Persian cavalry was soon in full retreat. As their route took them through narrow defiles and over rough country, they clashed and trampled on one another and many died without having received a blow from the enemy. For men lay piled up in confusion, some without armour, others in full battle panoply. Some with their swords still drawn killed those who spitted themselves upon them.3 Most of the cavalry, however, bursting out into the plain and driving their horses at full gallop succeeded in reaching the safety of the friendly cities. Now the Macedonian phalanx and the Persian infantry were engaged only briefly, for the rout of the cavalry had been, as it were, a prelude of the



1A more literal rendering would be “they shook off (or
out) their bits,” but it is hard to see how horses could do this.
Curtius (3. 11. 11) renders the same idiom as “iugum quatere,”
“toss the yoke.” If, as has been suggested in the Introduction
(p. 13), Diodorus was using Trogus as a source, it may
be that he was put to it to translate a Latin saying. We may
assume that the horses reared and tossed and shook their heads, making their control almost impossible. This is how they are represented in the Alexander Mosaic.2The Alexander Mosaic shows Dareius about to mount a horse to make his escape, as in Curtius (3. 11. 11) and Arrian (2. 11. 5). In chap. 37. 1, also, Dareius makes his escape on horseback. Perhaps he intended to continue the battle in the second chariot.3Arrian (2. 11. 8) quotes Ptolemy as reporting that Alexander’s cavalry in the pursuit crossed a deep gully on the piled up bodies of the dead. Even a king, it seems, might draw the long bow on occasion in writing history.215