Diodorus of Sicily
3ἠξιώθησαν. οἱ δὲ περὶ τὸν Ἀγαθοκλέα
διημερεύσαντες ἐν τοῖς τῶν πολιτῶν φόνοις οὐδὲ1
τῆς εἰς γυναῖκας ὕβρεως καὶ παρανομίας ἀπέσχοντο,
ἀλλὰ παρὰ τῶν ἐκπεφευγότων τὸν θάνατον ἱκανὴν
ὑπελάμβανον λήψεσθαι τιμωρίαν τὴν εἰς τοὺς συγγενεῖς
ἐπήρειαν· δεινότερα γὰρ θανάτου τοὺς μὲν
ἄνδρας καὶ πατέρας εἰκὸς ἦν πείσεσθαι γυναικῶν
ὕβρεις καὶ παρθένων αἰσχύνας ἀναλογιζομένους.
4ἀφ᾿ ὧν ἡμῖν περιαιρετέον ἐστὶ τὴν ἐπίθετον καὶ
συνήθη τοῖς συγγραφεῦσι τραγῳδίαν, μάλιστα μὲν
διὰ τὸν τῶν παθόντων ἔλεον, ἔπειτα καὶ διὰ τὸ
μηθένα τῶν ἀναγινωσκόντων ἐπιζητεῖν ἀκοῦσαι τὰ
5κατὰ μέρος, ἐν ἑτοίμῳ τῆς γνώσεως οὔσης. οἱ γὰρ
μεθ᾿ ἡμέραν ἐν ταῖς ὁδοῖς καὶ κατὰ τὴν ἀγορὰν
σφάττειν τολμῶντες τοὺς μηδὲν ἀδικοῦντας οὐ
προσδέονται τοῦ δηλώσοντος τί νύκτωρ ἔπραττον
καθ᾿ αὑτοὺς ἐν ταῖς οἰκίαις καὶ πῶς προσεφέροντο
παρθένοις ὀρφαναῖς καὶ γυναιξὶν ἐρήμοις μὲν οὔσαις
τῶν βοηθησόντων, πεπτωκυίαις δ᾿ ὑπ᾿ ἐξουσίαν
6αὐτοκράτορα τῶν ἐχθίστων. ὁ δ᾿ Ἀγαθοκλῆς δυεῖν
ἡμερῶν διελθουσῶν ἐπειδή ποτ᾿ ἐπληρώθη τοῦ
κατὰ τῶν πολιτῶν φόνου, τοὺς ζωγρηθέντας
ἀθροίσας Δεινοκράτην μὲν ἀφῆκε διὰ τὴν προγεγενημένην
φιλίαν, τῶν ἄλλων δὲ τοὺς μὲν ἀλλοτριώτατα
διακειμένους ἀνεῖλε, τοὺς δὲ λοιποὺς
ἐφυγάδευσε.
9. Μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα συναγαγὼν ἐκκλησίαν κατηγόρησε
μὲν τῶν ἑξακοσίων καὶ τῆς ὑπ᾿ αὐτῶν
προγεγενημένης ὀλιγαρχίας, καθαρὰν δὲ φήσας τὴν
πόλιν πεποιηκέναι τῶν δυναστεύειν ἐπιχειρούντων
ἀπεφαίνετο τῷ δήμῳ τὴν αὐτονομίαν εἰλικρινῆ

1οὐδὲ Dindorf: οὔτε.248Book XIX

accorded proper care. The party of Agathocles 317 b.c. spent the day in the murder of their fellow citizens, nor did they abstain from outrage and crime against women, but they thought that those who had escaped death would be sufficiently punished by the violation of their kindred. For it was reasonable to suppose that the husbands and fathers would suffer something worse than death when they thought of the violence done their wives and the shame inflicted upon their unmarried daughters. We must keep our account of these events free from the artificially tragic tone that is habitual with historians, chiefly because of our pity for the victims, but also because no one of our readers has a desire to hear all the details when his own understanding can readily supply them. For men who by day in the streets and throughout the market place were bold to butcher those who had done no harm need no writer to set forth what they did at night when by themselves in the homes, and how they conducted themselves toward orphaned maidens and toward women who were bereft of any to defend them and had fallen into the absolute power of their direst enemies. As for Agathocles, when two days had passed, since he was now sated with the slaughter of his fellow citizens, after gathering together the prisoners, he let Deinocrates go because of their former friendship, but of the others he killed those who were most bitterly hostile and exiled the rest.
9. Next he called together the Assembly and accused the Six Hundred and the oligarchy that they had brought into existence, saying that he had cleansed the state of those men who were trying to become her masters; and he proclaimed that he was restoring liberty undefiled to the people, and that he
249