Diodorus of Sicily

ῥᾳδίως ἐγκρατὴς γενόμενος τὰ περιλειπόμενα
τῶν φορτίων ἀποκατέστησε τοῖς ἐμπόροις καὶ τὸν
λιμένα φιλοτίμως ἐτήρει.
6Ὁ δὲ Θίβρων τὸ μὲν πρῶτον ἀθύμως εἶχεν,
ἀπολωλεκὼς τόπον ἐπίκαιρον καὶ τὰς τῶν στρατιωτῶν
ἀποσκευάς· μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα θαρσήσας καὶ
τὴν πόλιν τὴν ὀνομαζομένην Ταύχειρα ἐκπολιορκήσας
ἀνέδραμε ταῖς ἐλπίσι. μετ᾿ ὀλίγον δὲ πάλιν
αὐτὸν συνέβη περιπεσεῖν μεγάλοις ἐλαττώμασιν.
7οἱ γὰρ ἐν ταῖς ναυσὶν ὄντες τοῦ λιμένος ἐστερημένοι,
τροφῆς δὲ ἀποροῦντες εἰώθεισαν καθ᾿ ἡμέραν ἐπὶ
τὴν χώραν ἐξιέναι καὶ τὰς τροφὰς ἐκ ταύτης
πορίζεσθαι. οἱ δὲ Λίβυες ἐνεδρεύσαντες αὐτοὺς
πλανωμένους κατὰ τὴν χώραν πολλοὺς μὲν ἀπέκτειναν,
οὐκ ὀλίγους δ᾿ ἐζώγρησαν· οἱ δὲ περιλειφθέντες
ἐκ τοῦ κινδύνου καταφυγόντες εἰς τὰς ναῦς
ἀπέπλεον εἰς τὰς συμμαχίδας πόλεις. ἐπιγενομένου
δὲ μεγάλου πνεύματος αἱ πλεῖσται μὲν ὑπὸ τῆς
θαλάσσης κατεπόθησαν,1 τῶν δ᾿ ἄλλων αἱ μὲν εἰς
Κύπρον, αἱ δ᾿ εἰς Αἴγυπτον ἀπερρίφησαν.
21. Ὁ δὲ Θίβρων τηλικαύτῃ συμφορᾷ περιπεσὼν
ὅμως ἀντείχετο τοῦ πολέμου, προχειρισάμενος
δὲ τῶν φίλων τοὺς εὐθέτους ἔπεμψεν εἰς τὴν
Πελοπόννησον ἀναληψομένους τῶν ξένων τοὺς
ἐνδιατρίβοντας περὶ2 Ταίναρον. ἔτι γὰρ τῶν ἀμίσθων3
γενομένων πολλοὶ διεπλανῶντο ζητοῦντες
τοὺς μισθοδοτήσοντας καὶ τότε περὶ Ταίναρον
ὑπῆρχον πλείους τῶν δισχιλίων καὶ πεντακοσίων.
2τούτους δὲ οἱ πεμφθέντες ἀνέλαβον, τὸν δὲ εἰς


1κατεπόθησαν Wesseling: κατεποντήθησαν R, κατεποντίσθησαν
XF.2περὶ Reiske: ἐπι.3τῶν ἀμίσθων Wesseling, τῶν ἀμισθώτων Fischer: ἀμισθώτων.72Book XVIII

he restored to the merchants what was left of the 322 b.c. cargoes and zealously guarded the port.
At first Thibron was disheartened, since he had lost an advantageous position and the equipment of his soldiers; but afterwards, when he had recovered his spirits and captured by siege the city called Tauchira, his hopes again rose. It chanced, however, that in a short time he again encountered great misfortunes. The crews of his ships, having been deprived of their harbour and running short of food, were accustomed each day to go out into the country and gather supplies there; but the Libyans ambushed them as they were wandering about the country, killed many, and took no small number captive. Those who escaped the danger fled to the ships and sailed away for the allied cities. But when a great storm overtook them, most of the ships were swallowed by the sea; of the rest, some were cast ashore in Cyprus, others in Egypt.
21. Nevertheless Thibron, although he had encountered such a misfortune, did not give up the campaign. Selecting those of his friends who were fitted for the task, he sent them to the Peloponnesus to hire those of the mercenaries who were waiting about near Taenarum; for many of the discharged mercenaries were still roaming about seeking paymasters; and at that time there were more than twenty-five hundred of them at Taenarum. His messengers engaged these and set out upon the voyage to


73