Diodorus of Sicily

ὁμολογίαν παραλαβὼν τοὺς λοιποὺς εἰς τὰ ἴδια
τάγματα κατέταξε καὶ φιλανθρώπως αὐτοῖς χρησάμενος
ηὔξησε τὴν ἰδίαν δύναμιν οὐ μετρίως.
5οἱ δὲ Πισίδαι τὸν ἀριθμὸν ὄντες εἰς ἑξακισχιλίους
καὶ ταῖς ἀλκαῖς διαφέροντες παρεκάλουν
τὸν Ἀλκέταν θαρρεῖν, ἐπαγγελλόμενοι μηδ᾿ ἑνί τῳ
τρόπῳ ἐγκαταλείψειν αὐτόν. διέκειντο γὰρ πρὸς
αὐτὸν εὐνοϊκῶς καθ᾿ ὑπερβολὴν διὰ τοιαύτας τινὰς
αἰτίας.
46. Ἀλκέτας μετὰ τὸν Περδίκκου θάνατον οὐκ
ἔχων συμμάχους κατὰ τὴν Ἀσίαν ἔκρινε τοὺς Πισίδας
εὐεργετεῖν, νομίζων ἕξειν συμμάχους πολεμικοὺς
ἄνδρας καὶ χώραν ἔχοντας δυσέμβολον καὶ
2μεστὴν ὀχυρῶν φρουρίων. διόπερ ἐν ταῖς στρατείαις
παρὰ πάντας τοὺς συμμάχους ἐτίμα περιττότερον
τούτους καὶ τὰς μὲν ἐκ τῆς πολεμίας ὠφελείας
ἐμέριζεν αὐτοῖς, διδοὺς τῶν λαφύρων τὰ ἡμίση,
κατὰ δὲ τὰς ὁμιλίας λόγοις φιλανθρώποις χρώμενος
καὶ κατὰ τὰ σύνδειπνα καθ᾿ ἡμέραν τοὺς
ἀξιολογωτάτους ἐν μέρει παραλαμβάνων ἐπὶ τὰς
ἑστιάσεις, ἔτι δὲ τιμῶν πολλοὺς δωρεαῖς ἀξιολόγοις
3ἰδίους ταῖς εὐνοίαις κατεσκεύασεν. διόπερ
καὶ τότε τὰς ἐλπίδας ἔχοντος ἐν τούτοις Ἀλκέτου
τῶν ἐλπίδων αὐτὸν οὐ διεψεύσαντο. τοῦ γὰρ
Ἀντιγόνου μετὰ πάσης τῆς δυνάμεως πλησίον
τῆς Τερμησσοῦ καταστρατοπεδεύσαντος καὶ τὸν
Ἀλκέταν ἐξαιτοῦντος, ἔτι δὲ τῶν πρεσβυτέρων
συμβουλευόντων ἐκδοῦναι συστραφέντες οἱ νεώτεροι
πρὸς τοὺς γονεῖς διαστάντες ἐψηφίσαντο
πᾶν ὑπομένειν δεινὸν ἕνεκα τῆς τούτου σωτηρίας.
4Οἱ δὲ πρεσβύτεροι τὸ μὲν πρῶτον πείθειν ἐπεχείρουν
τοὺς νέους μὴ δι᾿ ἕνα Μακεδόνα περιιδεῖν
138Book XVIII

obtained the surrender of all the rest by negotiation 319
b.c. and enrolled them in his own ranks; by his kind treatment of them he brought no small addition to his forces. The Pisidians, however, who numbered six thousand and were of outstanding prowess, bade Alcetas be of good courage, promising that they would in no way fail him; for they were exceedingly well disposed to him for the following reasons.
46. Since Alcetas had had no supporters in Asia after the death of Perdiccas, he had decided to show kindness to the Pisidians, thinking that he would thus secure as allies men who were warlike and who possessed a country difficult to invade and well supplied with strongholds. For this reason during the campaigns he honoured them exceedingly above all the allies and distributed to them spoils from the hostile territory, assigning them half the booty. By employing the most friendly language in his conversation with them, by each day inviting the most important of them in turn to his table at banquets, and finally by honouring many of them with gifts of considerable value, he secured them as loyal supporters. Therefore even at this time Alcetas placed his hopes upon them, and they did not disappoint his hopes. For when Antigonus encamped near Termessus
with all his army and demanded Alcetas, and even when the older men advised that he be surrendered, the younger, forming a compact group in opposition to their parents, voted to meet every danger in the interest of his safety.
The older men at first tried to persuade the younger not to permit their native land to become the spoil of
139