Diodorus of Sicily
Κάσανδρος δὲ μετὰ τῆς δυνάμεως ἀναζεύξας ἐπὶ
Πελοποννήσου καὶ καταλαβὼν Ἀλέξανδρον τὸν
Πολυπέρχοντος διειληφότα τὸν Ἰσθμὸν φυλακαῖς
παρῆλθεν εἰς Μέγαρα. ἐνταῦθα δὲ κατασκευάσας
σχεδίας ἐπὶ μὲν τούτων τοὺς ἐλέφαντας διεβίβασεν
εἰς Ἐπίδαυρον, ἐν δὲ πλοίοις τὴν ἄλλην δύναμιν.
παρελθὼν δὲ ἐπὶ τὴν τῶν Ἀργείων πόλιν ταύτην
μὲν ἠνάγκασεν ἀποστᾶσαν τῆς Ἀλεξάνδρου συμμαχίας
4αὐτῷ προσθέσθαι, μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα τὰς ἐν τῇ
Μεσσήνῃ πόλεις προσηγάγετο πλὴν Ἰθώμης καὶ
τὴν Ἑρμιονίδα δι᾿ ὁμολογίας παρέλαβεν. τοῦ δ᾿
Ἀλεξάνδρου μὴ συγκαταβαίνοντος εἰς παράταξιν
ἀπολιπὼν ἐπὶ τὸν ἰσθμὸν πρὸς1 Γερανίας στρατιώτας
δισχιλίους καὶ στρατηγὸν Μόλυκκον ἐπανῆλθεν
εἰς Μακεδονίαν.
55. Τοῦ δ᾿ ἔτους τούτου διεληλυθότος Ἀθήνησι
μὲν ἦρχε Πραξίβουλος, ἐν Ῥώμῃ δὲ κατέστησαν
ὕπατοι Ναύτιος Σπόριος καὶ Μάρκος Πόπλιος.
ἐπὶ δὲ τούτων Ἀντίγονος τῆς μὲν Σουσιανῆς ἀπέλιπε
σατράπην Ἀσπίσαν, ἕνα τῶν ἐγχωρίων, αὐτὸς
δὲ τὰ χρήματα πάντα διαγνοὺς κατακομίζειν ἐπὶ
θάλασσαν, ἁμάξας καὶ καμήλους παρεσκευάσατο
καὶ μετὰ τῆς δυνάμεως ἔχων ταῦτα προῆγεν ἐπὶ
2τῆς Βαβυλωνίας. ἐν ἡμέραις δ᾿ εἴκοσι καὶ δυσὶν
αὐτοῦ καταντήσαντος εἰς Βαβυλῶνα Σέλευκος ὁ
τῆς χώρας σατράπης δωρεαῖς τε βασιλικαῖς ἐτίμησε
τὸν Ἀντίγονον καὶ τὴν δύναμιν ἅπασαν εἱστίασεν.
3τοῦ δ᾿ Ἀντιγόνου λόγους ἀπαιτοῦντος τῶν



1πρὸς added by Post.380Book XIX
To return to Cassander, he set out with his army 316 b.c. for the Peloponnesus, but on finding that Alexander, son of Polyperchon, had blocked the Isthmus with guards, he turned aside to Megara. There he constructed barges upon which he transported the elephants to Epidaurus, taking the rest of the army in boats. Coming to the city of the Argives, he forced it to abandon its alliance with Alexander and to join him, after which he won over the cities of Messenia except Ithomê, and gained Hermionis through negotiation. As Alexander, however, did not come out to fight, he left at the end of the Isthmus toward Gerania1 two thousand soldiers commanded by Molyccus and returned to Macedonia.
55. When this year had passed, Praxibulus was archon at Athens and in Rome Nautius Spurius and Marcus Poplius were consuls.2 While these held office Antigonus left Aspisas, a native, as satrap of Susianê,3 while he himself, having decided to convey all the money to the sea, prepared waggons and camels and, taking the treasure, set out for Babylonia with the army. In twenty-two days he arrived in Babylon, and Seleucus, the satrap of the country, honoured him with gifts suitable for a king and feasted the whole army. When Antigonus, however, demanded



1Gerania is the mountain range between Megara and Corinth with passes of some military importance (Book 11. 80. 1).2Praxibulus was archon in 315/14. Spurius Nautius Rutilus and M. Popilius Laenas were consuls in 316 (Livy, 9. 21. 1; Fasti Capitolini for 316). The events described in this chapter and the next still belong to the year 316 b.c. (Beloch, Griechische Geschichte2, 4. 2. 240).3Replacing an Antigenes (Book 18. 39. 6) who is probably not to be identified with the commander of the Silver Shields. Cp. Appian, Syrian History, 53, for the quarrel between Antigonus and Seleucus.381