Diodorus of Sicily

τὴν πολεμίαν1 χώραν, γέμουσαν παντοίας
ὠφελείας· ἐν αἷς δ᾿ ἡμέραις ἡ δύναμις περὶ τὴν
προνομὴν ἠσχολεῖτο, συναγαγὼν τὰς γυναῖκας τῶν
στρατιωτῶν καὶ τοὺς ἐξ αὐτῶν γεγονότας παῖδας
ταύταις μὲν συνεστήσατο κατὰ μῆνα διδόναι σῖτον,
τοῖς δὲ παισὶν ἐπιφορὰς ταγματικὰς ἀπένειμε κατὰ
5τοὺς τῶν πατέρων συλλογισμούς. ὡς δ᾿ ἐπανῆλθον
οἱ στρατιῶται πολλῶν πλῆθος ἀγαθῶν ἐκ τῆς
προνομῆς εὑρηκότες συνῆγε πάντας εἰς ἐκκλησίαν.
διελθὼν δὲ λόγον πεφροντισμένον περὶ τῆς ἐπὶ τοὺς
Γανδαρίδας στρατείας καὶ τῶν Μακεδόνων οὐδαμῶς
συγκαταθεμένων ἀπέστη τῆς ἐπιβολῆς.
95. Κρίνας δ᾿ ἐπὶ ταύτης τοὺς ὅρους θέσθαι τῆς
στρατείας πρῶτον μὲν τῶν δώδεκα θεῶν βωμοὺς
πεντήκοντα πηχῶν ᾠκοδόμησεν, ἔπειτα τριπλασίαν
τῆς προϋπαρχούσης στρατοπεδείαν περιβαλόμενος
ὤρυξε τάφρον τὸ μὲν πλάτος πεντήκοντα ποδῶν,
τὸ δὲ βάθος τεσσαράκοντα· τὴν δ᾿ ἀναβολὴν ἐντὸς
τῆς τάφρου σωρεύσας τεῖχος ἀξιόλογον ᾠκοδόμησε.
2προσέταξε δὲ τοῖς μὲν πεζοῖς κατασκηνώσεις
ἑκάστῳ δύο στιβάδας πενταπήχεις ἐχούσας2 οἰκοδομῆσαι,
τοῖς δ᾿ ἱππεῦσι πρὸς ταύταις καὶ δύο
φάτνας τῶν εἰθισμένων διπλασίας, ἀκολούθως δὲ




1παραποταμίαν F; this is corrected by a later hand.2ἐχούσας supplied by Fischer.392Book XVII

country, which was full of every good thing.1 During 326/5 b.c. these days when the army was busy foraging, he called together the wives of the soldiers and their children; to the wives he undertook to give a monthly ration, to the children he distributed a service bonus in proportion to the military records of their fathers.2 When the soldiers returned laden with wealth from their expedition, he brought them together to a meeting. He delivered a carefully prepared speech about the expedition against the Gandaridae but the Macedonians did not accept it, and he gave up the undertaking.3
95. Thinking how best to mark the limits of his campaign at this point, he first erected altars of the twelve gods each fifty cubits high4 and then traced the circuit of a camp thrice the size of the existing one. Here he dug a ditch fifty feet wide and forty feet deep, and throwing up the earth on the inside, constructed out of it a substantial wall. He directed the infantry to construct huts each containing two beds five cubits long, and the cavalry, in addition to this, to build two mangers twice the normal size. In




1It is not clear what this country can have been. The
kingdom of Phegeus was friendly. The reading of one
manuscript (see note 1 above) would avoid this logical
difficulty, but it is hard to think that Alexander allowed his
soldiers to plunder Phegeus’s cities. Similar instances of
plunder for the sake of loot occur below, chaps. 102. 6 and 104. 5–7. It was certainly only too often what generals did to please their soldiers.2This is only one possible translation. The meaning of ἐπιφορὰς ταγματικάς and συλλογισμούς in this connection is quite unknown. Justin (12. 4. 2–11) alone, of the other Alexander historians, mentions this proposal to provide for the dependants of soldiers. Plutarch, Alexander, 71. 5, tells the same story in a later connection, after the mutiny at Opis. Cp. also Arrian, 7. 12. 1–2.3This is all that Diodorus has to say about the famous mutiny (except for the mention in chap. 108. 3). Cp. Curtius, 9. 2. 12–3. 19; Justin, 12. 8. 10–17; Plutarch, Alexander, 62; Arrian, 5. 25–28.4Curtius, 9. 3. 19; Plutarch, Alexander, 62. 4; Arrian, 5. 29. 1, Fifty cubits would be seventy-five feet.393