Diodorus of Sicily

τὸν ἐκ τῆς κακοπαθείας κόπον ἐτρέπετο
πρὸς ἄνεσιν καὶ δειπνοποιίαν.
3Πρὸς δὲ τὴν γυναῖκα καὶ τὴν μητέρα τοῦ Δαρείου
προσελθών τις ἀπήγγειλεν ὅτι πάρεστιν Ἀλέξανδρος
ἀπὸ τοῦ διωγμοῦ, τὸν Δαρεῖον ἐσκυλευκώς.
ἔνθα δὴ κραυγῆς μεγάλης καὶ κλαυθμοῦ περὶ τὰς
γυναῖκας γενομένου καὶ τοῦ πλήθους τῶν αἰχμαλώτων
διὰ τὴν ἀπαγγελίαν συμπενθοῦντος καὶ πολὺν
ὀδυρμὸν προϊεμένου, πυθόμενος ὁ βασιλεὺς τὸ περὶ
τὰς γυναῖκας πάθος ἐξέπεμψεν ἕνα τῶν φίλων
Λεοννάτον1 καταπαύσοντα τὴν ταραχὴν καὶ παραμυθησόμενον
τὰς περὶ τὴν Σισύγγαμβριν καὶ δηλώσοντα
διότι Δαρεῖος μὲν ζῇ, ὁ δ᾿ Ἀλέξανδρος
ἐπιμέλειαν αὐτῶν ποιήσεται τὴν προσήκουσαν καὶ
διότι πρῲ βούλεται προσαγορεῦσαί τε αὐτὰς καὶ διὰ
4τῶν ἔργων ἀποδείξασθαι τὴν ἰδίαν φιλανθρωπίαν. αἱ
μὲν οὖν αἰχμαλωτίδες προσπεσούσης αὐταῖς παραδόξου
καὶ παντελῶς ἀπηλπισμένης εὐτυχίας τόν τε
Ἀλέξανδρον ὡς θεὸν προσεδέξαντο καὶ τῶν ὀδυρμῶν
ἀπηλλάγησαν.
5Ὁ δὲ βασιλεὺς ἅμ᾿ ἡμέρᾳ λαβὼν ἕνα τῶν φίλων
τὸν μάλιστα τιμώμενον Ἡφαιστίωνα παρῆλθε πρὸς
τὰς γυναῖκας. ἐχόντων δ᾿ ἀμφοτέρων ἐσθῆτας μὲν
ὁμοίας, τῷ μεγέθει δὲ καὶ κάλλει προέχοντος τοῦ
Ἡφαιστίωνος ἡ Σισύγγαμβρις τοῦτον ὑπολαβοῦσα
εἶναι τὸν βασιλέα προσεκύνησεν· διανευόντων δ᾿
αὐτῇ τῶν παρεστώτων καὶ τῇ χειρὶ δεικνύντων τὸν
Ἀλέξανδρον ἡ μὲν Σισύγγαμβρις αἰδεσθεῖσα τὴν
ἄγνοιαν πάλιν ἐξ ἀρχῆς προσεκύνει τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον,
6ὁ δὲ βασιλεὺς ὑπολαβὼν εἶπεν, Μηδὲν φροντίσῃς,
1Λεονάτον RX (cp. Book 16. 94. 4).222Book XVII

Having dispelled his weariness in the bath, he turned 333/2 b.c. to relaxation and to dinner.
Someone came to the wife and the mother of Dareius1 and told them that Alexander had come back from the pursuit after stripping Dareius of his arms. At this, a great outcry and lamentation arose among the women; and the rest of the captives, joining in their sorrow at the news, sent up a loud wail, so that the king heard it and sent Leonnatus, one of his Friends, to quiet the uproar and to reassure Sisyngambris2 by explaining that Dareius was still alive and that Alexander would show them the proper consideration. In the morning he would come to address them and to demonstrate his kindness by deeds. As they heard this welcome and altogether unexpected good news, the captive women hailed Alexander as a god and ceased from their wailing.
So at daybreak, the king took with him the most valued of his Friends, Hephaestion, and came to the women. They both were dressed alike, but Hephaestion was taller and more handsome. Sisyngambris took him for the king and did him obeisance. As the others present made signs to her and pointed to Alexander with their hands she was embarrassed by her mistake, but made a new start and did obeisance to Alexander. He, however, cut in and said, “Never




1Curtius, 3. 11.24–12. 18; Justin 11.9. 12–16; Plutarch, Alexander, 21; Arrian, 2. 12. 3–8. According to the last, Ptolemy and Aristobulus wrote that Alexander sent Leonnatus to the queens, but did not visit them himself; this is the version followed by Plutarch. The personal visit of Alexander and Hephaestion is attributed to another source, not identified.2The usual spelling is Sisigambis, as in Curtius, 3. 3. 22.223