Diodorus of Sicily

ἔλαθεν ὁ Τιμολέων διαδρὰς ἐπὶ τὴν ὑπολελειμμένην
ναῦν καὶ ταχέως ἐξέπλευσεν. οἱ δὲ Καρχηδόνιοι
καταστρατηγηθέντες ἐπεβάλοντο διώκειν
7τοὺς περὶ τὸν Τιμολέοντα· ἐκείνων δὲ προειληφότων
ἱκανὸν διάστημα καὶ τῆς νυκτὸς ἐπιλαβούσης
ἔφθασαν οἱ περὶ τὸν Τιμολέοντα ἀποπλεύσαντες
8εἰς τὸ Ταυρομένιον. ὁ δὲ τῆς πόλεως ταύτης
ἡγούμενος, διὰ παντὸς πεφρονηκὼς τὰ τῶν Συρακοσίων,
Ἀνδρόμαχος, φιλοφρόνως ὑπεδέξατο τοὺς
διωκομένους καὶ πολλὰ συνεβάλετο πρὸς τὴν σωτηρίαν
αὐτῶν.
9Μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα ὁ μὲν Ἱκέτας ἀναλαβὼν τῶν
στρατιωτῶν τοὺς ἀρίστους πεντακισχιλίους ἐστράτευσεν
ἐπὶ τοὺς Ἀδρανίτας ἀντιπράττοντας αὐτῷ
καὶ πλησίον τῆς πόλεως κατεστρατοπέδευσεν· ὁ
δὲ Τιμολέων προσλαβόμενος παρὰ τῶν Ταυρομενίων
στρατιώτας ἀνέζευξεν ἐκ τοῦ Ταυρομενίου,
10τοὺς ἅπαντας ἔχων οὐ πλείους τῶν χιλίων. ἀρχομένης
δὲ τῆς νυκτὸς ἀφορμήσας καὶ διανύσας ἐπὶ
τὸ Ἄδρανον δευτεραῖος ἀνελπίστως ἐπέθετο τοῖς
περὶ τὸν Ἱκέταν δειπνοποιουμένοις· παρεισπεσὼν δ᾿
εἰς τὴν παρεμβολὴν καὶ φονεύσας πλείους τῶν
τριακοσίων,1 ζωγρήσας δὲ περὶ ἑξακοσίους τῆς
11παρεμβολῆς ἐκράτησε. τούτῳ δὲ τῷ στρατηγήματι
ἕτερον ἐπεισάγων παραχρῆμα ἐπὶ τὰς Συρακούσσας
ἀφώρμησε καὶ δρομαῖος τὴν ὁδὸν διανύσας



1τριακοσίων (cp. Plutarch, Timoleon, 12. 5)] τετρακοσίων
PX.30Book XVI

away unnoticed to his remaining ship and quickly 345/4 b.c. sailed out of the harbour. The Carthaginians, though outmanoeuvred, set out in pursuit, but his fleet had gained a substantial lead, and as night fell it was able to reach Tauromenium before being overtaken. Andromachus,1 who was the leading man of this city and had constantly favoured the Syracusan cause, welcomed the fugitives hospitably and did much to ensure their safety.
Hicetas now put himself at the head of five thousand of his best soldiers and marched against the Adranitae, who were hostile to him, encamping near their city. Timoleon added to his force some soldiers from Tauromenium and marched out of that city, having all told no more than a thousand men. Setting out at nightfall, he reached Adranum on the second day, and made a surprise attack on Hicetas’s men while they were at dinner. Penetrating their defences he killed more than three hundred men, took about six hundred prisoners, and became master of the camp.2 Capping this manoeuvre with another, he proceeded forthwith to Syracuse. Covering the distance at full speed, he fell on the city without


1This was the father of the historian Timaeus, who may have been tyrant of the city, although Plutarch also (Timoleon, 10. 4) describes his position by the same non-technical term as is used here.2Plutarch, Timoleon, 12. 3–5, give the same figures for Hicetas’s casualties but states that Timoleon had “no more than 1200 men,” and adds that one faction in Adranum had invited him. It is possible that Timoleon’s success in the surprise attack was due in part to the circumstance that Hicetas was fooled because he still regarded Timoleon as an ally (H. D. Westlake, Timoleon and his Relations with Tyrants (1952), 15 f.). Plutarch gives the road distance between Tauromenium and Adranum as three hundred and forty furlongs.31