Diodorus of Sicily

προαγωγὴν Πτολεμαίου τοῦτον τὸν τρόπον ἐγένετο
προδότης τῆς πρὸς Ἀντίγονον φιλίας. Πτολεμαῖος
δ᾿ ὁ Ἀντιγόνου στρατηγὸς ἦν μὲν τεταγμένος ἐπὶ
τῶν κατὰ τὴν Ἑλλάδα πραγμάτων, πυθόμενος δὲ
τὴν ἀπόστασιν τὴν Τελεσφόρου καὶ τὴν κατάληψιν
τῆς Ἠλείων πόλεως, ἔτι δὲ τὴν σύλησιν τῶν κατὰ
τὴν Ὀλυμπίαν χρημάτων παρῆλθεν εἰς Πελοπόννησον
μετὰ δυνάμεως. καταντήσας δ᾿ εἰς Ἦλιν
καὶ τὴν ἐντετειχισμένην ἀκρόπολιν κατασκάψας τήν
τε ἐλευθερίαν ἀπέδωκε τοῖς Ἠλείοις καὶ τὰ χρήματα
ἀποκατέστησεν τῷ θεῷ. μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα τὸν
Τελεσφόρον πείσας παρέλαβεν τὴν Κυλλήνην, φρουρουμένην
ὑπ᾿ αὐτοῦ, καὶ τοῖς Ἠλείοις ἀποκατέστησεν.
88. Ἅμα δὲ τούτοις πρασσομένοις Ἠπειρῶται
τελευτήσαντος Αἰακίδου τοῦ βασιλέως αὐτῶν Ἀλκέτᾳ
τὴν βασιλείαν παρέδωκαν, ὃς ἦν πεφυγαδευμένος
μὲν ὑπὸ Ἀρύμβου1 τοῦ πατρός, ἀλλοτρίως δὲ
2διακείμενος πρὸς Κάσανδρον. διὸ καὶ Λυκίσκος
ὁ τεταγμένος ἐπὶ τῆς Ἀκαρνανίας στρατηγὸς ὑπὸ
Κασάνδρου παρῆλθε μετὰ δυνάμεως εἰς τὴν Ἤπειρον,
ἐλπίδας ἔχων ῥᾳδίως τὸν Ἀλκέταν ἀποστήσειν
τῆς ἀρχῆς ἀσυντάκτων ἔτι τῶν κατὰ τὴν βασιλείαν
3ὄντων. καταστρατοπεδεύσαντος δ᾿ αὐτοῦ περὶ
Κασσωπίαν πόλιν Ἀλκέτας τοὺς μὲν υἱοὺς Ἀλέξανδρον
καὶ Τεῦκρον ἀπέστειλεν ἐπὶ τὰς πόλεις,
διακελευσάμενος στρατολογεῖν ὡς πλείστους, αὐτὸς
δὲ μεθ᾿ ἧς εἶχε δυνάμεως ἀναζεύξας, ἐπειδὴ πλησίον
ἐγένετο τῶν πολεμίων, ἀνέμενε τὴν τῶν υἱῶν
1Ἀρύμβου Palmer: Ἀρρυβίλου RX, Ἀριβήλου F.72Book XIX

because he was jealous of the advancement of Ptolemaeus, 312 b.c. betrayed the friendship of Antigonus. Ptolemaeus, the general of Antigonus, had been placed in charge of affairs throughout Greece; and he, on hearing of the revolt of Telesphorus, the capture of the city of the Eleans, and the plundering of the wealth of Olympia, moved into the Peloponnesus with an army. When he had come into Elis and levelled the citadel that had been fortified, he gave the Eleans back their freedom and restored the treasure to the god. Then by winning Telesphorus’ consent he recovered Cyllenê, which the latter had garrisoned, and restored it to the Eleans.
88. While this was happening, the Epirotes, their king Aeacides being dead, gave the kingship to Alcetas,1 who had been banished by his father Arymbus and who was hostile to Cassander. For this reason, Lyciscus,2 who had been placed as general over Acarnania by Cassander, entered Epirus with an army, hoping to remove Alcetas easily from his throne while the affairs of the kingdom were still in disorder. While Lyciscus was in camp before Cassopia, Alcetas sent his sons Alexander and Teucer to the cities, ordering them to levy as many soldiers as possible; and he himself, taking the field with what force he had, came near the enemy and awaited the return of his sons. However, since




1Alcetas, an older brother of Aeacides, had been banished because of his unbridled passions (Pausanias, 1. 11. 5).2Lyciscus was placed in command of Epirus by Cassander in 316 b.c. (chap. 36. 5), and of Acarnania in 314 b.c. (chap. 67. 5); but in 313 b.c. he seems to have been replaced for a time by Philip (chap. 74. 3).73