Diodorus of Sicily
2τοὺς δὲ ἀνόπλους καθώπλιζεν. μετεπέμπετο
δὲ καὶ στρατιώτας ἐκ τῶν πλησιοχώρων ἐθνῶν καὶ
πρὸς τοὺς ἐν Βάκτροις καὶ ταῖς ἄνω σατραπείαις
σατράπας καὶ στρατηγοὺς διεπέμπετο, παρακαλῶν
διαφυλάττειν τὴν πρὸς αὐτὸν εὔνοιαν.
3Ἀλέξανδρος δὲ μετὰ τὴν νίκην θάψας τοὺς τετελευτηκότας
ἐπέβαλε τοῖς Ἀρβήλοις καὶ πολλὴν μὲν
εὗρεν ἀφθονίαν τῆς τροφῆς, οὐκ ὀλίγον δὲ κόσμον
καὶ γάζαν βαρβαρικήν, ἀργυρίου δὲ τάλαντα τρισχίλια.
συλλογισάμενος δὲ τὴν μέλλουσαν ἔσεσθαι
φθορὰν τοῦ περιέχοντος ἀέρος διὰ τὸ πλῆθος τῶν
νεκρῶν εὐθὺς ἀνέζευξε καὶ κατήντησε μετὰ πάσης
4τῆς δυνάμεως εἰς Βαβυλῶνα. τῶν δ᾿ ἐγχωρίων προθύμως
ὑποδεξαμένων αὐτὸν καὶ κατὰ τὰς ἐπισταθμίας
λαμπρῶς ἑστιώντων τοὺς Μακεδόνας ἀνέλαβε
τὴν δύναμιν ἐκ τῆς προγεγενημένης ταλαιπωρίας.
πλείους δὲ τῶν τριάκοντα ἡμερῶν ἐνδιέτριψε τῇ
πόλει διά τε τὴν δαψίλειαν τῶν ἐπιτηδείων καὶ
τὴν φιλοξενίαν τῶν ἐγχωρίων.
5Μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα τὴν μὲν ἄκραν παρέδωκε τηρεῖν
Ἀγάθωνι τῷ Πυδναίῳ, συστήσας αὐτῷ Μακεδόνας
στρατιώτας ἑπτακοσίους· Ἀπολλόδωρον δὲ τὸν
Ἀμφιπολίτην καὶ Μένητα τὸν Πελλαῖον ἀπέδειξε
στρατηγοὺς τῆς τε Βαβυλῶνος καὶ τῶν σατραπειῶν
μέχρι Κιλικίας, δοὺς δὲ αὐτοῖς ἀργυρίου τάλαντα
χίλια προσέταξε ξενολογεῖν στρατιώτας ὡς πλείστους.
6Μιθρίνῃ δὲ τῷ παραδόντι τὴν ἐν Σάρδεσιν


300Book XVII

from the battle and rearming those who had lost their 330/29 b.c. weapons.1 He sent around to the neighbouring tribes demanding soldiers, and he posted couriers to the satraps and generals in Bactria and the upper satrapies, calling upon them to preserve their loyalty to him.
After the battle, Alexander buried his dead and entered Arbela,2 finding there abundant stores of food, no little barbaric dress and treasure, and three thousand talents of silver.3 Judging that the air of the region would be polluted by the multitude of un-buried corpses,4 he continued his advance immediately and arrived with his whole army at Babylon. Here the people received him gladly, and furnishing them billets feasted the Macedonians lavishly.5 Alexander refreshed his army from its previous labours and remained more than thirty days in the city because food was plentiful and the population friendly.
At this time he designated Agathon of Pydna6 to guard the citadel, assigning to him seven hundred Macedonian soldiers. He appointed Apollodorus of Amphipolis and Menes of Pella as military governors of Babylon and the other satrapies as far as Cilicia, giving them one thousand talents of silver with instructions to enlist as many soldiers as possible.7 He assigned







1Arrian, 3. 16. 1. Dareius reached Ecbatana from the
north. That city is at the Persian end of the best route from Mesopotamia up to the Iranian plateau, however, and so was on the straggler line taken by many of the survivors of the battle.2Curtius, 5. 1. 10; Arrian, 3. 15. 5.3Curtius, 5. 1. 10, reports 4000 talents.4Curtius, 5. 1. 11.5Curtius (5. 1. 36–39) gives a lurid description of this entertainment, which he regarded as debauching the army.6Curtius, 5. 1. 43.7Arrian, 3. 16. 4. Some of these administrative arrangements may have been made at Susa (Arrian, 3. 16. 6–11).301