Diodorus of Sicily

καὶ Ῥοδίων καὶ Κῴων, ἔτι δὲ Βυζαντίων ἀποστάντων
ἐνέπεσον εἰς πόλεμον τὸν ὀνομασθέντα
συμμαχικόν, ὃς διέμεινεν ἔτη τρία. ἑλόμενοι δὲ
στρατηγοὺς Χάρητα καὶ Χαβρίαν ἀπέστειλαν μετὰ
δυνάμεως. οὗτοι δὲ πλεύσαντες ἐπὶ τὴν Χίον
κατέλαβον παραγεγονότας συμμάχους τοῖς Χίοις
παρὰ Βυζαντίων καὶ Ῥοδίων καὶ Κῴων, ἔτι δὲ
Μαυσώλου τοῦ Καρῶν δυνάστου. ἐκτάξαντες δὲ
τὴν δύναμιν ἐπολιόρκουν τὴν πόλιν κατὰ γῆν ἅμα
καὶ κατὰ θάλατταν. ὁ μὲν οὖν Χάρης τοῦ πεζοῦ
στρατεύματος ἡγούμενος κατὰ γῆν προσῄει τοῖς
τείχεσι καὶ πρὸς τοὺς ἐκ1 τῆς πόλεως ἐκχυθέντας
ἐπ᾿ αὐτὸν διηγωνίζετο· ὁ δὲ Χαβρίας προσπλεύσας
τῷ λιμένι ναυμαχίαν καρτερὰν συνεστήσατο καὶ τῆς
4νεὼς τοῖς ἐμβόλοις ἀναρραγείσης κατεπονεῖτο. οἱ
μὲν οὖν ἐπὶ τῶν ἄλλων νεῶν εἴξαντες τῷ καιρῷ
διεσώθησαν, ὁ δ᾿ ἀντὶ τῆς ἥττης ἀλλαξάμενος τὸν
εὐκλεᾶ θάνατον ἀγωνιζόμενος ὑπὲρ τῆς νεὼς καὶ
τρωθεὶς ἐτελεύτησε.
8. Περὶ δὲ τοὺς αὐτοὺς καιροὺς Φίλιππος ὁ τῶν
Μακεδόνων βασιλεὺς μεγάλῃ παρατάξει νενικηκὼς
τοὺς Ἰλλυριοὺς καὶ πάντας τοὺς μέχρι τῆς Λυχνίτιδος
καλουμένης λίμνης κατοικοῦντας ὑπηκόους
πεποιημένος ἀνέκαμψεν εἰς τὴν Μακεδονίαν, συντεθειμένος
ἔνδοξον εἰρήνην πρὸς τοὺς Ἰλλυριούς,



1ἐκ added by Kallenberg.256Book XVI

of Chios, Rhodes, and Cos and, moreover, of Byzantium, 358/7 b.c. became involved in the war called the Social War which lasted three years.1 The Athenians chose Chares and Chabrias as generals and dispatched them with an army. The two generals on sailing into Chios found that allies had arrived to assist the Chians from Byzantium, Rhodes, and Cos, and also from Mausolus,2 the tyrant of Caria. They then drew up their forces and began to besiege the city both by land and by sea. Now Chares, who commanded the infantry force, advanced against the walls by land and began a struggle with the enemy who poured out on him from the city; but Chabrias, sailing up to the harbour, fought a severe naval engagement and was worsted when his ship was shattered by a ramming attack. While the men on the other ships withdrew in the nick of time and saved their lives, he, choosing death with glory instead of defeat, fought on for his ship and died of his wounds.3
8. About the same time Philip, king of the Macedonians, who had been victorious over the Illyrians4 in a great battle and had made subject all the people who dwelt there as far as the lake called Lychnitis,5 now returned to Macedonia, having arranged a noteworthy peace with the Illyrians and won great acclaim





1Again Diodorus is wrong in the dating of the Social
War. The war opened with the attack on Chios in which
Chabrias fell. For reasons given in the preceding note this
must be the year 357/6. Diodorus (chap. 22. 2) closes the
war in the year of Elpines, 356/5, after it has lasted “four”
years. Dionysius (De Lysia Iudicium, 12, p. 480) placed the Social War in the years of Agathocles and Elpines (357/6 and 356/5), which seems to be the correct dating. For discussion see Beloch, Griechische Geschichte2, 3. 2. 260–262.2Mausolus was the prime instigator of the Social War (see Demosthenes, 15. 3). Yet Byzantium, Rhodes, and Chios had joined forces previously when stirred up by Epameinondas (see Book 15. 79. 1).3See Nepos, Chabrias, 4; Plutarch, Phocion, 6. 1; Demosthenes, 20. 80 ff.4See chap. 4.5Western border of Macedonia by Lyncestis and Orestis.257