Diodorus of Sicily

ὦ μῆτερ· καὶ γὰρ καὶ οὗτος Ἀλέξανδρός
ἐστιν. οὐ μὴν ἀλλὰ τὴν πρεσβῦτιν μητέρα προσαγορεύσας
διὰ τῆς φιλανθρωποτάτης προσηγορίας
προεσήμαινε τοῖς προητυχηκόσι τὴν μέλλουσαν
ἔσεσθαι φιλανθρωπίαν. διαβεβαιωσάμενος δ᾿ αὐτὴν
ὑπάρξειν δευτέραν μητέρα τοῖς ἔργοις εὐθὺς ἐκύρωσε
τὴν διὰ τῶν λόγων ἐπαγγελίαν.
38. Περιέθηκε γὰρ αὐτῇ κόσμον τε βασιλικὸν καὶ
τὸ προγεγονὸς ἀξίωμα ταῖς προσηκούσαις τιμαῖς
ἀποκατέστησε· τὴν μὲν γὰρ θεραπείαν αὐτῇ πᾶσαν
τὴν δοθεῖσαν ὑπὸ Δαρείου παρέδωκεν, ἰδίαν
δ᾿ ἄλλην οὐκ ἐλάττονα τῆς προϋπαρχούσης προσεδωρήσατο
καὶ τῆς μὲν τῶν παρθένων ἐκδόσεως
βέλτιον τῆς Δαρείου κρίσεως ἐπηγγείλατο προνοήσεσθαι,1
τὸν παῖδα δὲ θρέψειν ὡς υἱὸν ἴδιον καὶ
2βασιλικῆς τιμῆς ἀξιώσειν. προσκαλεσάμενος δ᾿
αὐτὸν καὶ φιλήσας, ὡς εἶδεν ἀδεῶς βλέψαντα καὶ
μηδὲν ὅλως καταπλαγέντα, πρὸς τοὺς περὶ τὸν
Ἡφαιστίωνα εἶπεν ὅτι ὁ παῖς ὢν ἓξ ἐτῶν καὶ τὴν
ἀρετὴν ὑπὲρ τὴν ἡλικίαν προφαίνων πολλῷ βελτίων
ἐστὶ τοῦ πατρός. περὶ δὲ τῆς Δαρείου γυναικὸς
καὶ τῆς περὶ αὐτὴν σεμνότητος πρόνοιαν ἕξειν
ἔφησεν ὅπως μηδὲν ἀνάξιον πάθῃ τῆς προγεγενημένης
εὐδαιμονίας.
3Πολλὰ δὲ καὶ ἄλλα πρὸς ἔλεον καὶ φιλανθρωπίαν
διαλεχθεὶς ἐποίησε τὰς γυναῖκας διὰ τὸ μέγεθος
τῆς ἀνελπίστου χαρᾶς εἰς ἀκατάσχετα προπεσεῖν
δάκρυα. ἐπὶ δὲ πᾶσι τοῖς προειρημένοις δοὺς τὴν
δεξιὰν οὐ μόνον ὑπὸ τῶν εὖ παθόντων ἐπαίνων
ἐτύγχανεν, ἀλλὰ καὶ παρὰ πᾶσι τοῖς συστρατευομένοις
περιβόητον ἔσχε τὴν ὑπερβολὴν τῆς ἐπιεικείας.

1So editors: προνοήσασθαι.224Book XVII

mind, Mother. For actually he too is Alexander.”1 333/2 b.c. By thus addressing the aged woman as “Mother,” with this kindliest of terms he gave the promise of coming benefactions to those who had been wretched a moment before. Assuring Sisyngambris that she would be his second mother he immediately ratified in action what he had just promised orally.
38. He decked her with her royal jewelry and restored her to her previous dignity, with its proper honours. He made over to her all the former retinue of servants which she had been given by Dareius and added more in addition not less in number than the preceding. He promised to provide for the marriage of the daughters even more generously than Dareius had promised and to bring up the boy as his own son and to show him royal honour. He called the boy to him and kissed him, and as he saw him fearless in countenance and not frightened at all, he remarked to Hephaestion that at the age of six years the boy showed a courage beyond his years and was much braver than his father.2 As to the wife of Dareius, he said that he would see that her dignity should be so maintained that she would experience nothing inconsistent with her former happiness.
He added many other assurances of consideration and generosity, so that the women broke out into uncontrolled weeping, so great was their unexpected joy. He gave them his hand as pledge of all this and was not only showered with praises by those who had been helped, but won universal recognition through out his own army for his exceeding propriety of conduct.


1This recalls the proverbial Greek definition of a friend as a “Second Self,” ascribed to Zenon in Diogenes Laertius, 7. 23. Cp. also Plutarch, De amicorum multitudine, 2. 93 e.2Curtius, 3. 12. 26.225