Diodorus of Sicily
7διόπερ ἔνιοι προσηκόντως ὑπολαμβάνουσιν εὐχερέστερον
ὑπάρχειν συμφορὰς ἐνεγκεῖν ἐπιδεξίως ἢ
τὰς εὐμεγέθεις εὐημερίας ἐμφρόνως· αἱ μὲν γὰρ
διὰ τὸν περὶ τοῦ μέλλοντος φόβον ἐπαναγκάζουσιν
ἐπιμελεῖσθαι, αἱ δὲ διὰ τὸ προγεγονὸς εὐτύχημα
προτρέπονται καταφρονεῖν πάντων.
96. Οἱ δὲ Ναβαταῖοι τοὺς πολεμίους κολάσαντες
ἀνδρωδῶς αὐτοὶ μὲν ἐπανῆλθον εἰς τὴν πέτραν τὰ
σφέτερα κεκομισμένοι, πρὸς δ᾿ Ἀντίγονον ἐπιστολὴν
γράψαντες Συρίοις γράμμασι τῶν μὲν περὶ
Ἀθήναιον κατηγόρουν ὑπὲρ ἑαυτῶν δὲ ἀπελογοῦντο.
2ὁ δ᾿ Ἀντίγονος ἀντέγραψεν αὐτοῖς, προσμαρτυρῶν
ὡς δικαίως μὲν ἠμύναντο, τῶν δὲ περὶ
Ἀθήναιον κατήγορει, φάσκων παρὰ τὰς δεδομένας
ἐντολὰς ὑπ᾿ αὐτοῦ πεποιῆσθαι τὴν ἐπίθεσιν. τοῦτο
δ᾿ ἔπραττε κρύπτων τὴν ἑαυτοῦ προαίρεσιν καὶ
βουλόμενος ὑπαγαγέσθαι τοὺς βαρβάρους εἰς ῥᾳθυμίαν,
ὅπως ἀνελπίστως ἐπιθέμενος κρατήσῃ τῆς
ἐπιβολῆς· οὐ γὰρ ῥᾴδιον ἦν ἄνευ δόλου τινὸς ἀνδρῶν
περιγενέσθαι νομάδα βίον ἐζηλωκότων καὶ
3καταφυγὴν ἀπρόσιτον ἐχόντων τὴν ἔρημον. οἱ δ᾿
Ἄραβες περιχαρεῖς μὲν ἦσαν ἐπὶ τῷ δοκεῖν ἀπολελύσθαι
μεγάλων φόβων, οὐ μὴν παντελῶς ἐπίστευόν
γε τοῖς Ἀντιγόνου λόγοις, ἀλλὰ τὰς ἐλπίδας
ἔχοντες ἀμφιδοξουμένας σκοποὺς μὲν κατέστησαν
ἐπὶ τῶν λόφων, ἀφ᾿ ὧν ἦν ῥᾴδιον συνορᾶν πόρρωθεν
τὰς εἰς τὴν Ἀραβίαν ἐμβολάς, αὐτοὶ δὲ συνταξάμενοι
τὰ περὶ ἑαυτοὺς προσηκόντως ἐκαραδόκουν
4τὸ ἀποβησόμενον. ὁ δ᾿ Ἀντίγονος φιλοποιησάμενος
χρόνον τινὰ τοὺς βαρβάρους καὶ νομίσας
αὐτοὺς ἐξηπατημένους παραδεδωκέναι τὸν καθ᾿
94Book XIX

wont to follow success. For this reason some rightly 312 b.c. believe that it is easier to meet disaster with skill than very great success with discretion; for disaster, because of the fear of what is to follow, forces men to be careful, but success, because of the previous good fortune, tempts men to be careless about everything.
96. When the Nabataeans had manfully punished the enemy they themselves returned to the rock with the property that they had recovered; but to Antigonus they wrote a letter in Syrian characters in which they accused Athenaeus and vindicated themselves. Antigonus replied to them, agreeing that they had been justified in defending themselves; but he found fault with Athenaeus, saying that he had made the attack contrary to the instructions that had been given. He did this, hiding his own intentions and desiring to delude the barbarians into a sense of security so that, by making an unexpected attack, he might accomplish his desire; for it was not easy without some deception to get the better of men who zealously pursued a nomadic life and possessed the desert as an inaccessible refuge. The Arabs were highly pleased because they seemed to have been relieved of great fears; yet they did not altogether trust the words of Antigonus, but, regarding their prospects as uncertain, they placed watchmen upon the hills from which it was easy to see from a distance the passes into Arabia, and they themselves, after having arranged their affairs in proper fashion, anxiously awaited the issue. But Antigonus, when he had treated the barbarians as friends for some time and believed that they had been thoroughly deceived and thus had given him
95