Diodorus of Sicily

Πολυπέρχων ἧκε μετὰ πάσης τῆς δυνάμεως καὶ
πλησίον τῆς πόλεως ἐστρατοπέδευσε δύο θέμενος
παρεμβολάς, τὴν μὲν τῶν Μακεδόνων, τὴν δὲ τῶν
συμμάχων. κατασκευάσας δὲ πύργους ξυλίνους
ὑψηλοτέρους τῶν τειχῶν προσῆγε τῇ πόλει κατὰ
τοὺς εὐθέτους τόπους καὶ βέλη παντοδαπὰ καὶ
τοὺς ἀγωνιζομένους ἐπιστήσας ἀνέστελλε τοὺς ἐπὶ
5τῶν ἐπάλξεων ἀντιτεταγμένους. ἅμα δὲ τούτοις
πραττομένοις διὰ τῶν μεταλλευόντων ὑπορύξας τὰ
τείχη καὶ τὰς στήριγγας1 ἐμπρήσας κατέβαλε τρεῖς
πύργους τοὺς μεγίστους καὶ μεσοπύργια τὰ ἴσα.
μεγάλου δὲ τοῦ πτώματος καὶ παραδόξου γενομένου
τὸ μὲν πλῆθος τῶν Μακεδόνων ἀνεβόησεν, οἱ δὲ
κατὰ τὴν πόλιν διὰ τὴν δεινότητα τῆς πράξεως
6κατεπλάγησαν. ἔνθα δὴ τῶν Μακεδόνων διὰ τοῦ
πτώματος εἰσπιπτόντων εἰς τὴν πόλιν οἱ Μεγαλοπολῖται
διεῖλον σφᾶς αὐτοὺς καὶ τῷ μὲν ἑνὶ μέρει
τοὺς πολεμίους ὑποστάντες καὶ τὴν ἐν τῷ πτώματι
δυσχωρίαν συνεργὸν ἔχοντες καρτερὰν μάχην συνίσταντο,
τῷ δ᾿ ἑτέρῳ χάρακι διελάμβανον τὸν ἐντὸς
τοῦ πτώματος τόπον καὶ τεῖχος ἕτερον ἀντῳκοδόμουν,
συνεχῶς ἐργαζόμενοι καὶ μεθ᾿ ἡμέραν καὶ
7νύκτωρ. ταχὺ δὲ τῶν ἔργων συντελουμένων διά
τε τὴν πολυχειρίαν καὶ τὸ πλῆθος τῆς εἰς ἅπαντα
παρασκευῆς τὸ μὲν διὰ τοῦ πτώματος ἐλάττωμα
συντόμως οἱ Μεγαλοπολῖται διωρθώσαντο, πρὸς δὲ
τοὺς ἐπὶ τῶν ξυλίνων πύργων ἀγωνιζομένους τοῖς
τε ὀξυβελέσι καταπέλταις ἐχρῶντο καὶ τοῖς σφενδονήταις
καὶ τοξόταις πολλοὺς τῶν πολεμίων κατετίτρωσκον.
71. Πολλῶν δὲ πιπτόντων παρ᾿ ἀμφοτέροις καὶ
κατατραυματιζομένων καὶ τῆς νυκτὸς περικαταλαβούσης
1στήριγγας Scaliger: στηριγίας F, τερηπὰς RX.202Book XVIII

arrived with his entire army and took up his 318 b.c. position near the city, building two camps, one for the Macedonians, the other for the allies. Having constructed wooden towers higher than the walls, he brought them up to the city in those places that were convenient for the purpose, supplied them with missiles of many kinds and men to hurl these, and drove back those who were arrayed against him on the battlements. Meantime his sappers drove mines under the wall and then, by burning the mine props, caused the ruin of three very large towers and as many intervening sections of the wall. At this great and unexpected collapse the crowd of Macedonians shouted with joy, but those in the city were stunned by the seriousness of the event. Immediately the Macedonians began to pour through the breach into the city, while the Megalopolitans divided themselves, some of them opposing the enemy and, aided by the difficulty of the passage through the breach, putting up a stout fight, the rest cutting off the area inside the breach with a palisade and throwing up a second wall, applying themselves day and night without intermission to the task. Since this work was soon finished owing to the multitude of workmen and the ample supply of all the needed material, the Megalopolitans quickly made good the loss they had suffered by the breaching of the wall. Moreover, against those of the enemy who were fighting from the wooden towers they used bolt-shooting catapults, slingers, and bowmen, and mortally wounded many.
71. When many were falling or being disabled on each side and night had closed in about them, Polyperchon


203