Diodorus of Sicily
4ἀγανακτούντων δὲ τῶν πολιτῶν ἐπὶ τῷ φόνῳ τῶν
οἰκείων συναγαγὼν εἰς ἐκκλησίαν τὰ πλήθη περί
τε τούτων ἀπελογήσατο καὶ τὴν πάτριον πολιτείαν
ἀποκατέστησεν. συνεχώρησε δὲ καὶ τὴν ἀτέλειαν
ἔχειν τὴν ἐπὶ τῶν προγόνων οὖσαν τοῖς Παντικάπαιον
οἰκοῦσι. προσεπηγγείλατο δὲ καὶ τῶν
εἰσφορῶν ἅπαντας ἀφήσειν καὶ πολλὰ διελέχθη
5δημαγωγῶν τὰ πλήθη. ταχὺ δὲ πάντων εἰς τὴν
προϋπάρχουσαν εὔνοιαν ἀποκαταστάντων διὰ τὰς
εὐεργεσίας τὸ λοιπὸν ἐβασίλευεν ἄρχων νομίμως
τῶν ὑποτεταγμένων καὶ διὰ τὴν ἀρετὴν οὐ μετρίως
θαυμαζόμενος.
25. Βυζαντίους μὲν γὰρ καὶ Σινωπεῖς καὶ τῶν
ἄλλων Ἑλλήνων τῶν τὸν Πόντον περιοικούντων1
τοὺς πλείστους διετέλεσεν εὐεργετῶν· Καλλαντιανῶν
δὲ πολιορκουμένων ὑπὸ Λυσιμάχου καὶ πιεζουμένων
τῇ σπάνει τῶν ἀναγκαίων χιλίους ὑπεδέξατο τοὺς διὰ
τὴν σιτοδείαν ἐκχωρήσαντας. οἷς οὐ μόνον τῆς καταφυγῆς
παρέσχετο τὴν ἀσφάλειαν, ἀλλὰ καὶ πόλιν
ἔδωκε κατοικεῖν, ἐπὶ δὲ τούτοις τὴν ὀνομαζομένην
2Ψοανκαητικὴν2 χώραν κατεκληρούχησεν. ὑπὲρ
δὲ τῶν πλεόντων τὸν Πόντον πόλεμον ἐξενέγκας
πρὸς τοὺς λῃστεύειν εἰωθότας βαρβάρους Ἡνιόχους
καὶ Ταύρους, ἔτι δ᾿ Ἀχαιοὺς καθαρὰν λῃστῶν
ἀπέδειξε τὴν θάλασσαν, ὥστε μὴ μόνον κατὰ τὴν
βασιλείαν, ἀλλὰ καὶ κατὰ πᾶσαν σχεδὸν τὴν οἰκουμένην,
διαγγελλόντων τῶν ἐμπόρων τὴν μεγαλοψυχίαν,




1περιοικούντων Fischer in apparatus: οἰκούντων.2Ψοανκαητικὴν Madvig, approved by Fischer in apparatus:
Ψόαν καὶ τὴν.206Book XX

the Scythians. Since the citizens were angry at the 310 b.c. slaughter of their kinsmen, Eumelus summoned the people to an assembly in which he defended himself in this matter and restored the constitution of their fathers. He even granted to them the immunity from taxation that those who lived in Panticapaeum had enjoyed under his ancestors. He promised also to free all of them from special levies, and he discussed many other measures as he sought the favour of the people. When all had been promptly restored to their former goodwill by his benevolence, from that time on he continued to be king, ruling in a constitutional way over his subjects and by his excellence winning no little admiration.
25. For Eumelus continued to show kindness to the people of Byzantium and to those of Sinopê and to most of the other Greeks who lived on the Pontus; and when the people of Callantia were besieged by Lysimachus and were hard pressed by lack of food,1 he took under his care a thousand who had left their homes because of the famine. Not only did he grant them a safe place of refuge, but he gave them a city in which to live and allotted to them the region called Psoancaëticê.2 In the interests of those who sailed on the Pontus he waged war against the barbarians who were accustomed to engage in piracy, the Heniochians, the Taurians, and the Achaeans; and he cleared the sea of pirates, with the result that, not only throughout his own kingdom but even throughout almost all the inhabited world, since the merchants carried abroad the news of his nobility, he


1In 313 b.c. Lysimachus had begun a siege of Callantia concerning the outcome of which we have no information. Cp. Book 19. 73.2The name is very doubtful. Cp. the critical note.207