Diodorus of Sicily

οὓς περιεδίνευον1 τροχοὶ Περσικοὶ τέσσαρες,
ὧν ὑπῆρχον αἱ μὲν πλῆμναι2 καὶ αἱ κνημίδες
κατακεχρυσωμέναι, τὸ δὲ προσπῖπτον τοῖς ἐδάφεσι
μέρος σιδηροῦν. τῶν δ᾿ ἀξόνων τὰ προέχοντα
χρυσᾶ κατεσκεύαστο προτομὰς ἔχοντα λεόντων
4σιβύνην ὀδὰξ κατεχούσας. κατὰ δὲ μέσον τὸ
μῆκος εἶχον πόλον ἐνηρμοσμένον μηχανικῶς ἐν
μέσῃ τῇ καμάρᾳ, ὥστε δύνασθαι διὰ τούτου τὴν
καμάραν ἀσάλευτον εἶναι τοῖς σεισμοῖς κατ᾿3 ἀνωμάλους
5τόπους. τεσσάρων δ᾿ ὄντων ῥυμῶν ἑκάστῳ
τετραστοιχία ζευγῶν ὑπέζευκτο, τεσσάρων
ἡμιόνων ἑκάστῳ ζεύγει προσδεδεμένων, ὥστε τοὺς
ἅπαντας ἡμιόνους εἶναι ἑξήκοντα καὶ τέσσαρας,
ἐπιλελεγμένους ταῖς τε ῥώμαις καὶ τοῖς ἀναστήμασιν.
ἕκαστος δὲ τούτων ἐστεφάνωτο κεχρυσωμένῳ
στεφάνῳ καὶ παρ᾿ ἑκατέραν τῶν σιαγόνων εἶχεν
ἐξηρτημένον κώδωνα χρυσοῦν, περὶ δὲ τοὺς τραχήλους
χλιδῶνας λιθοκολλήτους.
28. Ἡ μὲν οὖν ἁρμάμαξα, τοιαύτην ἔχουσα τὴν
κατασκευὴν καὶ διὰ τῆς ὁράσεως μᾶλλον ἢ τῆς
ἀπαγγελίας φαινομένη μεγαλοπρεπεστέρα, πολλοὺς
ἐπεσπᾶτο θεωροὺς διὰ τὴν περιβόητον δόξαν· οἱ
γὰρ ἐκ τῶν πόλεων καθ᾿ ἃς αἰεὶ γίνοιτο πανδημεὶ
συνήντων καὶ πάλιν προέπεμπον, οὐκ ἐμπιμπλάμενοι
2τῆς κατὰ τὴν θεωρίαν τέρψεως. ἀκολούθως
δὲ ταύτῃ τῇ μεγαλοπρεπείᾳ παρηκολούθει πλῆθος
ὁδοποιῶν καὶ τεχνιτῶν, ἔτι δὲ τῶν στρατιωτῶν
παραπεμπόντων.
Ἀρριδαῖος μὲν οὖν σχεδὸν ἔτη δύο καταναλώσας


1οὓς περιεδίνευον Dindorf: οὕσπερ ἐδίνευον.2ὑπῆρχον αἱ μὲν πλῆμναι Wesseling: ὑπῆρχε τὰ μὲν πλάγια
MSS., Fischer.3τοῖς σεισμοῖς κατ᾿
Geer: κατὰ τοὺς σεισμοὺς καὶ. Fischer in app. crit. suggests κατὰ τοὺς βουνοειδεῖς καὶ92Book XVIII

chamber had two axles upon which turned four 322 b.c. Persian wheels, the naves and spokes of which were gilded, but the part that bore upon the ground was of iron. The projecting parts of the axle were made of gold in the form of lion heads, each holding a spear in its teeth. Along the middle of their length the axles had a bearing1 ingeniously fitted to the middle of the chamber in such a way that, thanks to it, the chamber could remain undisturbed by shocks from rough places. There were four poles,2 and to each of them were fastened four teams with four mules harnessed in each team, so that in all there were sixty-four mules, selected for their strength and size. Each of them was crowned with a gilded crown, each had a golden bell hanging by either cheek, and about their necks were collars set with precious stones.
28. In this way the carriage was constructed and ornamented, and it appeared more magnificent when seen than when described. Because of its widespread fame it drew together many spectators; for from every city into which it came the whole people went forth to meet it and again escorted it on its way out, not becoming sated with the pleasure of beholding it. To correspond to this magnificence, it was accompanied by a crowd of roadmenders and mechanics, and also by soldiers sent to escort it.
When Arrhidaeus had spent nearly two years in 321 b.c.
1There seems to be no satisfactory explanation of this device.2The use of several poles on the same vehicle is Persian (Xenophon, Education of Cyrus, 6. 1. 51–52, 6. 4. 2). Bulle (pp. 71–73) suggests that the poles were placed one in front of the other.93