Diodorus of Sicily

ὀλίγον ὄψονται καὶ τῶν βασιλέων καὶ τῶν προγεγονότων
2ἀγώνων ἀξίους. καὶ γὰρ ἐτύγχανον
κατὰ τοῦτον τὸν καιρὸν τῶν ἀργυρασπίδων οἱ
νεώτατοι μὲν περὶ τὰ ἑξήκοντα ἔτη, τῶν δ᾿ ἄλλων
οἱ πλείους μὲν περὶ τὰ ἑβδομήκοντα, τινὲς δὲ καὶ
πρεσβύτεροι, πάντες δὲ ταῖς ἐμπειρίαις καὶ ταῖς
ῥώμαις ἀνυπόστατοι· τοσαύτη περὶ αὐτοὺς ἦν εὐχειρία
καὶ τόλμα διὰ τὴν συνέχειαν τῶν κινδύνων.
3γενομένου δὲ τοῦ κηρύγματος καθότι προείρηται,
παρὰ μὲν τοῖς περὶ Ἀντίγονον ἐγίνοντο φωναὶ
δυσχερεῖς, ὅτι συναναγκάζοιντο πρὸς συγγενεῖς καὶ
πρεσβυτέρους διαμάχεσθαι, παρὰ δὲ τοῖς μετ᾿ Εὐμενοῦς
παρατασσομένοις παρακελευσμὸς καὶ βοὴ
τὴν ταχίστην ἄγειν ἐπὶ τοὺς πολεμίους. ὧν Εὐμενὴς
ὁρῶν τὴν προθυμίαν ἦρεν τὸ σύσσημον, δι᾿
οὗ1 παρεστήσατο τοὺς μὲν σαλπιγκτὰς τὸ πολεμικὸν
σημαίνειν, τὴν δὲ δύναμιν ἀλαλάξαι πᾶσαν.
42. Συνῆψε δὲ μάχην πρῶτον μὲν τὰ θηρία, μετὰ
δὲ ταῦτα καὶ τὸ τῶν ἱππέων πλῆθος. τοῦ δὲ πεδίου
πολλὴν εὐρυχωρίαν ἔχοντος καὶ παντὸς ὑπάρχοντος
ἀργοῦ διὰ τὴν ἐν αὐτῷ διήκουσαν ἁλμυρίδα
τοσοῦτον συνέβη ὑπὸ τῶν ἱππέων ἐξαίρεσθαι κονιορτὸν
ὥστε μηδένα δύνασθαι ῥᾳδίως συνορᾶν ἐξ
2ὀλίγου διαστήματος τὸ γινόμενον. ὃ δὴ κατανοήσας
Ἀντίγονος ἀπέστειλε τοὺς ἐκ Μηδίας ἱππεῖς
καὶ τῶν Ταραντίνων τοὺς ἱκανοὺς ἐπὶ τὴν ἀποσκευὴν
τῶν πολεμίων· ἤλπιζε γάρ, ὅπερ ἦν ἀληθές,
διὰ μὲν τὸν κονιορτὸν λήσεσθαι, διὰ δὲ τὴν ἅλωσιν
τῆς ἀποσκευῆς ἀκονητὶ κρατήσειν2 τῶν πολεμίων.
3οἱ δὲ πεμφθέντες περιιππεύσαντες τὸ κέρας τῶν

1οὗ Wesseling, approved by Fischer in apparatus: ὧν
MSS., Fischer.2κρατήσειν Dindorf: κρατῆσαι MSS., Fischer.342Book XIX

veterans were worthy both of the kings and of their 317/16 b.c. own past battles. At this time the youngest of the Silver Shields were about sixty years old, most of the others about seventy, and some even older; but all of them were irresistible because of experience and strength, such was the skill and daring acquired through the unbroken series of their battles. When this proclamation had been delivered as we have said, there arose from the soldiers of Antigonus angry cries to the effect that they were being forced to fight against their kinsfolk and their elders, but from the ranks of Eumenes there came a cheer and a demand that he lead them against the enemy as soon as possible. When Eumenes saw their enthusiasm, he gave the sign by which he directed the trumpeters to sound the signal for combat and the whole army to raise the battle cry.
42. The first to join in battle were the elephants, and after them the main body of the cavalry. Since the plain was of great extent and entirely uncultivated because of the salt that permeated it, such a cloud of dust was raised by the cavalry that from a little distance one could not easily see what was happening. When Antigonus perceived this, he dispatched the Median cavalry and an adequate force of Tarentines against the baggage of the enemy; for he hoped, as indeed happened, that this manoeuvre might not be discovered because of the dust, and that by the capture of the baggage he might prevail over the enemy without labour. The detachment rode around the flank of their opponents and without being


343