Diodorus of Sicily

περιβόητός τε ὑπάρχων παρὰ τοῖς Μακεδόσιν ἐπὶ
2τοῖς δι᾿ ἀνδρείαν κατωρθωμένοις. μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα
τῶν τὴν Ἀμφίπολιν οἰκούντων ἀλλοτρίως πρὸς αὐτὸν
διατεθέντων καὶ πολλὰς ἀφορμὰς δόντων εἰς πόλεμον
ἐστράτευσεν ἐπ᾿ αὐτοὺς ἀξιολόγῳ δυνάμει.
προσαγαγὼν δὲ τοῖς τείχεσι μηχανὰς καὶ προσβολὰς1
ἐνεργοὺς καὶ συνεχεῖς ποιησάμενος κατέβαλε
μὲν τοῖς κριοῖς μέρος τι τοῦ τείχους, παρεισελθὼν
δ᾿ εἰς τὴν πόλιν διὰ τοῦ πτώματος καὶ τῶν
ἀντιστάντων πολλοὺς καταβαλὼν ἐκυρίευσε τῆς πόλεως
καὶ τοὺς μὲν ἀλλοτρίως πρὸς αὐτὸν διακειμένους
ἐφυγάδευσε, τοῖς δ᾿ ἄλλοις φιλανθρώπως
3προσηνέχθη. ἡ δὲ πόλις αὕτη κειμένη κατὰ τῆς
Θρᾴκης καὶ τῶν σύνεγγυς τόπων εὐφυῶς πολλὰ
συνεβάλετο τῷ Φιλίππῳ πρὸς αὔξησιν. εὐθὺ γὰρ
τὴν μὲν Πύδναν ἐχειρώσατο, πρὸς δὲ Ὀλυνθίους
συμμαχίαν ἔθετο καὶ Ποτίδαιαν ὡμολόγησε περιποιήσειν
αὐτοῖς, ὑπὲρ ἧς Ὀλύνθιοι πολλὴν σπουδὴν
4ἔσχον κυριεῦσαι τῆς πόλεως. τῶν δ᾿ Ὀλυνθίων
βαρεῖαν πόλιν οἰκούντων καὶ διὰ τὸ πλῆθος τῶν
ἐν ταύτῃ2 ἐνοικούντων πολλὴν ἐχόντων3 ῥοπὴν εἰς
τὸν πόλεμον περιμάχητος ἦν ἡ πόλις τοῖς ἡγεμονίας
μείζονος ὀρεγομένοις. διόπερ οἵ τε Ἀθηναῖοι καὶ
ὁ Φίλιππος διεφιλοτιμοῦντο πρὸς ἀλλήλους περὶ
5τῆς τῶν Ὀλυνθίων συμμαχίας. οὐ μὴν ἀλλ᾿ ὁ







1So Cobet: πολιορκίας.2ἐν ταύτῃ Capps: ταύτην, which Hertlein would delete.3ἐχόντων] Fischer suggests ἔχουσαν (cp. Book 13. 66. 5).258Book XVI

among the Macedonians for the successes due to his 358/7 b.c. valour. Thereupon, finding that the people of Amphipolis1 were ill-disposed toward him and offered many pretexts for war, he entered upon a campaign against them with a considerable force. By bringing siege-engines against the walls2 and launching severe and continuous assaults, he succeeded in breaching a portion of the wall with his battering rams, whereupon, having entered the city through the breach and struck down many of his opponents, he obtained the mastery of the city and exiled those who were disaffected toward him, but treated the rest considerately.3 Since this city was favourably situated with regard to Thrace and the neighbouring regions, it contributed greatly to the aggrandizement of Philip. Indeed he immediately reduced Pydna,4 and made an alliance with the Olynthians5 in the terms of which he agreed to take over for them Potidaea, a city which the Olynthians had set their hearts on possessing. Since the Olynthians inhabited an important city and because of its huge population had great influence in war, their city was an object of contention for those who sought to extend their supremacy. For this reason the Athenians and Philip were rivals against one another for the alliance with the Olynthians. However that may



1See chap. 3. 3 and explanatory not; also 4. 1.2See Wilcken, Alexander, 33.3A good account of Philip’s seizures of Amphipolis, Pydna,
Potidaea, and Crenides is found in Pickard-Cambridge,
Cambridge Ancient History, 6. 207–208. This account omits, as does Diodorus, Athens’ declaration of war on Philip’s retention of Amphipolis, which is attested by Isocrates, Philip, 2; Aeschines, False Embassy, 21, 70, 72, Against Ctesiphon, 51; and IG, 22. 127 (πόλεμος πρὸς Φίλιππον) of the year 356. For Amphipolis see also note on chap. 3. 3; Theopompus, fr. 43 (Oxford); Demosthenes, 1.8; 2. 6; 7.27–28; and on the exiles also Dittenberger, Syllogê, 13. 194.4For Pydna see Demosthenes, 20. 63; 1.5.5For the alliance between Philip and Olynthus see Demosthenes, 23. 108; 2. 14; 6. 20; also Robinson, Transactions of the American Philological Association, 65 (1934), 103–122.259