Diodorus of Sicily

ἐλευθερίας φροντίσαι τὸν δῆμον καὶ τὰς μὲν
φρουρουμένας πόλεις ἐλευθερῶσαι, ναῦς δὲ παρασκευάσαι
τετρήρεις μὲν τεσσαράκοντα, τριήρεις δὲ
διακοσίας,1 στρατεύσασθαι δὲ πάντας Ἀθηναίους
τοὺς μέχρι ἐτῶν τεσσαράκοντα καὶ τρεῖς μὲν φυλὰς
τὴν Ἀττικὴν παραφυλάττειν, τὰς δ᾿ ἑπτὰ πρὸς τὰς
3ὑπερορίους στρατείας ἑτοίμους εἶναι. ἐκπέμψαι δὲ
καὶ πρέσβεις τοὺς ἐπελευσομένους τὰς Ἑλληνίδας
πόλεις καὶ διδάξοντας ὅτι καὶ πρότερον μὲν ὁ
δῆμος, τὴν Ἑλλάδα πᾶσαν κοινὴν εἶναι πατρίδα
κρίνων τῶν Ἑλλήνων, τοὺς ἐπὶ δουλείᾳ στρατευσαμένους
βαρβάρους ἠμύνατο κατὰ θάλασσαν καὶ νῦν
οἴεται δεῖν ὑπὲρ τῆς κοινῆς τῶν Ἑλλήνων σωτηρίας
καὶ σώμασι καὶ χρήμασι καὶ ναυσὶ προκινδυνεύειν.
4Κυρωθέντος δὲ τοῦ ψηφίσματος προχειρότερον
ἢ συνέφερεν οἱ μὲν συνέσει διαφέροντες τῶν Ἑλλήνων
ἔφασαν τὸν δῆμον τῶν Ἀθηναίων τὰ μὲν
πρὸς εὐδοξίαν εὖ βεβουλεῦσθαι, τοῦ δὲ συμφέροντος
διημαρτηκέναι· προεξανίστασθαι γὰρ αὐτὸν τῶν
καιρῶν καὶ πρὸς ἀνικήτους καὶ μεγάλας δυνάμεις
ἐπιβάλλεσθαι διακινδυνεύειν μηδεμιᾶς ἀνάγκης
κατεπειγούσης, καὶ φρονήσει δοκοῦντα διαφέρειν
μηδὲ ταῖς περιβοήτοις τῶν Θηβαίων συμφοραῖς
5νενουθετῆσθαι. οὐ μὴν ἀλλὰ τῶν πρέσβεων ἐπιπορευομένων
τὰς πόλεις καὶ τῇ συνήθει τῶν λόγων
δεινότητι παρορμώντων πρὸς τὸν πόλεμον αἱ πλεῖσται
μὲν συνέθεντο τὴν συμμαχίαν, αἱ μὲν κατ᾿
ἔθνος, αἱ δὲ κατὰ πόλιν.
1τετρήρεις μὲν τεσσαράκοντα, τριήρεις δὲ διακοσίας Wesseling:
τριήρεις μὲν , τετρήρεις δὲ .40Book XVIII

for the common freedom of the Greeks and 323 b.c. liberate the cities that were subject to garrisons; that they should prepare forty quadriremes and two hundred triremes1; that all Athenians up to the age of forty should be enrolled; that three tribes should guard Attica, and that the other seven should be ready for campaigns beyond the frontiers; that envoys should be sent to visit the Greek cities and tell them that formerly the Athenian people, convinced that all Greece was the common fatherland of the Greeks, had fought by sea against those barbarians who had invaded Greece to enslave her, and that now too Athens believed it necessary to risk lives and money and ships in defence of the common safety of the Greeks.
When this decree had been ratified more promptly than was wise, those of the Greeks who were superior in understanding said that the Athenian people had counselled well for glory but had missed what was expedient; for they had left the mark before the proper time and, with no necessity compelling them, were venturing to meet forces that were great and undefeated, and moreover, although they enjoyed a reputation for excelling in judgement, they had learned nothing even from the well-known misfortunes of the Thebans.2 Nevertheless, as the ambassadors made the circuit of the cities and roused them for war with their accustomed eloquence, most of the Greeks joined the alliance, some by national groups and some by cities.
1But see critical note on this passage. Justin (13. 5. 8) estimates the Athenian force as two hundred ships in all.2For the destruction of Thebes by Alexander cp. Book 17. 8–14.41