Diodorus of Sicily

οἱ συναγωνιζόμενοι τοῖς Καρχηδονίοις Ἕλληνες,
ὧν Κλίνων ἡγεῖτο, τοὺς περὶ τὸν Ἀγαθοκλέα βαρεῖς
ἐπικειμένους ὑπέστησαν. ἀγωνισαμένων δ᾿ αὐτῶν
λαμπρῶς οἱ πλεῖστοι μὲν ἀνῃρέθησαν μαχόμενοι
γενναίως, οἱ δὲ περιλειφθέντες τύχῃ τινὶ διεσώθησαν.
39. Ὁ δ᾿ Ἀγαθοκλῆς ἀφεὶς τὸ διώκειν τούτους
ὥρμησεν ἐπὶ τοὺς καταφυγόντας βαρβάρους εἰς
τὴν παρεμβολὴν καὶ προσβιαζόμενος τόποις προσάντεσι
καὶ δυσπροσίτοις οὐχ ἧττον ἔπασχεν ἢ
διετίθει τοὺς Καρχηδονίους. οὐ μὴν ἔληγε1 τῆς
τόλμης, ἀλλὰ τῇ νίκῃ μετεωριζόμενος ἐνέκειτο,
διαλαμβάνων κατὰ κράτος αἱρήσειν τὴν στρατοπεδείαν.
2ἐν τοσούτῳ δὲ τὸ τέλος τῆς μάχης καραδοκοῦντες
οἱ Νομάδες ταῖς μὲν τῶν Καρχηδονίων
ἀποσκευαῖς οὐχ οἷοί τε ἦσαν ἐπιθέσθαι διὰ τὸ τὰς
δυνάμεις ἀμφοτέρας πλησίον τῆς παρεμβολῆς ἀγωνίζεσθαι,
ἐπὶ δὲ τὴν τῶν Ἑλλήνων στρατοπεδείαν
ὥρμησαν, εἰδότες τὸν Ἀγαθοκλέα μακρὰν ἀπεσπασμένον.
ἐρήμου δ᾿ αὐτῆς οὔσης τῶν δυναμένων
ἀμύνασθαι ῥᾳδίως ἐπιπεσόντες τοὺς μὲν ἀντιστάντας
ὀλίγους ὄντας ἀπέκτειναν, αἰχμαλώτων δὲ
3πλήθους καὶ τῆς ἄλλης ὠφελείας ἐκυρίευσαν. ἃ
δὴ πυθόμενος ὁ Ἀγαθοκλῆς ἦγε κατὰ τάχος τὴν
δύναμιν καὶ τινὰ μὲν τῶν ἀφηρπασμένων ἀνέσωσε,
τῶν δὲ πλείστων οἱ Νομάδες ἐκυρίευον καὶ νυκτὸς
4ἐπιγενομένης μακρὰν ἑαυτοὺς ἐξετόπισαν. ὁ δὲ
δυνάστης στήσας τρόπαιον τὰ μὲν λάφυρα διείλετο
τοῖς στρατιώταις, ὅπως μηδεὶς ἀγανακτήσῃ περὶ
τῶν ἀπολωλότων, τοὺς δ᾿ αἰχμαλώτους Ἕλληνας
τοὺς συστρατευσαμένους τοῖς Καρχηδονίοις εἴς τι2
5φρούριον ἀπέθετο. οὗτοι3 μὲν οὖν εὐλαβούμενοι
1ἔληγέ γε Reiske.2εἴς τι Wesseling: εἰς τὸ.3οὗτοι Dindorf: αὐτοὶ.246Book XX

the Greeks who, led by Clinon, were assisting the 308 b.c.
Carthaginians withstood Agathocles’ heavy armed men as they advanced. Although they struggled brilliantly, most of these Greeks were slain while righting gallantly, and those who survived were saved by mere chance.
39. Agathocles, giving up the pursuit of the cavalry, attacked the barbarians who had taken refuge in the camp; and, since he had to force his way over terrain steep and difficult of access, he suffered losses no less great than those he inflicted on the Carthaginians. Nevertheless, he did not slacken his zeal, but rather, made confident by his victory, pressed on, expecting to take the camp by storm. At this the Nomads who were awaiting the outcome of the battle, not being able to fall on the baggage train of the Carthaginians since both armies were fighting near the camp, made an attack on the encampment of the Greeks, knowing that Agathocles had been drawn off to a great distance. Since the camp was without defenders capable of warding them off, they easily launched an attack, killing the few who resisted them and gaining possession of a large number of prisoners and of booty as well. On hearing this Agathocles led his army back quickly and recovered some of the spoil, but most of it the Nomads kept in their possession, and as night came on they withdrew to a distance. The prince, after setting up a trophy, divided the booty among the soldiers so that no one might complain about his losses; but the captured Greeks, who had been fighting for the Carthaginians, he put into a certain fortress. Now these men, dreading punishment




247