Diodorus of Sicily

Ἀγαθοκλεῖ δύο, Θέρμα καὶ Κεφαλοίδιον καὶ τὴν
χώραν τὴν τούτων.
78. Θαυμάσαι δ᾿ ἄν τις εἰκότως ἐν τούτοις πῶς
Ἀγαθοκλῆς, ὑποστατικὸς ἐν τοῖς ἄλλοις πᾶσι
γενόμενος καὶ μηδέποθ᾿ ἑαυτὸν ἐν ταῖς ἐσχάταις
προσδοκίαις ἀπελπίσας, τότε δειλωθεὶς ἀκονιτὶ
παρεχώρησε τοῖς πολεμίοις τῆς τυραννίδος, ὑπὲρ
ἧς πολλοὺς καὶ μεγάλους κινδύνους προηγωνίσατο,
καὶ τὸ πάντων παραλογώτατον, Συρακουσσῶν τε
κυριεύσας καὶ τῶν ἄλλων πόλεων καὶ ναῦς καὶ
χρήματα κεκτημένος καὶ δύναμιν σύμμετρον, ἐξησθένησε
τοῖς λογισμοῖς, οὐδὲν τῶν γενομένων περὶ
2Διονύσιον τὸν τύραννον μνησθείς. τούτου γάρ ποτε
συνδιωχθέντος εἰς περίστασιν ὁμολογουμένως ἀπεγνωσμένην
καὶ διὰ τὸ μέγεθος τῶν ἐπηρτημένων
κινδύνων ἀπελπίσαντος μὲν τὰ κατὰ τὴν δυναστείαν,
μέλλοντος δ᾿ ἐκ τῶν Συρακουσσῶν ἐξιππεύειν πρὸς
ἑκούσιον φυγήν, Ἕλωρις ὁ πρεσβύτατος τῶν φίλων
ἐπιλαβόμενος τῆς ὁρμῆς “Διονύσιε,” φησίν, “καλὸν
3ἐντάφιον ἡ τυραννίς.” παραπλησίως δε τούτῳ καὶ
ὁ κηδεστὴς Μεγακλῆς ἀπεφήνατο πρὸς αὐτόν,
εἰπὼν ὅτι δεῖ τὸν ἐκ τυραννίδος ἐκπίπτοντα τοῦ
σκέλους ἑλκόμενον ἀπιέναι καὶ μὴ κατὰ προαίρεσιν
ἀπαλλάττεσθαι. ὑπὸ δὲ τούτων τῶν παρακλήσεων
ὁ Διονύσιος μετεωρισθεὶς ἐνεκαρτέρησε πᾶσι τοῖς
δοκοῦσιν εἶναι δεινοῖς καὶ τὴν μὲν ἀρχὴν μείζονα
κατεσκεύασεν, αὐτὸς δὲ ἐν τοῖς ταύτης καλοῖς
ἐγγηράσας ἀπέλιπε τοῖς ἐκγόνοις μεγίστην τῶν
κατὰ τὴν Εὐρώπην δυναστείαν.
79. Ἀγαθοκλῆς δ᾿ ἐπ᾿ οὐδενὶ τούτων μετεωρισθεὶς


348Book XX

Agathocles two designated fortresses, Therma and 306 b.c. Cephaloedium, together with their territories.
78. One might with good reason express wonder at this point that Agathocles, who had shown himself resolute in every other situation and had never lost confidence in himself when his prospects were at their lowest, at this time became a coward and without a fight abandoned to his enemies the tyranny for the sake of which he had previously fought many great battles, and what was the most unaccountable of all, that while he was master of Syracuse and of the other cities and had possession of ships and wealth and an army commensurate with these, he lost all power of calculating chances, recalling not one of the experiences of the tyrant Dionysius. For instance, when that tyrant had been driven into a situation that was confessedly desperate and when, because of the greatness of the impending dangers, he had given up hope of retaining his throne and was about to ride out from Syracuse into voluntary exile, Heloris, the eldest of his friends, opposing his impulse, said, “Dionysius, tyranny is a good winding-sheet.” And similarly his brother-in-law, Megacles, spoke his mind to Dionysius, saying that the man who was being expelled from a tyranny ought to make his exit dragged by the leg and not to depart of his own free choice.1 Encouraged by these exhortations, Dionysius firmly faced all the emergencies that seemed formidable, and not only made his dominion greater, but when he himself had grown old amid its blessings, he left to his sons the greatest empire of Europe.
79. Aathocles, however, buoyed up by no such

1In Book 14. 8. 4–6 the words of Heloris are given as here; but the advice here assigned to Megacles is there put in the mouth of the historian Philistus.349