Diodorus of Sicily

πετροβόλους καταπέλτας καὶ λίθους μεγάλους
ἀφιεὶς ἐσάλευε τὰ τείχη, τοῖς δ᾿ ὀξυβελέσιν ἀπὸ
τῶν πύργων τῶν ξυλίνων ἐκβάλλων βελῶν παντοδαπῶν
πλῆθος δεινῶς κατετίτρωσκε τοὺς ἐφεστῶτας
3τοῖς τείχεσιν. ἀντιμηχανώμενοι δὲ πρὸς ταῦτα
οἱ Τύριοι πρὸ μὲν τῶν τειχῶν μαρμαρίνους τροχοὺς
ἵστανον καὶ διά τινων ὀργάνων τούτους δινεύοντες
τὰ φερόμενα βέλη καταπελτικὰ συνέτριβον καὶ εἰς
τὰ πλάγια μέρη παράγοντες ἀπράκτους ἐποίουν τὰς
4τῶν ἀφιεμένων πληγάς. πρὸς δὲ τούτοις βύρσας
καὶ διπλᾶς διφθέρας πεφυκωμένας καταράπτοντες
εἰς ταύτας ἀπεδέχοντο τὰς ἀπὸ τῶν πετροβόλων
πληγάς· καὶ μαλακῆς τῆς ἐνδόσεως γινομένης ἐξελύετο
5τῶν φερομένων πετρῶν ἡ βία. καθόλου δὲ
οἱ Τύριοι πάντα τρόπον εὐρώστως ἀμυνόμενοι καὶ
κατευποροῦντες τοῖς βοηθήμασι κατεθάρρησαν τῶν
πολεμίων καὶ τὸ τεῖχος καὶ τὰς ἐντὸς τῶν πύργων
στάσεις ἀπολιπόντες ἐπ᾿ αὐτὰς ὠθοῦντο τὰς ἐπιβάθρας
καὶ ταῖς τῶν πολεμίων ἀνδραγαθίαις ἀντέταττον
6τὰς ἑαυτῶν ἀρετάς. διὸ καὶ συμπλεκόμενοι
τοῖς πολεμίοις καὶ τὴν μάχην ἐκ χειρὸς συνιστάμενοι
μέγαν ἀγῶνα τὸν ὑπὲρ τῆς πατρίδος συνίσταντο
καί τινες πελέκεσι τῶν ἀπαντώντων τὸ
προσπεσὸν μέρος τοῦ σώματος ἀπέκοπτον.
Ἔνθα δὴ τῶν παρὰ τοῖς Μακεδόσιν ἡγεμόνων
τις, ὄνομα μὲν Ἄδμητος, διαφέρων δὲ ἀνδρείᾳ καὶ
σώματος ῥώμῃ, τεθαρρηκὼς τὴν βίαν τῶν Τυρίων
ὑπέστη καὶ πληγεὶς πελέκει μέσην τὴν κεφαλὴν
παραχρῆμα κατέστρεψε τὸν βίον ἡρωικῶς.
7Ὁ δ᾿ Ἀλέξανδρος ὁρῶν τῇ μάχῃ τῶν Τυρίων
κατισχυομένους τοὺς Μακεδόνας ἀνεκαλέσατο τῇ
246Book XVII

in proper places and made the walls rock with 332/1 b.c. the boulders that they threw. With the dartthrowers on the wooden towers he kept up a constant fire of all kinds of missiles and terribly punished the defenders of the walls. In response, the Tyrians rigged marble wheels in front of the walls and causing these to rotate by some mechanism they shattered the flying missiles of the catapults and, deflecting them from their course, rendered their fire ineffective.1 In addition, they stitched up hides or pairs of skins and stuffed them with seaweed so as to receive the blows of the stones on these. As these were soft and yielding, the force of the flying stones was lessened. In sum, the Tyrians defended themselves strongly in all regards and showed themselves well provided with the means of defence. They were bold in face of their enemies, and left the shelter of the walls and their positions within the towers to push out onto the very bridges and match the courage of the Macedonians with their own valour. They grappled with the enemy and, fighting hand to hand, put up a stout battle for their city. Some of them used axes to chop off any part of the body of an opponent that presented itself.
There was one of the Macedonian commanders named Admetus who was a conspicuously brave and powerful man.2 He withstood the fury of the Tyrians with high courage and died heroically, killed instantly when his skull was split by the stroke of an axe.
Alexander saw that the Macedonians were held in check by the resistance of the Tyrians, and, as it


1Cp. chap. 43. 1 above, and note.2He commanded the hypaspistae or infantry of the guard (Arrian, 2. 23. 2–5). He was killed by a spear thrust, according to Arrian (2. 24. 4).247