Diodorus of Sicily

ἱερὰ καταφευγόντων δι᾿ ὀργῆς αὐτοὺς ἔχων φόνου
τὴν πόλιν ἐπλήρωσε. τοὺς μὲν γὰρ ἐν χειρῶν νόμῳ
διέφθειρε, τοὺς δ᾿ ἁλόντας ἐκρέμασε, τοὺς δ᾿ ἐπὶ
θεῶν ἱερὰ καὶ βωμοὺς καταφυγόντας διαψευσθῆναι
3τῆς ἐλπίδος ἐποίησεν. διαφορήσας δὲ τὰς κτήσεις
καὶ φυλακὴν ἀπολιπὼν ἐπὶ τῆς πόλεως ἐστρατοπέδευσεν
ἐπὶ τὴν Ἵππου καλουμένην ἄκραν,
ὠχυρωμένην φυσικῶς τῇ παρακειμένῃ λίμνῃ. πολιορκήσας
δὲ αὐτὴν ἐνεργῶς καὶ τῶν ἐγχωρίων
ναυμαχίᾳ περιγενόμενος κατὰ κράτος εἷλε. τούτῳ
δὲ τῷ τρόπῳ τὰς πόλεις χειρωσάμενος τῶν τε ἐπὶ
θαλάττῃ τόπων τῶν πλείστων ἐκυρίευσεν καὶ τῶν
τὴν μεσόγειον οἰκούντων πλὴν τῶν Νομάδων· ὧν
τινὲς μὲν φιλίαν πρὸς αὐτὸν ἐποιήσαντο, τινὲς δ᾿
4ἐκαραδόκουν τὴν τῶν ὅλων κρίσιν. τέτταρα γὰρ
τὴν Λιβύην διείληφε γένη, Φοίνικες μὲν οἱ τὴν
Καρχηδόνα τότε κατοικοῦντες, Λιβυφοίνικες δὲ
πολλὰς ἔχοντες πόλεις ἐπιθαλαττίους καὶ κοινωνοῦντες
τοῖς Καρχηδονίοις ἐπιγαμίας, οἷς ἀπὸ τῆς
συμπεπλεγμένης συγγενείας συνέβη τυχεῖν ταύτης
τῆς προσηγορίας· ὁ δὲ πολὺς λαὸς τῶν ἐγχωρίων,
ἀρχαιότατος ὤν, Λίβυς ὠνομάζετο, μισῶν διαφερόντως
τοὺς Καρχηδονίους διὰ τὸ βάρος τῆς
ἐπιστασίας· οἱ δὲ τελευταῖοι Νομάδες ὑπῆρχον,
πολλὴν τῆς Λιβύης νεμόμενοι μέχρι τῆς ἐρήμου.
5Ἀγαθοκλῆς δὲ τοῖς μὲν κατὰ Λιβύην συμμάχοις
καὶ ταῖς δυνάμεσιν ὑπερέχων τῶν Καρχηδονίων,
περὶ δὲ τῶν ἐν Σικελίᾳ πραγμάτων ἀγωνιῶν
ἄφρακτα καὶ πεντηκοντόρους ναυπηγησάμενος ἐνεβίβασε


294Book XX

Agathocles, enraged as he was against them, filled 307 b.c. the city with slaughter. Some he killed in hand-to-hand
fighting; those who were captured he hanged, and those who had fled to temples and altars of the gods he cheated of their hopes. When he had sacked the movable property, he left a garrison in possession of the city, and led his army into position against the place called Hippu Acra,1 which was made naturally strong by the marsh that lay before it. After laying siege to this with vigour and getting the better of its people in a naval battle, he took it by storm. When he had conquered the cities in this way, he became master both of most of the places along the sea and of the peoples dwelling in the interior except the Nomads, of whom some arrived at terms of friendship with him and some awaited the final issue. For four stocks have divided Libya: the Phoenicians, who at that time occupied Carthage; the Libyphoenicians, who have many cities along the sea and intermarry with the Carthaginians, and who received this name as a result of the interwoven ties of kinship. Of the inhabitants the race that was most numerous and oldest was called Libyan, and they hated the Carthaginians with a special bitterness because of the weight of their overlordship; and last were the Nomads, who pastured their herds over a large part of Libya as far as the desert.
Now that Agathocles was superior to the Carthaginians by reason of his Libyan allies and his own armies but was much troubled about the situation in Sicily, he constructed light ships and penteconters

1Literally, “The citadel of the horse” or “The cape of
the horse,” identified with Hippos Diarrhytus, the modern Bisertê; cp. Beloch, Griechische Geschichte2, 4. 1. 195, note 2. Here Agathocles gathered material for the construction of his fleet, Appian, African Wars, 110.295