Diodorus of Sicily
Ἐπεὶ δέ τινες τῶν συγγραφέων περὶ τῆς τελευτῆς
τοῦ βασιλέως τούτου διαπεφωνήκασιν, ἀποφαινόμενοι
διὰ φαρμάκου θανασίμου γεγονέναι τὸν
θάνατον, ἀναγκαῖον ἡγούμεθα δεῖν μὴ παραλιπεῖν
αὐτῶν τοὺς λόγους.
118. Φασὶ γὰρ Ἀντίπατρον ἐπὶ τῆς Εὐρώπης
στρατηγὸν ὑπ᾿ αὐτοῦ καταλειφθέντα διενεχθῆναι
πρὸς Ὀλυμπιάδα τὴν μητέρα τοῦ βασιλέως καὶ τὸ
μὲν πρῶτον καταφρονεῖν αὐτῆς διὰ τὸ μὴ προσδέχεσθαι
τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον τὰς κατ᾿ αὐτοῦ διαβολάς,
ὕστερον δ᾿ αἰεὶ τῆς ἔχθρας αὐξομένης, τοῦ βασιλέως
διὰ τὸ πρὸς τὸ θεῖον εὐσεβὲς πάντα βουλομένου τῇ
μητρὶ χαρίζεσθαι, πολλὰς ἐμφάσεις διδόναι τῆς
πρὸς αὐτὸν ἀλλοτριότητος· πρὸς δὲ τούτοις τῆς
Παρμενίωνος καὶ Φιλώτου σφαγῆς φρίκην ἐμποιούσης
τοῖς φίλοις διὰ τοῦ ἰδίου υἱοῦ τεταγμένου περὶ
τὸν κύαθον δοῦναι πιεῖν θανάσιμον φάρμακον τῷ
2βασιλεῖ. μετὰ δὲ τὴν τελευτὴν πλεῖστον ἰσχύσαντος
τῶν κατὰ τὴν Εὐρώπην καὶ μετὰ ταῦτα Κασάνδρου
τοῦ υἱοῦ διαδεξαμένου τὴν βασιλείαν πολλοὺς συγγραφεῖς
μὴ τολμᾶν γράψαι περὶ τῆς φαρμακείας.
φανερὸν δὲ γεγονέναι Κάσανδρον δι᾿ αὐτῶν τῶν
πράξεων ἀλλοτριώτατα διακείμενον τοῖς Ἀλεξάνδρου
πράγμασι· τήν τε γὰρ Ὀλυμπιάδα φονεύσαντα
ἄταφον ῥῖψαι καὶ τὰς ὑπ᾿ ἐκείνου κατασκαφείσας
Θήβας ἀνοικίσαι1 μετὰ πολλῆς σπουδῆς.
3Μετὰ δὲ τὴν τοῦ βασιλέως τελευτὴν Σισύγγαμβρις2
ἡ Δαρείου μήτηρ, πολλὰ καταθρηνήσασα τήν
τε Ἀλεξάνδρου τελευτὴν καὶ τὴν ἑαυτῆς ἐρημίαν,
ἐπὶ τῆς ἐσχάτης τοῦ βίου γραμμῆς ἐγκαρτερήσασα

1ἀνοικίσαι Fischer; οἰκῆσαι RX; οἰκίσαι F.2Σισύγαμβρις codd.468Book XVII
Since some historians disagree about the death of 324/3 b.c. Alexander, and state that this occurred in consequence of a draught of poison, it seems necessary for us to mention their account also.1
118. They say that Antipater, who had been left by Alexander as viceroy in Europe, was at variance with the king’s mother Olympias. At first he did not take her seriously because Alexander did not heed her complaints against him, but later, as their enmity kept growing and the king showed an anxiety to gratify his mother in everything out of piety, Antipater gave many indications of his disaffection. This was bad enough, but the murder of Parmenion and Philotas struck terror into Antipater as into all of Alexander’s Friends, so by the hand of his own son, who was the king’s wine-pourer, he administered poison to the king.2 After Alexander’s death, Antipater held the supreme authority in Europe and then his son Casander took over the kingdom, so that many historians did not dare write about the drug. Casander, however, is plainly disclosed by his own actions as a bitter enemy to Alexander’s policies. He murdered Olympias and threw out her body without burial, and with great enthusiasm restored Thebes, which had been destroyed by Alexander.3
After the king’s death Sisyngambris, Dareius’s mother, mourned his passing and her own bereavement, and coming to the limit of her life she refrained





1Justin, 12. 13. 10; Arrian, 7. 27. 1. See Addenda.2Justin, 12. 14; Plutarch, Alexander, 77. 1–3; Arrian, 7. 27. The son’s name was Iollas, but Justin associated with him his brothers Philip and Casander, the later king. Curtius does not mention this tradition.3Book 19. 49–51; 53.469