Diodorus of Sicily
Καὶ τὰ μὲν κατὰ τὴν Κύπρον ἐν τούτοις ἦν.
43. Μετὰ δὲ ταῦθ᾿ ὁ μὲν τῶν Περσῶν βασιλεὺς
ἐκ τῆς Βαβυλῶνος τὴν ἀνάζευξιν ποιησάμενος μετὰ
τῆς δυνάμεως προῆγεν ἐπὶ τὴν Φοινίκην· ὁ δὲ τῆς
Σιδῶνος δυνάστης Τέννης1 πυνθανόμενος τὸ μέγεθος
τῆς τῶν Περσῶν δυνάμεως καὶ νομίσας τοὺς
ἀφεστηκότας οὐκ ἀξιομάχους εἶναι τὴν σωτηρίαν
2ἰδίᾳ πορίζειν ἔκρινεν. διόπερ τῶν ἑαυτοῦ θεραπόντων
τὸν πιστότατον Θετταλίωνα λάθρᾳ τῶν
Σιδωνίων ἐξέπεμψε πρὸς τὸν Ἀρταξέρξην ἐπαγγελλόμενος
αὐτῷ τὴν μὲν Σιδῶνα παραδώσειν τὴν
δ᾿ Αἴγυπτον συνεκπολεμήσειν, μεγάλα δ᾿ αὐτῷ
συνεργήσειν ἔμπειρον ὄντα τῶν κατὰ τὴν Αἴγυπτον
τόπων καὶ τὰς κατὰ τὸν Νεῖλον ἀποβάσεις ἀκριβῶς
3εἰδότα. ὁ δὲ βασιλεὺς ἀκούσας τοῦ Θετταλίωνος
τὰ κατὰ μέρος ἥσθη διαφερόντως καὶ τῶν μὲν
κατὰ τὴν ἀπόστασιν ἐγκλημάτων ἀπολύσειν ἔφη
τὸν Τέννην,2 πράξαντος δ᾿ αὐτοῦ τὰ καθωμολογημένα
μεγάλας δωρεὰς δώσειν ἐπηγγείλατο. εἰπόντος
δὲ τοῦ Θετταλίωνος ὡς καὶ δεξιὰν λαβεῖν ὁ
Τέννης3 ἠξίωσεν, ἐπὶ τούτοις ὁ μὲν βασιλεὺς
ὀργισθεὶς ὡς οὐ πιστευόμενος παρέδωκε τὸν Θετταλίωνα
τοὶς ὑπηρέταις καὶ προσέταξεν ἀφελεῖν
4τὴν κεφαλήν· ἐπεὶ δ᾿ ἀπαγόμενος ὁ Θετταλίων ἐπὶ
τὴν τιμωρίαν τοσοῦτον εἶπεν ὅτι Σὺ μέν, ὦ βασιλεῦ,
πράξεις ὃ θέλεις, ὁ μέντοι Τέννης4 δυνάμενος ἅπαντα
καταπρᾶξαι διὰ τὸ μὴ δοῦναί σε τὴν πίστιν οὐδὲν
μὴ συντελέσει τῶν ἐπηγγελμένων, πάλιν ἀκούσας



1So corrector in R: Τέννης Μέντωρ PX; Μέντωρ cet. See
note 2 opposite.2So corrector in R: Μέντορα.3So corrector in R: Τέννη Μέντωρ PX, ὁ μέντωρ cet.4So edd.: ὁ μέντοι Μέντωρ most MSS., ὁ μὲν σοι Μέντωρ X.356Book XVI
Such was the situation in Cyprus. 351/0 b.c.
43. After this the King of the Persians, who had begun his journey from Babylon, marched with his army against Phoenicia.1 The ruler of Sidon, Tennes,2 who was informed of the great size of the Persian army and thought that the insurgents were incapable of fighting against it, decided to provide for his personal safety. Accordingly, without the knowledge of the people of Sidon, he sent the most faithful of his own henchmen, Thettalion, to Artaxerxes with the promise that he would betray Sidon to him, would assist him in vanquishing Egypt, and would render him great service, since he was acquainted with the topography of Egypt and knew accurately the landing-places along the Nile. The King on hearing from Thettalion these particulars was extremely pleased and said that he would free Tennes of the charges relative to the revolt, and he promised to give him rich rewards if he performed all that he had agreed upon. But when Thettalion added that Tennes wished him also to confirm his promise by giving his right hand, thereupon the King, flying into a rage at the thought that he was not trusted, handed Thettalion over to his attendants and gave orders to take off his head. But when, as Thettalion was being led off to his punishment, he simply said: “You, O King, will do as you please, but Tennes, though he is able to achieve complete success, since you refuse the pledge, will assuredly not perform any of his promises,” the




1Cp. chap. 42. 2; Trogus, Prol. 10.2For Tennes in this chapter the MSS. consistently read Mentor.357