Diodorus of Sicily

τοὺς δ᾿ ἀπὸ Φρυγίας καὶ Λυδίας χιλίους, τοὺς δὲ
μετὰ Πίθωνος χιλίους πεντακοσίους καὶ τοὺς μετὰ
Λυσανίου ξυστοφόρους τετρακοσίους, ἐπὶ πᾶσι δὲ
τούς τε ἀμφίππους1 ὀνομαζομένους καὶ τοὺς ἐκ
3τῶν ἄνω κατοικούντων2 ὀκτακοσίους. καὶ τὸ μὲν
εὐώνυμον κέρας ὑπὸ τούτων ἐπληροῦτο τῶν ἱππέων,
ὧν ἁπάντων Πίθων εἶχε τὴν ἡγεμονίαν·
τῶν δὲ πεζῶν πρῶτοι μὲν ἐτάχθησαν οἱ ξένοι,
πλείους ὄντες τῶν ἐννακισχιλίων, μετὰ δὲ τούτους
Λύκιοι καὶ Παμφύλιοι τρισχίλιοι, παντοδαποὶ δ᾿
εἰς τὰ Μακεδονικὰ καθωπλισμένοι πλείους τῶν
ὀκτακισχιλίων, ἐπὶ πᾶσι δὲ Μακεδόνες οὐ πολὺ
ἐλάττους τῶν ὀκτακισχιλίων, οὓς ἔδωκεν Ἀντίπατρος
καθ᾿ ὃν καιρὸν ἐπιμελητὴς ἀπεδείχθη τῆς
4βασιλείας. τῶν δ᾿ ἱππέων πρῶτοι μὲν ἦσαν ἐπὶ
τοῦ δεξιοῦ κέρατος συνάπτοντες τῇ φάλαγγι μισθοφόροι
παντοδαποὶ πεντακόσιοι, ἑξῆς δὲ Θρᾷκες
χίλιοι, παρὰ δὲ τῶν συμμάχων πεντακόσιοι, ἐχόμενοι
δὲ τούτων οἱ προσαγορευθέντες ἑταῖροι χίλιοι,
Δημήτριον ἔχοντες ἡγεμόνα τὸν Ἀντιγόνου,
τότε πρώτως μέλλοντα συναγωνίζεσθαι τῷ πατρί.
5ἐπ᾿ ἄκρου δὲ τοῦ κέρατος ἦν τὸ ἄγημα τῶν ἱππέων
τριακοσίων, μεθ᾿ ὧν καὶ αὐτὸς ἐκινδύνευε· πρόταγμα
δὲ τούτων3 ἐκ τῶν ἰδίων παίδων εἶλαι τρεῖς
ὑπῆρχον καὶ ταύταις ἴσαι4 παράλληλοι, συναγωνιζομένων
6αὐτοῖς Ταραντίνων ἑκατόν. παρὰ5 δὲ τὸ







1ἀμφίππους Wesseling: ἀσθίππους RV, ἀνθίππους XF2Fischer adds Θρᾳκῶν after κατοικούντων, cp. chap. 27. 5.3πρόταγμα δὲ τούτων Wesseling, πρόταγμα δὲ τούτῳ Reiske:
τὸ τάγμα δὲ τοῦτο.4ἴσαι Dindorf: ἴσοι.5παρὰ Dindorf: περὶ.308Book XIX

himself, the thousand cavalry from Phrygia and 317 b.c. Lydia, the fifteen hundred with Pithon, the four hundred lancers with Lysanias, and in addition to all these, the cavalry who are called the “two-horse men,”1 and the eight hundred cavalry from the colonists established in the upper country. The left wing was made up of these cavalrymen, all of whom were under the command of Pithon. Of the infantry, more than nine thousand mercenaries were placed first, next to them three thousand Lycians and Pamphylians, then more than eight thousand mixed troops in Macedonian equipment, and finally nearly eight thousand Macedonians, whom Antipater had given him at the time when he was appointed regent of the kingdom. The first of the horsemen on the right wing adjacent to the phalanx were five hundred mercenaries .of mixed origin, then a thousand Thracians, five hundred from the allies, and next to them the thousand known as the Companions with Antigonus* son Demetrius as commander, now about to fight in company with his father for the first time. At the outer end of the wing was the squadron of three hundred horsemen with whom Antigonus himself was entering the battle. As an advance guard for these there were three troops from his own slaves, and parallel to them were as many units reinforced by a hundred Tarentines.2 Along the whole wing he


1One must suppose that each of these brought an extra mount to the battle, as did the Tarentines who followed Philopoemen (Livy, 35. 28. 8).2The outer end of the wing consisted of the 300 horse under Antigonus in line with the cavalry previously mentioned, an advance guard of three troops (of 50 men each?) from the personal retinue of Antigonus, and a rearguard of three similar troops plus 100 Tarentines (cp. chap. 28. 3–4). The forces enumerated total 10,600 horse and 28,000 heavy infantry (cp. chap. 27. 1).309