Diodorus of Sicily

ὃς πολλοὺς τῶν ἐνοικούντων διέφθειρεν. ὧν
ὁ μὲν πρῶτος ὀλίγα τοῖς ἀνθρώποις ἐνώχλησεν, ὡς
ἂν τῆς πόλεως οὔσης νεοκτίστου καὶ διὰ τοῦτο
2πολλὴν εὐρυχωρίαν ἐχούσης, ὁ δὲ δεύτερος μείζων
ἐγένετο καὶ πλείω σώματα διέφθειρεν. ὁ δὲ
τελευταῖος ἐπέπεσε μὲν ἔαρος ἀρχομένου, καταρραγέντων
ἐξαίφνης μεγάλων ὄμβρων καὶ χαλάζης
ἀπίστου τὸ μέγεθος· μνααῖαι γὰρ ἔπιπτον, ἔστι δ᾿
ὅτε καὶ μείζους, ὥστε πολλὰς μὲν τῶν οἰκιῶν συμπίπτειν
διὰ τὸ βάρος, οὐκ ὀλίγους δὲ καὶ τῶν
3ἀνθρώπων ἀπόλλυσθαι· θεατροειδοῦς δ᾿ οὔσης τῆς
Ῥόδου καὶ τὰς ἐγκλίσεις τῶν ὑδάτων κατὰ τὸ πλεῖστον
εἰς ἕνα τόπον ποιουμένης εὐθὺς τὰ ταπεινὰ τῆς
πόλεως ἐπληροῦτο, τῶν μὲν ὀχετῶν διὰ τὸ δοκεῖν
παρεληλυθέναι τὸν χειμῶνα κατημελημένων, τῶν δ᾿
4ἐν τοῖς τείχεσιν ὀβελίσκων συμφραχθέντων. τοῦ δ᾿
ὕδατος παραδόξως ἀθροιζομένου πᾶς μὲν ὁ περὶ τὸ
δεῖγμα καὶ Διονύσιον τόπος ἐπεπλήρωτο, πρὸς δὲ
τὸ Ἀσκληπιεῖον ἤδη τοῦ λιμνάζοντος τόπου προσιόντος
ἐκπλαγεῖς μὲν ἦσαν ἅπαντες, πρὸς δὲ τὴν
5σωτηρίαν διαφόροις ἐχρῶντο κρίσεσιν. οἱ μὲν γὰρ
αὐτῶν εἰς τὰ πλοῖα συνέφυγον, οἱ δ᾿ ἐπὶ τὸ θέατρον
ἀνέδραμον, τινὲς δὲ τῶν περικαταλαμβανομένων
ὑπὸ τοῦ δεινοῦ διαποροῦντες ἐπὶ τοὺς ὑψηλοτάτους
βωμοὺς καὶ τὰς τῶν ἀνδριάντων βάσεις προσανέβησαν.
6κινδυνευούσης δὲ τῆς πόλεως ἄρδην μετὰ
τῶν κατοικούντων ἀπολέσθαι βοήθειά τις αὐτόματος
ἐγένετο· τοῦ γὰρ τείχους ῥαγέντος ἐπὶ πολὺν
τόπον ἐξέπεσε ταύτῃ τὸ συνεστηκὸς ὕδωρ εἰς τὴν
θάλασσαν καὶ ταχὺ πάλιν ἕκαστος εἰς τὴν προϋπάρχουσαν
7τάξιν ἀποκατέστη. συνήργησε δὲ τοῖς
κινδυνεύουσι καὶ τὸ μεθ᾿ ἡμέραν γενέσθαι τὸν κατακλυσμόν·
352Book XIX

inhabitants. Of these floods, the first did little 316 b.c. damage to the population since the city was newly founded and therefore contained much open space; the second was greater and caused the death of more persons. The last befell at the beginning of spring, great rain storms suddenly bursting forth with hail of incredible size. Indeed, hail-stones fell weighing a mina1 and sometimes more, so that many of the houses collapsed because of the weight, and no small number of the inhabitants were killed. Since Rhodes is shaped like a theatre and since the streams of water were thus deflected chiefly into a single region, the lower parts of the city were straightway flooded; for, because it was thought that the rainy season of winter had passed, the drains had been neglected and the drainage openings through the city walls had become clogged. The water that suddenly gathered filled the whole region about the Market and the Temple of Dionysus; and then, as the flood was already advancing to the Temple of Asclepius, all were struck with fear and began to follow various plans for gaining safety. Some of them fled to the ships, others ran to the theatre; certain of those overtaken by the calamity in their extremity climbed upon the highest altars and the bases of statues. When the city and all its inhabitants were in danger of being utterly destroyed, relief of a sort came of itself; for, as the walls gave way over a long stretch, the water that had been confined poured out through this opening into the sea, and each man soon returned again to his former place. It was to the advantage of those who were endangered that the flood came by day, for

1About one pound, but standards varied from city to city.353