Diodorus of Sicily

θρασύτατα μαχομένοις ἐπερρίπτουν καὶ ταῖς ἐσχάταις
συμφοραῖς περιέβαλλον τοὺς ὑποπεσόντας·
διὰ γὰρ τῶν θωράκων καὶ τῶν ὑποδυτῶν παρεισπίπτουσα
ἡ ἄμμος καὶ διὰ τὴν ὑπερβολὴν τῆς θερμασίας
λυμαινομένη τὰς σάρκας ἀβοήθητον ἐποίει
3τὸ ἀτύχημα. διὸ καὶ παραπλησίως τοῖς βασανιζομένοις
πᾶσαν δεητικὴν φωνὴν προϊέμενοι τοὺς
μὲν ἐπικουρήσοντας οὐκ εἶχον, αὐτοὶ δὲ διὰ τὴν
δεινότητα τοῦ πάθους εἰς μανιώδεις διαθέσεις ἐμπίπτοντες
ἐτελεύτων, ἐλεεινῷ καὶ ἀμηχάνῳ πάθει
περιπίπτοντες.
4Ἅμα δὲ καὶ πῦρ ἐπερρίπτουν καὶ σαυνία καὶ
λίθους ἐπέβαλλον οἱ Φοίνικες καὶ τῷ πλήθει τῶν
βελῶν κατεπόνουν τὰς ἀρετὰς τῶν ἀνθισταμένων
καὶ ταῖς μὲν δρεπανηφόροις κεραίαις τὰς τῶν κριῶν
ὁρμιστηρίας ὑποτέμνοντες ἄχρηστον τὴν τῶν ὀργάνων
βίαν ἐποίουν, ταῖς δὲ πυρφόροις μύδρους
μεγάλους διαπύρους ἐπέβαλλον εἰς τὸ πλῆθος τῶν
πολεμίων καὶ διὰ τὴν πυκνότητα τῶν ἀνδρῶν οὐχ
ἡμάρτανον τῶν σκοπῶν, τοῖς δὲ κόραξι καὶ ταῖς
σιδηραῖς χερσὶν ἀνήρπαζον τοὺς τοῖς θωρακείοις
5ἐφεστῶτας. τῇ δὲ πολυχειρίᾳ πάσας τὰς μηχανὰς
ἐνεργεῖς1 ποιοῦντες πολλοὺς τῶν βιαζομένων
ἀπέκτεννον.
45. Ἀνυπερβλήτου δὲ τῆς ἐκπλήξεως οὔσης καὶ
τῆς ἐν τοῖς ἀγῶσι δεινότητος ἀνυποστάτου γινομένης
οὐδ᾿ ὣς ἔληγον τῆς τόλμης οἱ Μακεδόνες,
ἀλλὰ τοὺς ἀεὶ πίπτοντας ὑπερβαίνοντες οὐκ ἐνουθετοῦντο
2ταῖς τῶν ἄλλων συμφοραῖς. ὁ δ᾿ Ἀλέξανδρος
ἐπιστήσας ἐπὶ τοὺς ἁρμόζοντας τόπους2 τοὺς

1ἐνεργεῖς Fischer; ἀνεργεῖς RX; ἀνενεργεῖς F.2τοὺς ἁρμόζοντας τόπους added by Fischer, exempli gratia, from Polybius, 5. 4. 6.244Book XVII

apparatus they then scattered this over those Macedonians 332/1 b.c. who were fighting most boldly and brought those within its range into utter misery. The sand sifted down under breastplates and shirts, and scorching the skin with the intense heat inflicted upon them irremediable disaster. They shrieked supplications like those under torture and there was no one to help them, but with the excruciating agony they fell into madness and died, the victims of a pitiable and helpless lot.1
At the same time, the Phoenicians poured down fire and flung javelins and stones, and by the volume of their missiles weakened the resolution of the attackers. They let down long poles or spars equipped with concave cutting edges and cut the ropes supporting the rams, thus rendering these instruments useless. With their fire-throwers they discharged huge red-hot masses of metal into the press of the enemy, and where so many men were packed together they did not miss their mark. With “crows” and “iron hands”2 they dragged over the edge many who were stationed behind the breastworks on the towers. With many hands at work they kept all their engines busy and caused many deaths among the besiegers.
45. They caused extreme terror by all of this and the fury of their fighting became hardly resistible, but the Macedonians did not lose their boldness. As those in front kept falling, those behind moved up and were not deterred by the sufferings of their comrades. Alexander mounted the stone-throwing catapults




1Curtius, 4. 3. 25–26.2Two forms of grappling irons.245