Diodorus of Sicily
4διὰ τὴν ἐπιφάνειαν οὖν τοῦ γένους οἱ
περὶ Κάσανδρον καὶ Λυσίμαχον, ἔτι δὲ Ἀντίγονον
καὶ Πτολεμαῖον καὶ καθόλου πάντες οἱ μετὰ τὴν
Ἀλεξάνδρου τελευτὴν ἀξιολογώτατοι τῶν ἡγεμόνων
ταύτην ἐμνήστευον· ἕκαστος γὰρ τούτῳ τῷ
γάμῳ συνακολουθήσειν Μακεδόνας ἐλπίζων ἀντείχετο
τῆς βασιλικῆς οἰκίας, ὡς τὴν τῶν ὅλων ἀρχὴν
5περιστήσων εἰς ἑαυτόν. ὁ δὲ ἐπιμελητὴς τῶν Σάρδεων
ἔχων παράγγελμα παρ᾿ Ἀντιγόνου τηρεῖν τὴν
Κλεοπάτραν, διεκώλυεν αὐτῆς τὴν ἔξοδον· ὕστερον
δὲ προστάξαντος τοῦ δυνάστου διά τινων γυναικῶν
6ἐδολοφόνησεν. ὁ δ᾿ Ἀντίγονος οὐ βουλόμενος
λέγεσθαι κατ᾿ αὐτοῦ περὶ τῆς ἀναιρέσεως, τῶν
γυναικῶν τινας ἐκόλασεν ὡς ἐπιβεβουλευκυίας καὶ
τὰ περὶ τὴν ἐκφορὰν βασιλικῶς ἐφιλοκάλησεν.
Κλεοπάτρα μὲν οὖν περιμάχητος γενομένη παρὰ
τοῖς ἐπιφανεστάτοις ἡγεμόσι πρὸ τοῦ συντελεσθῆναι
τὸν γάμον τοιαύτης ἔτυχε καταστροφῆς.
7Ἡμεῖς δὲ διεληλυθότες τὰ κατὰ τὴν Ἀσίαν καὶ
τὴν Ἑλλάδα μεταβιβάσομεν τὸν λόγον ἐπὶ τὰ ἄλλα
μέρη τῆς οἰκουμένης.
38. Κατὰ γὰρ τὴν Λιβύην Καρχηδονίων ἐκπεμψάντων
δύναμιν τὴν προσαξομένην1 τοὺς ἀφεστηκότας
Νομάδας Ἀγαθοκλῆς ἐπὶ μὲν τοῦ Τύνητος
ἀπέλιπεν Ἀρχάγαθον τὸν υἱὸν μετὰ μέρους τῆς
στρατιᾶς, αὐτὸς δ᾿ ἀναλαβὼν τοὺς κρατίστους,
πεζοὺς μὲν ὀκτακισχιλίους, ἱππεῖς δὲ ὀκτακοσίους,
ζεύγη δὲ Λιβύων πεντήκοντα, κατὰ σπουδὴν ἐπηκολούθει
2τοῖς πολεμίοις. οἱ δὲ Καρχηδόνιοι παραγενηθέντες



1προσαξομένην Dindorf: προσδεξομένην.242Book XX

into Italy.1 Because of the distinction of her descent 308 b.c. Cassander and Lysimachus, as well as Antigonus and Ptolemy and in general all the leaders who were most important after Alexander’s death, sought her hand; for each of them, hoping that the Macedonians would follow the lead of this marriage, was seeking alliance with the royal house in order thus to gain supreme power for himself. The governor of Sardis, who had orders from Antigonus to watch Cleopatra, prevented her departure; but later, as commanded by the prince, he treacherously brought about her death through the agency of certain women. But Antigonus, not wishing the murder to be laid at his door, punished some of the women for having plotted against her, and took care that the funeral should be conducted in royal fashion. Thus Cleopatra, after having been the prize in a contest among the most eminent leaders, met this fate before her marriage was brought to pass.
Now that we have related the events of Asia and of Greece, we shall turn our narrative to the other parts of the inhabited world.2
38. In Libya,3 when the Carthaginians had sent out an army to win over the Nomads who had deserted, Agathocles left his son Archagathus before Tunis with part of the army, but he himself, selecting the strongest men—eight thousand foot, eight hundred horse, and fifty Libyan chariots—followed after the enemy at full speed. When the Carthaginians had



1For the marriage of Cleopatra and Alexander, at which Philip was murdered, cp. Book 16. 91–94. After the death of Alexander of Epirus in 326 b.c., Cleopatra married Leonnatus (Plutarch, Eumenes, 3. 5), and on his death in 322 b.c., she took as her third husband Perdiccas (Arrian, FGrH, 156. 9. 26). who died in 321 b.c.2Continued in chap. 45. 1.3Continued from chap. 34. 7.243