Diodorus of Sicily

δεύτερον ἔτος ἤδη πολεμοῦντες Πάρωνα καὶ
Μενέδημον, ἄνδρας ἐπιφανεῖς, στρατηγοὺς ἐχειροτόνησαν.
4οἱ δὲ φυγάδες ἐκ Θουρίων ὁρμήσαντες
καὶ προσλαβόντες μισθοφόρους τριακοσίους ἐπεχείρησαν
μὲν νυκτὸς παρεισπίπτειν εἰς τὴν πατρίδα,
ἀποκρουσθέντες δ᾿ ὑπὸ τῶν Κροτωνιατῶν κατεστρατοπέδευσαν
ἐπὶ τῶν μεθορίων τῆς Βρεττίων
χώρας, μετ᾿ ὀλίγον δὲ τῆς πολιτικῆς δυνάμεως
ἐπελθούσης πολλαπλασίου πάντες μαχόμενοι
κατεσφάγησαν.
Ἡμεῖς δ᾿ ἐπεὶ τὰ περὶ Σικελίαν καὶ τὴν Ἰταλίαν
διεληλύθαμεν, διαβιβάσομεν τὸν λόγον ἐπὶ τὰ λοιπὰ
μέρη τῆς Εὐρώπης.
11. Κατὰ γὰρ τὴν Μακεδονίαν Εὐρυδίκη, τῆς βασιλείας
προεστηκυῖα καὶ πυνθανομένη τὴν Ὀλυμπιάδα
παρασκευάζεσθαι πρὸς τὴν κάθοδον, πρὸς
μὲν Κάσανδρον εἰς Πελοπόννησον ἀπέστειλε βιβλιαφόρον,
ἀξιοῦσα βοηθεῖν τὴν ταχίστην, τῶν δὲ
Μακεδόνων τοὺς πρακτικωτάτους ἀνακαλουμένη
δωρεαῖς καὶ μεγάλαις ἐπαγγελίαις ἰδίους ταῖς εὐνοίαις
2κατεσκεύαζε. Πολυπέρχων δὲ δύναμιν
ἤθροισε προσλαβόμενος Αἰακίδην τὸν Ἠπειρώτην
καὶ κατήγαγεν Ὀλυμπιάδα μετὰ τοῦ Ἀλεξάνδρου
παιδὸς ἐπὶ τὴν βασιλείαν. ἀκούων οὖν Εὐρυδίκην
ἐν Εὐίοις τῆς Μακεδονίας οὖσαν μετὰ τῆς δυνάμεως
ὥρμησεν ἐπ᾿ αὐτήν, σπεύδων μιᾷ μάχῃ κρῖναι
τὰ πράγματα. ἀντιταχθέντων δὲ ἀλλήλοις τῶν
στρατοπέδων οἱ Μακεδόνες ἐντραπέντες τὸ τῆς



254Book XIX

its second year, Paron and Menedemus,1 both outstanding 317 b.c. men, having been elected generals. The exiles, setting out from Thurii and taking with them three hundred mercenaries, tried to enter their native city by night, were driven off by the people of Croton, and encamped on the boundaries of the land of the Bruttii. Soon afterwards, however, they were attacked by the army of citizens, which far outnumbered them, and all were slaughtered in the fight.
Now that we have finished the affairs of Sicily and Italy, we turn to the remaining parts of Europe.2
11. In Macedonia, when Eurydicê,3 who had assumed the administration of the regency, heard that Olympias was making preparations for a return, she sent a courier into the Peloponnesus to Cassander, begging him to come to her aid as soon as possible; and, by plying the most active of the Macedonians with gifts and great promises, she was trying to make them personally loyal to herself. But Polyperchon, with Aeacides of Epirus as his ally, collected an army and restored Olympias and the son of Alexander to the throne. So, as soon as he heard that Eurydice was at Euia4 in Macedonia with her army, he hastened against her with the intention of deciding the campaign in a single battle. When, however, the armies were drawn up facing each other, the Macedonians,



1Menedemus later became tyrant of Croton (Book 21.
frag. 4 Dindorf).2Diodorus returns to the affairs of Sicily and Italy in chap. 65. They are not mentioned in the account of the year 316/15 (chaps. 17–54).3She had probably returned to Macedonia with the kings (Book 18. 39. 7). After Antipater’s death she sided with Cassander, and acting in the name of Philip she removed Polyperchon from the guardianship (Justin, 14. 5. 1–4). For her struggle with Olympias cp. Justin, 14. 5. 8–10.4This town, whose exact location is unknown, is called by Ptolemy (3. 13. 32) a town of the Dassaretae, an Illyrian tribe living just beyond the Macedonian frontier.255