Diodorus of Sicily
29. Ἐπ᾿ ἄρχοντος δ᾿ Ἀθήνησι Νικοκράτους ἐν
Ῥώμῃ τὴν ὕπατον ἀρχὴν διεδέξατο Καίσων Οὐαλλέριος
καὶ Λεύκιος Παπίριος. ἐπὶ δὲ τούτων
Δαρεῖος χρημάτων πλῆθος ἐξέπεμψε τῷ Μέμνονι
2καὶ τοῦ πολέμου παντὸς ἀπέδειξε στρατηγόν. ὁ
δὲ μισθοφόρων πλῆθος ἀθροίσας καὶ τριακοσίας
ναῦς πληρώσας ἐνεργῶς διῴκει τὰ κατὰ τὸν πόλεμον.
Χῖον μὲν οὖν προσηγάγετο· πλεύσας δ᾿ ἐπὶ
Λέσβον Ἄντισσαν μὲν καὶ Μήθυμναν καὶ Πύρραν
καὶ Ἐρεσσὸν1 ῥᾳδίως ἐχειρώσατο, τὴν δὲ Μιτυλήνην2
μεγάλην οὖσαν καὶ παρασκευαῖς μεγάλαις
καὶ πλήθει τῶν ἀμυνομένων ἀνδρῶν κεχορηγημένην
πολλὰς ἡμέρας πολιορκήσας καὶ πολλοὺς τῶν
στρατιωτῶν ἀποβαλὼν μόγις εἷλε κατὰ κράτος.
3εὐθὺ δὲ τῆς περὶ τὸν στρατηγὸν ἐνεργείας διαβοηθείσης
αἱ πλείους τῶν Κυκλάδων νήσων διεπρεσβεύοντο.
προσπεσούσης δὲ φήμης εἰς τὴν
Ἑλλάδα διότι Μέμνων μετὰ τοῦ στόλου μέλλει
πλεῖν ἐπ᾿ Εὐβοίας αἱ μὲν κατὰ τὴν νῆσον ταύτην
πόλεις περίφοβοι καθειστήκεισαν, οἱ δὲ τὰ τῶν
Περσῶν αἱρούμενοι τῶν Ἑλλήνων, ἐν οἷς ὑπῆρχον
καὶ Σπαρτιᾶται, μετέωροι ταῖς ἐλπίσιν ἐγίνοντο
4πρὸς καινοτομίαν. ὁ δὲ Μέμνων χρήμασι διαφθείρων
πολλοὺς τῶν Ἑλλήνων ἔπεισε κοινωνεῖν
τῶν Περσικῶν ἐλπίδων. οὐ μὴν ἡ τύχη γ᾿3 εἴασεν
ἐπὶ πλέον προελθεῖν τὴν τἀνδρὸς ἀρετήν· ὁ γὰρ
Μέμνων περιπεσὼν ἀρρωστίᾳ καὶ πάθει παραβόλῳ
συσχεθεὶς μετήλλαξε καὶ τῇ τούτου τελευτῇ συνετρίβη
καὶ τὰ τοῦ Δαρείου πράγματα.
30. Προσεδόκησε μὲν γὰρ ὁ βασιλεὺς μεταθήσεσθαι

1Ἐρεσσὸν RX, Ἔρεσσον F] see Strabo, 13. 24; Ptolemy, 5. 2. 19. For Ἐρεσός see IG 12. 2, Index, p. 148; Head, Historia Nummorvm, 486.2Cospius deleted καὶ Λέσβον of MSS. after Μιτυλήνην.3Added by Kallenbach (cp. chap. 101. 2).198Book XVII
29. When Nicocrates was archon at Athens, Caeso 333/2 b.c. Valerius and Lucius Papirius became consuls at Rome.1 In this year Dareius sent money to Memnon and appointed him commanding general of the whole war. He gathered a force of mercenaries, manned three hundred ships, and pursued the conflict vigorously. He secured Chios, and then coasting along to Lesbos easily mastered Antissa and Methymna and Pyrrha and Eressus. Mitylene also, large and possessed of rich stores of supplies as well as plenty of fighting men, he nevertheless captured with difficulty by assault after a siege of many days and with the loss of many of his soldiers. News of the general’s activity spread like wildfire and most of the Cyclades sent missions to him. As word came to Greece that Memnon was about to sail to Euboea with his fleet, the cities of that island became alarmed, while those Greeks who were friendly to Persia, notably Sparta, began to have high hopes of a change in the political situation. Memnon distributed bribes freely and won many Greeks over to share the Persian hopes, but Fortune nevertheless put an end to his career. He fell ill and died, seized by a desperate malady, and with his death Dareius’s fortunes also collapsed.2
30. The king had counted on Memnon’s transferring






1Nicocrates was archon from July 333 to June 332 b.c. Broughton (1. 139) lists the consuls of 336 b.c. as L. Papirius Crassus and K. Duillius. The former has apparently already been named by Diodorus, chap. 17. 1.2Arrian, 2. 1, gives a similar account, but states that Mitylene was not captured until after Memnon’s death.199