Diodorus of Sicily

καὶ Ὀρχομενὸν1 μετοικίζοντος εἰς Θήβας Κασάνδρου
διεκώλυσε μετοικισθῆναι τὰς πόλεις. Κάσανδρος
δὲ θεωρῶν τὰ πράγματα τῷ Δημητρίῳ
κατὰ νοῦν χωροῦντα Φερὰς μὲν καὶ Θήβας ἁδροτέραις
φρουραῖς παρεφύλαττε, τὴν δὲ δύναμιν πᾶσαν
εἰς ἕνα τόπον ἀθροίσας ἀντεστρατοπέδευσε τοῖς
4περὶ τὸν Δημήτριον. εἶχε δὲ τοὺς σύμπαντας
πεζοὺς μὲν εἰς δισμυρίους ἐννακισχιλίους, ἱππεῖς
δὲ δισχιλίους. τῷ δὲ Δημητρίῳ συνηκολούθουν
ἱππεῖς μὲν χίλιοι καὶ πεντακόσιοι, πεζοὶ δὲ Μακεδόνες
οὐκ ἐλάττους τῶν ὀκτακισχιλίων, μισθοφόροι
δ᾿ εἰς μυρίους καὶ πεντακισχιλίους, ἐκ δὲ τῶν κατὰ
τὴν Ἑλλάδα πόλεων δισμύριοι καὶ πεντακισχίλιοι,
ψιλικὰ δὲ τάγματα καὶ πειρατῶν παντοδαπῶν τῶν
συντρεχόντων ἐπὶ τοὺς πολέμους2 καὶ τὰς ἁρπαγὰς
οὐκ ἐλάττους τῶν ὀκτακισχιλίων, ὥστ᾿ εἶναι τοὺς
ἅπαντας πεζοὺς περὶ τοὺς πεντακισμυρίους ἑξακισχιλίους.
5ἀντικαθημένων δὲ τῶν στρατοπέδων
ἀλλήλοις ἐπὶ πολλὰς ἡμέρας ἐκτάξεις μὲν ἐγίνοντο
παρ᾿ ἀμφοτέροις, εἰς μάχην δὲ οὐδέτερος συγκατέβαινε,
καραδοκῶν τὴν ἐπὶ τῆς Ἀσίας ἐσομένην
6τῶν ὅλων κρίσιν. Δημήτριος δέ, τῶν Φεραίων
ἐπικαλεσαμένων αὐτόν, παρεισπεσὼν εἰς τὴν πόλιν
μετὰ μέρους τῆς δυνάμεως τὴν μὲν ἄκραν ἐκπολιορκήσας
ὑποσπόνδους ἀφῆκε τοὺς παρὰ Κασάνδρου
στρατιώτας, τοῖς δὲ Φεραίοις τὴν ἐλευθερίαν ἀποκατέστησεν.
111. Ἐν τούτοις δ᾿ ὄντων τῶν περὶ Θεσσαλίαν
ἧκον πρὸς τὸν Δημήτριον οἱ πεμφθέντες ὑπ᾿ Ἀντιγόνου,
διασαφοῦντες τὰς παρὰ τοῦ πατρὸς ἐντολὰς

1Fischer in apparatus suggests Νηλίαν and Ὀρμένιον from
Strabo, 9. 5. 15.2πολέμους Dindorf: πολεμίους.436Book XX

the people of Dium and Orchomenus1 into 302 b.c. Thebes, he prevented the transplanting of the cities. But when Cassander saw that Demetrius’ undertakings were prospering, he first protected Pherae and Thebes with stronger garrisons; and then, after collecting his whole army into one place, he encamped over against Demetrius. He had in all twenty-nine thousand foot-soldiers and two thousand horsemen. Demetrius was followed by fifteen hundred horsemen, not less than eight thousand Macedonian foot-soldiers, mercenaries to the number of fifteen thousand, twenty-five thousand from the cities throughout Greece, and at least eight thousand of the light armed troops and of the freebooters of all sorts such as gather where there is fighting and plundering; so that there were in all about fifty-six thousand foot-soldiers. For many days the camps were pitched opposite each other, and the battle lines were drawn up on both sides, but neither came forward into battle since each was awaiting the decision of the whole matter that would take place in Asia. Demetrius, however, when the people of Pherae called upon him, entering their city with part of his army and taking the citadel, dismissed the soldiers of Cassander on terms and restored their liberty to the people of Pherae.
111. While affairs in Thessaly were in this state, there came to Demetrius the messengers sent by Antigonus, accurately detailing the orders of his



1Dium and Orchomenus in this region are unknown; but since the Thebes in question must be Thebae Phthiotides (cp. Pherae and Thebes below), Demetrius can hardly have returned to Boeotia.437