Diodorus of Sicily

ἀπομένειν1 τὴν τῆς Πλειάδος δύσιν δοκοῦσαν ἔσεσθαι
μεθ᾿ ἡμέρας ὀκτώ, τούτοις μὲν ἐπετίμησεν
ὡς κατορρωδοῦσι τοὺς κινδύνους, αὐτὸς δὲ στρατοπεδεύων
περὶ Γάζαν καὶ σπεύδων φθάσαι τὴν
τοῦ Πτολεμαίου παρασκευὴν τοῖς μὲν στρατιώταις
παρήγγειλε δέχ᾿ ἡμερῶν ἔχειν ἐπισίτισιν, ἐπὶ δὲ
ταῖς καμήλοις ταῖς ἀθροισθείσαις ὑπὸ τῶν Ἀράβων
ἐπέθηκε σίτου μυριάδας μεδίμνων τρισκαίδεκα
καὶ χόρτου πλῆθος τοῖς τετράποσι· τά τε βέλη κομίζων
τοῖς ζεύγεσι προῆγε διὰ τῆς ἐρήμου μετὰ
κακοπαθείας διὰ τὸ πολλοὺς εἶναι τῶν τόπων τελματώδεις
καὶ μάλιστα περὶ τὰ καλούμενα Βάραθρα.
74. Οἱ δὲ περὶ τὸν Δημήτριον ἐκ τῆς Γάζης
ἐκπλεύσαντες περὶ μέσας νύκτας τὸ μὲν πρῶτον
εὐδίας οὔσης ἐφ᾿ ἡμέρας τινὰς ταῖς ταχυναυτούσαις
ναυσὶν ἐρυμούλκουν τὰ στρατιωτικὰ πόρια· ἔπειτα
τῆς Πλειάδος περικαταλαμβανούσης αὐτοὺς καὶ
πνεύματος ἐπιγενομένου βορίου συνέβη πολλὰ τῶν
τετρηρικῶν σκαφῶν ὑπὸ τοῦ χειμῶνος κατενεχθῆναι
παραβόλως ἐπὶ πόλιν Ῥαφίαν, οὖσαν δυσπροσόρμιστον
2καὶ τεναγώδη. τῶν δὲ πλοίων τῶν
κομιζόντων τὰ βέλη τὰ μὲν ὑπὸ τοῦ χειμῶνος συγκλυσθέντα
διεφθάρη, τὰ δ᾿ ἐπαλινδρόμησεν εἰς τὴν
Γάζαν· τοῖς δὲ κρατίστοις τῶν σκαφῶν βιασάμενοι
3διέτειναν μέχρι τοῦ Κασίου. τοῦτο δὲ τοῦ μὲν Νείλου
διέστηκεν οὐ μακράν, ἀλίμενον δέ ἐστι καὶ κατὰ
τὰς χειμερίους περιστάσεις ἀπροσόρμιστον. διόπερ
ἠναγκάζοντο τὰς ἀγκύρας ἀφέντες ὡς ἂν ἐν δυσὶ




1ἀπομένειν Fischer: ἀπιδεῖν.338Book XX

Pleiades,1 which was expected to take place after 306 b.c. eight days, Antigonus censured them as men afraid of danger; but he himself, since he was encamped at Gaza and was eager to forestall the preparations of Ptolemy, ordered his soldiers to provide themselves with ten days’ rations, and loaded on the camels, which had been gathered together by the Arabs, one hundred and thirty thousand measures of grain and a good stock of fodder for the beasts; and, carrying his ordnance in waggons, he advanced through the wilderness with great hardship because many places in the region were swampy, particularly near the spot called Barathra.2
74. As for Demetrius, after setting sail from Gaza about midnight, since the weather at first was calm for several days, he had his transports towed by the swifter ships; then the setting of the Pleiades overtook them and a north wind arose, so that many of the quadriremes were driven dangerously by the storm to Raphia,3 a city which affords no anchorage and is surrounded by shoals. Of the ships that were carrying his ordnance, some were overwhelmed by the storm and destroyed, and others ran back to Gaza; but pressing on with the strongest of the ships he held his course as far as Casium.4 This place is not very distant from the Nile, but it has no harbour and in the stormy season it is impossible to make a landing here. They were therefore compelled to cast their anchors and ride the waves at a distance



1About November 1.2Literally “Pits,” a region of quicksands between the Sirbonian Lake and the Mediterranean. Cp. Books 1. 30. 4–9, and 16. 46. 4–5, for accounts of the dangers of this region.3A day’s march south of Gaza.4Probably at the western end of the Sirbonian Lake. For the dangers from storms on this coast cp. Strabo, 16. 2. 26 (p. 758).339