Diodorus of Sicily

κατὰ τὴν ἐπὶ Γρανικῷ μάχην· κατὰ νώτου γὰρ
λαβεῖν τὸν ποταμόν, ὅπως μηδεὶς ἐπιβάληται
φεύγειν προδήλου τῆς ἀπωλείας οὔσης τῶν διωκομένων
ἐν τῷ τοῦ ποταμοῦ ῥείθρῳ. καὶ γὰρ κατὰ
τοὺς ὕστερον χρόνους Ἀγαθοκλέα τὸν Συρακοσίων
βασιλέα μιμησάμενον τὴν Ἀλεξάνδρου στρατηγίαν
3ἀνέλπιστον καὶ μεγάλην νίκην περιποιήσασθαι· διαβάντα
γὰρ αὐτὸν εἰς Λιβύην μετ᾿ ὀλίγης δυνάμεως
καὶ τὰς ναῦς ἐμπρήσαντα παρελέσθαι μὲν τῶν
στρατιωτῶν τὰς ἐκ τοῦ φεύγειν ἐλπίδας, συναναγκάσαι
δὲ γενναίως ἀγωνίσασθαι καὶ διὰ τοῦτο
Καρχηδονίων ἀντιταχθέντων πολλαῖς μυριάσι νικῆσαι.
4Μετὰ δὲ τὴν ἅλωσιν τῆς Μιλήτου τὸ πλῆθος
τῶν Περσῶν καὶ τῶν μισθοφόρων, ἔτι δ᾿ οἱ πρακτικώτατοι
τῶν ἡγεμόνων συνέδραμον εἰς τὴν Ἁλικαρνασσόν.
αὕτη δὲ ἡ πόλις μεγίστη τῶν κατὰ τὴν
Καρίαν ἦν, βασίλεια μὲν ἐσχηκυῖα τὰ Καρῶν,
5ἀκροπόλεσι δὲ καλῶς κεκοσμημένη. κατὰ δὲ τὸν
αὐτὸν καιρὸν Μέμνων μὲν τήν τε γυναῖκα καὶ τὰ
τέκνα πρὸς Δαρεῖον ἔπεμψε καὶ τούτῳ παραθέμενος
ἅμα μὲν ὑπέλαβε τῆς ἀσφαλείας αὐτῶν καλῶς
πεπρονοῆσθαι, ἅμα δὲ τὸν βασιλέα καλοὺς ὁμήρους
ἔχοντα προθυμότερον ἐμπιστεύσειν αὐτῷ τὴν τῶν
6ὅλων ἡγεμονίαν· ὅπερ καὶ συνέβη γενέσθαι. εὐθὺς
γὰρ ὁ Δαρεῖος ἔπεμψεν ἐπιστολὰς πρὸς τοὺς κατὰ
θάλατταν οἰκοῦντας, προστάττων ἅπαντας ὑπακούειν
τῷ Μέμνονι. διόπερ οὗτος παραλαβὼν τὴν
τῶν ὅλων ἡγεμονίαν παρεσκευάζετο πάντα τὰ χρήσιμα
πρὸς πολιορκίαν ἐν τῇ πόλει τῶν Ἁλικαρνασσέων.
24. Ὁ δὲ βασιλεὺς Ἀλέξανδρος τὰ μὲν πολιορκητικὰ
182Book XVII

the battle of the Granicus, where he placed the stream 334/3 b.c. at his rear, for no one could think of flight when destruction of any who were followed into the bed of the river was a certainty. There is also, they note, in later years the case of Agathocles, king of the Syracusans, who copied the strategy of Alexander and won an unexpected and decisive victory. He had crossed to Libya with a small force and by burning his ships deprived his men of any hope of escape by flight, thus constraining them to fight like heroes and thereby win a victory over the Carthaginians, who had an army numbering many tens of thousands.1
After the capture of Miletus, the bulk of the Persians and mercenaries, as well as the most enterprising of the commanders, concentrated their forces at Halicarnassus. This was the largest city in Caria, containing the palace of the kings of the Carians, and was well provided with interior fortresses. About the same time Memnon sent his wife2 and children to Dareius, because he calculated that leaving them in the king’s care was a good way to ensure their safety, while at the same time the king, now that he had good hostages, would be more willing to entrust Memnon with the supreme command. And so it turned out. For Dareius straightway sent letters to those who dwelt next the sea, directing them one and all to take orders from Memnon. Accordingly, having assumed the supreme command, he made all the necessary dispositions for a siege in the city of the Halicarnassians.
24. King Alexander had his siege engines and provisions


1See Book 20. 7.2This wife, Barsine the daughter of Artabazus, was captured after Issus and was believed later to have born Alexander a son, Heracles.183