Diodorus of Sicily

Σερούιον1 Σουλπίκιον, Λοκρήτιον. ἐπὶ δὲ τούτων
Ἀρταξέρξης ὁ τῶν Περσῶν βασιλεὺς μέλλων
πολεμεῖν πρὸς Αἰγυπτίους καὶ σπεύδων ξενικὴν
δύναμιν ἀξιόλογον συστήσασθαι, διέγνω συλλύσασθαι
τοὺς κατὰ τὴν Ἑλλάδα πολέμους· οὕτως
γὰρ μάλιστ᾿ ἤλπιζε τοὺς Ἕλληνας ἀπολελυμένους
τῶν οἰκείων πολέμων ἑτοιμοτέρους ἔσεσθαι πρὸς
τὰς ξενολογίας. διόπερ πρέσβεις ἐξέπεμψεν εἰς
τὴν Ἑλλάδα τοὺς παρακαλέσοντας τὰς πόλεις
2κοινὴν εἰρήνην συνθέσθαι. τῶν δ᾿ Ἑλλήνων ἀσμένως
προσδεξαμένων τοὺς λόγους διὰ τὸ κάμνειν τῇ
συνεχείᾳ τῶν πολέμων, συνέθεντο πάντες τὴν
εἰρήνην, ὥστε πάσας τὰς πόλεις αὐτονόμους καὶ
ἀφρουρήτους εἶναι. καὶ κατέστησαν οἱ Ἕλληνες
ἐξαγωγεῖς, οἳ κατὰ πόλιν ἑκάστην ἐπελθόντες ἐξήγαγον
3ἁπάσας τὰς φρουράς. μόνων δὲ Θηβαίων
οὐ προσδεξαμένων κατὰ πόλιν γίνεσθαι τὰς σπονδάς,
ἀλλὰ τὴν Βοιωτίαν ἅπασαν ὑπὸ τὴν τῶν
Θηβαίων συντέλειαν ταττόντων, καὶ Ἀθηναίων
μὲν ἀντειπόντων φιλοτιμότατα, Καλλιστράτου τοῦ2
δημαγωγοῦ τὸν λόγον διαθεμένου, ὑπὲρ δὲ τῶν
Θηβαίων Ἐπαμεινώνδου διαθεμένου λόγον θαυμαστῶς
ἐν τῷ κοινῷ συνεδρίῳ, τοῖς μὲν ἄλλοις
Ἕλλησι πᾶσι συμφώνως αἱ σπονδαὶ συνετελέσθησαν,
μόνοι δὲ Θηβαῖοι κριθέντες ἔκσπονδοι, καὶ




1Σερούιον Rhodoman: Σερουίλιον.2δὲ before τοῦ deleted by Reiske.52Book XV

Sulpicius, and Lucretius. During their term of office 375/4 b.c. Artaxerxes, King of the Persians, intending to make war on the Egyptians and being busily engaged in organizing a considerable mercenary army, decided to effect a settlement of the wars going on in Greece. For by this means he particularly hoped that the Greeks, once released from their domestic wars, would be more ready to accept mercenary service. Accordingly he sent ambassadors to Greece to urge the cities to enter into a general peace by agreement. The Greeks welcomed his proposal because they wearied of the uninterrupted series of wars, and all agreed to make peace on the condition that all the cities should be independent and free from foreign garrisons. Accordingly the Greeks appointed agents who, going from city to city, proceeded to evacuate all the garrisons. But the Thebans alone would not agree that the ratification of the peace should be made city by city,1 but insisted that all Boeotia should be listed as subject to the confederacy of the Thebans. When the Athenians opposed this in the most contentious manner, Callistratus, their popular leader, reciting their reasons, while, on behalf of the Thebans, Epameinondas delivered the address before the general assembly with marvellous effect, the result was that though the terms of the peace were harmoniously concluded for all the other Greek states, the Thebans alone were refused participation in

1This peace seems to have been concluded thought it did not last long. Ascribed by Beloch, Griechische Geschichte2, 3. 1. 156 to the year 375/4 (see also Judeich, “Athen und Theben,” Rheinisches Museum 76 (1927), 181 and his ascription in note 2 of Cephisodotus’ statue of Eirenê to this occasion). Cp. Xenophon, Hell. 6. 2.1; Isocrates, Antidosis, 109 f., Plataïcus, 10; Nepos, Timotheüs, 2; Philochorus in Didymus, de Demosthene, 7. 64 ff.53