Diodorus of Sicily

παράδοξον τῆς ἐπαγγελίας καὶ ζητούντων μαθεῖν
τί ποτ᾿ ἔσται τὸ δυνάμενον κωλῦσαι προάγειν τοὺς
ἐναντίους, προσέταξεν ἀκολουθεῖν ἑαυτῷ πάντας
τοὺς ἡγεμόνας μετὰ τῶν ἰδίων στρατιωτῶν, ἔχοντας
ἐν ἀγγείοις πλείοσι πῦρ. ἐκλεξάμενος δὲ τῆς
μετεώρου χώρας τόπον ἐστραμμένον ἐπὶ τὴν ἔρημον
καὶ πρὸς τὴν ἀποθεώρησιν πανταχόθεν εὐφυῆ,
σημεῖα θέμενος περιέλαβεν ὡς ἂν ἑβδομήκοντα σταδίων
περιφέρειαν. διελὼν δὲ τόπους ἑκάστῳ τῶν
συνακολουθούντων συνέταξε νυκτὸς πῦρ κάειν διαστάντας1
ὡς ἂν εἴκοσι πήχεις καὶ κατὰ μὲν τὴν
πρώτην φυλακὴν πολλὴν φλόγα ποιεῖν ὡς ἂν
ἐγρηγορότων ἔτι καὶ πρὸς θεραπείαν καὶ δεῖπνον
παρασκευαζομένων, τῆς δὲ δευτέρας ἐλάττω, καὶ
τῆς τρίτης ἀπολιπεῖν ὀλίγα παντελῶς ὥστε δοκεῖν
εἶναι τοῖς ἐξ ἀποστήματος θεωροῦσιν ἀληθινὴν
4στρατοπεδείαν. τῶν δὲ στρατιωτῶν ποιησάντων
τὸ προσταχθὲν κατενόησάν τινες τὰ πυρὰ τῶν νεμομένων
μὲν τὴν ἀπεναντίον ὀρεινήν, φίλων δ᾿ ὄντων
Πίθωνι τῷ Μηδίας σατράπῃ. δόξαντες δὲ πρὸς
ἀλήθειαν εἶναι στρατοπεδείαν, καταδραμόντες εἰς
τὸ πεδίον ἀπήγγειλαν τοῖς περὶ τὸν Ἀντίγονον καὶ
5Πίθωνα. οἱ δὲ διὰ τὸ παράδοξον καταπλαγέντες
καὶ τῆς ὁδοιπορίας ἐπισχόντες ἐβουλεύοντο πῶς
χρηστέον τοῖς προσηγγελμένοις· ἦν γὰρ ἐπικίνδυνον
τὸ πεπονηκότας καὶ πάντων ἐνδεεῖς συνηγμένοις
ἤδη τοῖς πολεμίοις καὶ πάντων εὐποροῦσι συμβαλεῖν.
6ὑπολαβόντες δὲ προδοσίαν γεγενῆσθαι καὶ
προακηκοότας τὸ μέλλον τοὺς πολεμίους ἠθροῖσθαι,
τὸ μὲν ἐπ᾿ εὐθείας προάγειν ἀπέγνωσαν, εἰς δεξιὰ

1διαστάντας Dindorf: διιστάντας.334Book XIX

promise and were trying to learn what in the world 317/16 b.c. it would be that could prevent the enemy from advancing, he ordered all the commanders to follow him with their own soldiers bringing fire in many jars. He then selected a place in the higher ground that faced toward the desert and was well situated to be clearly visible from every direction and by setting up markers laid out a space with a perimeter of seventy stades.1 Assigning an area to each of those who followed him, he ordered them at night to light fires about twenty cubits2 apart and to keep the flames bright in the first watch as if men were still awake and busy with the care of their bodies and the preparation of food, but dimmer in the second watch, and in the third watch to leave only a very few, so that to those who watched from a distance it would seem to be a genuine camp. The soldiers carried out the directions. The flames were seen by some of those who pastured flocks on the hills opposite and who were friendly toward Pithon, the satrap of Media. Believing that this truly was a camp, they hurried down into the plain and carried the news to Antigonus and Pithon. These were astonished at this unexpected news and halted the march while they took counsel how they should use this information, for it was dangerous to lead an army that had been undergoing hardship and was in need of everything against hostile forces that were already assembled and were well provided with everything. Believing that there had been treachery and that the enemy had assembled because they knew in advance what was to happen, they gave up the plan of going straight forward and, turning to the right, went to


1About eight miles.2About thirty feet.335