Diodorus of Sicily
4πρόστιμον εἶναι. χρῶνται δὲ τῷ νόμῳ τούτῳ διαλαμβάνοντες
τοὺς ταῦτα κτωμένους ἀναγκασθήσεσθαι
ῥᾳδίως ὑπὸ τῶν δυνατῶν ἕνεκα τῆς τούτων
χρείας ποιεῖν τὸ προστασσόμενον. τρέφουσι δ᾿
αὐτῶν οἱ μὲν καμήλους, οἱ δὲ πρόβατα, τὴν ἔρημον
ἐπινέμοντες. οὐκ ὀλίγων δ᾿ ὄντων Ἀραβικῶν ἐθνῶν
τῶν τὴν ἔρημον ἐπινεμόντων οὗτοι πολὺ τῶν
ἄλλων προέχουσι ταῖς εὐπορίαις, τὸν ἀριθμὸν ὄντες
5οὐ πολὺ πλείους τῶν μυρίων· εἰώθασι γὰρ αὐτῶν
οὐκ ὀλίγοι κατάγειν ἐπὶ θάλασσαν λιβανωτόν τε
καὶ σμύρναν καὶ τὰ πολυτελέστατα τῶν ἀρωμάτων,
διαδεχόμενοι παρὰ τῶν κομιζόντων ἐκ τῆς Εὐδαίμονος
6καλουμένης Ἀραβίας. φιλελεύθεροι δέ εἰσι
διαφερόντως καὶ ὅταν πολεμίων δύναμις ἁδρὰ
προσίῃ, φεύγουσιν εἰς τὴν ἔρημον, ταύτῃ χρώμενοι
ὀχυρώματι· ἄνυδρος γὰρ οὖσα τοῖς μὲν ἄλλοις
ἀνεπίβατός ἐστι, τούτοις δὲ κατεσκευακόσιν ἀγγεῖα
κατὰ γῆς ὀρυκτὰ κεκονιαμένα μόνοις παρέχεται τὴν
7ἀσφάλειαν. τῆς γὰρ γῆς οὔσης τῆς μὲν ἀργιλλώδους,
τῆς δὲ πέτραν ἐχούσης μαλακὴν ὀρύγματα
μεγάλα ποιοῦσιν ἐν αὐτῇ, ὧν τὰ μὲν στόμια μικρὰ
παντελῶς κατασκευάζουσι, κατὰ βάθους δ᾿ ἀεὶ
μᾶλλον εὐρυχωρῆ ποιοῦντες τὸ τελευταῖον τηλικοῦτ᾿
ἀποτελοῦσι τὸ μέγεθος ὥστε γίνεσθαι πλευρὰν ἑκάστην
8πλέθρου. ταῦτα δὲ τὰ ἀγγεῖα πληροῦντες
ὕδατος ὀμβρίου τὰ στόματ᾿ ἐμφράττουσι καὶ ποιοῦντες
ἰσόπεδον τῇ λοιπῇ χώρᾳ σημεῖα καταλείπουσιν
ἑαυτοῖς μὲν γιγνωσκόμενα, τοῖς δ᾿ ἄλλοις ἀνεπινόητα.
9ποτίζουσι δὲ καὶ τὴν λείαν δι᾿ ἡμερῶν
τριῶν, ὅπως ἐν ταῖς ἀνυδρίαις καὶ φυγαῖς μὴ προσδέωνται


88Book XIX

They follow this custom because they believe that 312 b.c. those who possess these things are, in order to retain the use of them, easily compelled by the powerful to do their bidding. Some of them raise camels, others sheep, pasturing them in the desert. While there are many Arabian tribes who use the desert as pasture, the Nabataeans far surpass the others in wealth although they are not much more than ten thousand in number; for not a few of them are accustomed to bring down to the sea frankincense and myrrh and the most valuable kinds of spices, which they procure from those who convey them from what is called Arabia Eudaemon.1 They are exceptionally fond of freedom; and, whenever a strong force of enemies comes near, they take refuge in the desert, using this as a fortress2; for it lacks water and cannot be crossed by others, but to them alone, since they have prepared subterranean reservoirs lined with stucco, it furnishes safety. As the earth in some places is clayey and in others is of soft stone, they make great excavations in it, the mouths of which they make very small, but by constantly increasing the width as they dig deeper, they finally make them of such size that each side has a length of one plethrum.3 After filling these reservoirs with rain water, they close the openings, making them even with the rest of the ground, and they leave signs that are known to themselves but are unrecognizable by others. They water their cattle every other day, so that, if they flee through waterless places, they may not need a continuous


1i.e. Arabia the Fortunate (Arabia Felix), the south-western
part of the peninsula (cp. Book 2. 49).2In Book 2. 48. 5 Diodorus states that the kings of the Assyrians and of the Medes and Persians vainly sent large forces against these Arabs.3About 100 feet.89