Diodorus of Sicily

κοινῇ μετὰ Χάρητος διαπολεμεῖν τοῖς ἀφεστηκόσι
2τῶν συμμάχων. οἱ δὲ Χῖοι καὶ Ῥόδιοι καὶ Βυζνάτιοι
μετὰ τῶν συμμάχων ἑκατὸν ναῦς πληρώσαντες
Ἴμβρον μὲν καὶ Λῆμνον οὔσας1 Ἀθηναίων
ἐπόρθησαν, ἐπὶ δὲ Σάμον πολλῇ δυνάμει στρατεύσαντες
τὴν μὲν χώραν ἐδῄωσαν τὴν δὲ πόλιν ἐπολιόρκουν
κατὰ γῆν καὶ κατὰ θάλατταν· πολλὰς δὲ
καὶ ἄλλας νήσους οὔσας ὑπ᾿ Ἀθηναίους κακοποιήσαντες
χρήματα ἤθροισαν εἰς τὰς τοῦ πολέμου
3χρείας. οἱ δὲ τῶν Ἀθηναίων στρατηγοὶ πάντες
ἀθροισθέντες τὸ μὲν πρῶτον ἐπεβάλοντο πολιορκῆσαι
τὴν τῶν Βυζαντίων πόλιν, μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα τῶν
Χίων καὶ τῶν συμμάχων τὴν μὲν πολιορκίαν τῆς
Σάμου λυσάντων ἐπὶ δὲ τὴν βοήθειαν τοῖς Βυζαντίοις
τρεπομένων συνηθροίσθησαν πάντες οἱ στόλοι
περὶ τὸν Ἑλλήσποντον. μελλούσης δὲ γίνεσθαι τῆς
ναυμαχίας μέγας ἄνεμος ἐπιπεσὼν διεκώλυσεν αὐτῶν
4τὴν προαίρεσιν. τοῦ δὲ Χάρητος παρὰ φύσιν
βουλομένου ναυμαχεῖν καὶ τῶν περὶ τὸν Ἰφικράτην
καὶ Τιμόθεον ἐναντιουμένων διὰ τὸ μέγεθος τοῦ
κλύδωνος ὁ μὲν Χάρης ἐπιμαρτυρόμενος τοὺς στρατιώτας2
διέβαλε τοὺς συνάρχοντας ὡς προδότας
καὶ πρὸς τὸν δῆμον ἔγραψε περὶ αὐτῶν ὡς ἐγκαταλελοιπότων
ἑκουσίως τὴν ναυμαχίαν, οἱ δ᾿ Ἀθηναῖοι
παροξυνθέντες καὶ κρίσιν τῷ Ἰφικράτει καὶ Τιμοθέῳ
προθέντες ἐζημίωσαν αὐτοὺς πολλοῖς ταλάντοις
καὶ τῆς στρατηγίας ἀπέστησαν.
1So Dindorf: οὖσαν.2So Wesseling (cp. Book 2. 18. 1): τοῖς στρατιώταις.296Book XVI

along with Chares to continue war upon their allies 356/5 b.c. who had revolted. The Chians, Rhodians, and Byzantians together with their allies manned one hundred ships and then sacked Imbros and Lemnos, Athenian islands, and having descended on Samos with a large contingent laid waste the countryside and besieged the city by land and by sea; and by ravaging many other islands that were subject to Athens they collected money for the needs of the war. All the Athenian generals now met and planned at first to besiege the city of the Byzantians, and when later the Chians and their allies abandoned the siege of Samos and turned to assist the Byzantians, all the fleets became massed in the Hellespont. But just at the time when the naval battle was about to take place a great wind fell upon them and thwarted their plans. When Chares, however, though the elements were against him, wished to fight, but Iphicrates and Timotheus opposed on account of the heavy sea, Chares, calling upon his soldiers to bear him witness, accused his colleagues of treason and wrote to the assembly about them, charging that they had purposely shirked the sea-fight.1 And the Athenians were so incensed that they indicted Iphicrates and Timotheus, fined them many talents, and removed them from the generalship.2
1See Nepos, Timotheüs, 3. Menestheüs, son of Iphicrates and son-in-law of Timotheus, was also associated with the command and later brought to trial, A battle was actually begun, the battle of Embata, not in the Hellespont, but near Erythrae. See Nepos, l.c.: “hinc male re gesta, compluribus amissis navibus”; Polyaenus, 3. 9. 29; Stephanus of Byzantium, s.v. Ἔμβατον.2See Nepos, Timotheüs, 3. 5; Iphicrates, 3. 3; Isocrates, Antidosis, 129; Polyaenus, 3. 9. 29; Deinarchus, Against Demosthenes, 14 and Schaefer, Demosthenes, 12. 175 ff. For an interesting appraisal of these generals see chap. 85. 7.297