Diodorus of Sicily

σεσιδηρωμένον χάρακα κατήντησε, τὸ μὲν πλῆθος
τῶν ἀκοντιστῶν καὶ τοξοτῶν συνεχῶς βαλλόντων
κατετίτρωσκε τὰ σώματα τῶν ἐλεφάντων καὶ τοὺς
2ἐπ᾿ αὐτοῖς ἀναβεβηκότας· βιαζομένων δὲ τῶν
Ἰνδῶν καὶ κολαζόντων τὰ θηρία τινὰ μὲν αὐτῶν
περιεπείροντο τῷ φιλοτεχνηθέντι χάρακι, καὶ ταῖς
πληγαῖς καὶ πυκνότησι τῶν τιτρωσκόντων περιώδυνα
3γινόμενα ἐποίει θόρυβον. τὸ γὰρ γένος τοῦτο
κατὰ μὲν τοὺς ὁμαλοὺς καὶ μαλακοὺς τόπους ἀνυπόστατον
παρέχεται κατὰ στόμα τὴν ῥώμην, ἐν δὲ
τοῖς τραχέσι καὶ δυσβάτοις τελέως ἄπρακτον ἔχει
4τὴν ἀλκὴν διὰ τὴν τῶν ποδῶν μαλακότητα. διὸ καὶ
τότε, τῶν περὶ Πτολεμαῖον συνετῶς προεωραμένων
τὸ μέλλον ἐκ τοῦ χάρακος τῆς πήξεως,1 ἄπρακτον
ἐποίει τὴν βίαν αὐτῶν. τέλος δὲ τῶν πλείστων
Ἰνδῶν κατακοντισθέντων ὑποχειρίους συνέβη γενέσθαι
5πάντας τοὺς ἐλέφαντας. οὗ τελεσθέντος οἱ
πολλοὶ τῶν περὶ τὸν Δημήτριον ἱππέων καταπλαγέντες
πρὸς φυγὴν ὥρμησαν· αὐτὸς δὲ μετ᾿ ὀλίγων
ἀπολειφθεὶς καὶ δεόμενος ἑκάστου στῆναι καὶ μὴ
καταλιπεῖν αὐτόν, ὡς οὐδεὶς προσεῖχε, συναποχωρεῖν
6ἠναγκάζετο. μέχρι μὲν οὖν Γάζης οἱ πολλοὶ
τῶν ἱππέων συνακολουθοῦντες ὑπήκουον καὶ κατέστησαν
εἰς τάξεις, ὥστε μηδένα ῥᾳδίως τολμᾶν
προσάγειν τῶν εἰκῇ διωκόντων· τὸ γὰρ πεδίον εὐρύχωρον
ὂν καὶ μαλακὸν συνήργει τοῖς βουλομένοις
7ἐν τάξει ποιεῖσθαι τὴν ἀποχώρησιν. συνείποντο δὲ
καὶ πεζῶν οἱ βουληθέντες λιπεῖν τὰς τάξεις καὶ



1For τῆς πήξεως Fischer in his apparatus suggests ἡ
πήρωσις.64Book XIX

however, they came up to the barrier of spikes, the 312 b.c. host of javelin-throwers and archers, who were sending their missiles unremittingly, began to wound severely the elephants themselves and those who were mounted upon them; and while the mahouts were forcing the beasts forward and were using their goads, some of the elephants were pierced by the cleverly devised spikes and, tormented by their wounds1 and by the concentrated efforts of the attackers, began to cause disorder. For on smooth and yielding ground these beasts display in direct onset a might that is irresistible, but on terrain that is rough and difficult their strength is completely useless because of the tenderness of their feet. Thus, too, on this occasion, since Ptolemy shrewdly foresaw what would result from the setting up of the spikes, he rendered the power of the elephants unavailing.2 The final outcome was that, after most of the mahouts had been shot down, all the elephants were captured. When this happened, most of Demetrius’ horsemen were panic-stricken and rushed into flight; and he himself was left with a few and then, since no one heeded him when he begged them each to stand and not desert him, was forced to leave the field with the rest. Now as far as Gaza most of the cavalry who were following with him listened to orders and remained in formation, so that no one of those who were pursuing at random lightly risked attacking; for the plain was open and yielding, and favourable to men who wished to withdraw in formation. There followed also those of the infantry who preferred to

1Cp. Book 18. 71. 6, where πληγή is clearly used of the
wounds caused by the spikes.2Or, reading ἡ πήρωσις; “Thus on this occasion also, as Ptolemy shrewdly foresaw would happen, the wounds caused by the spikes rendered, etc.”65