Diodorus of Sicily

Ἰνδικῆς, ἣν κατεπολέμησεν ὁ Ἀλέξανδρος, παραποταμίοις1
ὕδασι κατάρρυτος καὶ κατὰ τὴν εὐδαιμονίαν
ἐπιφανεστάτη, καθ᾿ ἣν ὑπῆρχε σὺν ἄλλαις
πλείοσι βασιλείαις ἥ τε τοῦ Πώρου καὶ Ταξίλου
δυναστεία, δι᾿ ἧς συμβαίνει ῥεῖν τὸν Ἰνδὸν ποταμόν,
3ἀφ᾿ οὗ τὴν προσηγορίαν ἔσχεν ἡ χώρα. ἐχομένη
δὲ τῆς Ἰνδικῆς ἀφώριστο σατραπείας Ἀραχωσία
καὶ Κεδρωσία καὶ Καρμανία, πρὸς δὲ ταύταις
Περσίς, ἐν ᾗ τὴν Σουσιανὴν καὶ Σιττακινὴν κεῖσθαι
συμβέβηκεν· ἑξῆς δὲ Βαβυλωνία μέχρι τῆς κατὰ
τὴν Ἀραβίαν ἀοικήτου· ἐκ δὲ θατέρου μέρους, ἀφ᾿
οὗ ποιούμεθα τὴν ἀνάβασιν, Μεσοποταμία περιειλημμένη
δυσὶ ποταμοῖς, τῷ τε Εὐφράτῃ καὶ
Τίγριδι, δι᾿ οὓς τέτευχε ταύτης τῆς προσηγορίας·
ἐχομένη δὲ τῆς Μεσοποταμίας2 Συρία ἡ ἄνω
καλουμένη, καὶ αἱ συνεχεῖς ταύτῃ παραθαλάττιοι
Κιλικία καὶ Παμφυλία, καὶ ἡ Κοίλη Συρία, καθ᾿
ἣν ἡ Φοινίκη περιείληπται. παρὰ δὲ τὰ πέρατα
τῆς Κοίλης Συρίας καὶ τὴν συνεχῶς κειμένην ἔρημον,
καθ᾿ ἣν ὁ Νεῖλος φερόμενος ὁρίζει Συρίαν τε
καὶ τὴν Αἴγυπτον, ἀπεδέδεικτο σατραπεία πασῶν
ἀρίστη καὶ προσόδους ἔχουσα μεγάλας Αἴγυπτος.
4πᾶσαι δ᾿ αὗται καυματώδεις εἰσίν, ὡς3 ἀντιπεπονθότος4
τοῦ κατὰ μεσημβρίαν ἀέρος τῷ πρὸς ἄρκτους
καθήκοντι. αἱ μὲν οὖν ὑπ᾿ Ἀλεξάνδρου
καταπολεμηθεῖσαι σατραπεῖαι τὸν εἰρημένον τρόπον
κείμεναι διεμερίσθησαν τοῖς ἀξιολογωτάτοις τῶν
ἀνδρῶν.
7. Οἱ δ᾿ ἐν ταῖς ἄνω καλουμέναις σατραπείαις
κατοικισθέντες Ἕλληνες ὑπ᾿ Ἀλεξάνδρου, ποθοῦντες


1For παραποταμίοις Fischer reads ποταμίοις after Reiske.2Μεσοποταμίας Reiske: Βαβυλωνίας.3Dindorf adds ἂν after ὡς.4Fischer reads ἀντιπνέοντος.28Book XVIII

India, which Alexander conquered, irrigated by 323 b.c. water from the rivers and most conspicuous for its prosperity. Here were the dominions of Porus and Taxiles, together with many other kingdoms, and through it flows the Indus River, from which the country received its name. Next to the Indian satrapy Arachosia was marked off, and Cedrosia and Carmania, and Persia next to them, in which are Susianê and Sittacinê. Next comes Babylonia extending to the Arabian Desert. On the other side, in the direction from which we make the march inland, is Mesopotamia encompassed by two rivers, the Euphrates and the Tigris, to which it owes its name. Next to Mesopotamia are Upper Syria, as it is called, and the countries adjacent thereto along the sea: Cilicia, Pamphylia, and Coelê Syria, which encloses Phoenicia. Along the frontiers of Coelê Syria and along the desert that lies next to it, through which the Nile makes its way and divides Syria and Egypt,1the best satrapy of all and one that has great revenues, was set up, Egypt. All these countries are very hot, since the air in the south is different from that which extends to the north. The satrapies, then, that were conquered by Alexander, are situated as described, and were distributed to the most noteworthy men.
7. The Greeks who had been settled by Alexander in the upper satrapies, as they were called, although




1By some geographers the Nile was regarded as the boundary between Asia and Libya-Africa (Strabo, 1. 4. 7); others included Egypt in Asia (Strabo, 2. 5. 33).29