Diodorus of Sicily

τείχει καὶ τῆς πόλεως χερρονήσου γενομένης πολλοὺς
καὶ μεγάλους ἀγῶνας συνέβαινε γίνεσθαι κατὰ
6τὴν τειχομαχίαν. οἱ μὲν γὰρ τὸ δεινὸν ἔχοντες ἐν
ὀφθαλμοῖς καὶ τὴν ἐκ τῆς ἁλώσεως συμφορὰν ἀναλογιζόμενοι
ταῖς ψυχαῖς οὕτω παρέστησαν πρὸς
τὸν κίνδυνον ὥστε τοῦ θανάτου καταφρονῆσαι.
7τῶν γὰρ Μακεδόνων προσαγόντων πύργους ὑψηλοὺς
ἴσους τοῖς τείχεσι καὶ διὰ τούτων τὰς ἐπιβάθρας
ἐπιβαλλόντων καὶ θρασέως ταῖς ἐπάλξεσιν
ἐπιβαινόντων οἱ μὲν Τύριοι διὰ τὴν ἐπίνοιαν τῶν
ὀργανοποιῶν πολλὰ πρὸς τὴν τειχομαχίαν εἶχον
8βοηθήματα. χαλκευσάμενοι γὰρ εὐμεγέθεις τριόδοντας
παρηγκιστρωμένους τούτοις ἔτυπτον ἐκ
χειρὸς τοὺς ἐπὶ τῶν πύργων καθεστῶτας. ἐμπηγνυμένων
δὲ εἰς τὰς ἀσπίδας τούτων καὶ κάλους
ἐχόντων προσδεδεμένους εἷλκον πρὸς ἑαυτοὺς ἐπιλαμβανόμενοι
9τῶν κάλων. ἀναγκαῖον οὖν ἦν ἢ
προΐεσθαι τὰ ὅπλα καὶ γυμνουμένους τὰ σώματα
κατατιτρώσκεσθαι πολλῶν φερομένων βελῶν ἢ
τηροῦντας τὰ ὅπλα διὰ τὴν αἰσχύνην πίπτειν ἀφ᾿
10ὑψηλῶν πύργων καὶ τελευτᾶν. ἄλλοι δ᾿ ἁλιευτικὰ
δίκτυα τοῖς ἐπὶ τῶν ἐπιβαθρῶν διαμαχομένοις ἐπιρριπτοῦντες
καὶ τὰς χεῖρας ἀχρήστους ποιοῦντες
κατέσπων καὶ περιεκύλιον ἀπὸ τῆς ἐπιβάθρας ἐπὶ
τὴν γῆν.
44. Ἕτερον δ᾿ ἐπενόησαν εὕρεμα φιλότεχνον κατὰ
τῆς τῶν Μακεδόνων ἀνδρείας, δι᾿ οὗ τοὺς ἀρίστους
τῶν πολεμίων ἀμηχάνοις καὶ δειναῖς περιέβαλον τιμωρίαις.
κατασκευάσαντες γὰρ ἀσπίδας χαλκᾶς
καὶ σιδηρᾶς καὶ ταύτας πληρώσαντες ἄμμου φλογὶ
πολλῇ συνεχῶς ὑπέκαιον καὶ διάπυρον κατεσκεύαζον
2τὴν ἄμμον. ταύτην δὲ διά τινος μηχανῆς τοῖς
242Book XVII

the city mainland, and sharp fighting took place along 332/1 b.c. the walls. The Tyrians had the present danger before their eyes and easily imagined what a disaster the actual capture of the city would be, so that they spent themselves so freely in the contest as to despise mortal danger. When the Macedonians moved up towers as high as the walls and in this way, extending bridges, boldly assaulted the battlements, the Tyrians fell back on the ingenuity of their engineers and applied many counter-measures to meet the assault. They forged great tridents armed with barbs and struck with these at close range the assailants standing on the towers. These stuck in the shields, and as ropes were attached to the tridents, they could haul on the ropes and pull them in. Their victims were faced with the alternative of releasing their arms and exposing their bodies to be wounded by the missiles which showered upon them, or clinging to their shields for shame and perishing in the fall from the lofty towers. Other Tyrians cast fishing nets over those Macedonians who were fighting their way across the bridges and, making their hands helpless, pulled them off and tumbled them down from bridge to earth.
44. They thought of another ingenious device also to offset the Macedonian fighting qualities, by which they involved the bravest of the enemy in a horrible torment which could not be avoided. They fashioned shields of bronze and iron and, filling them with sand, roasted them continuously over a strong fire and made the sand red hot. By means of a certain
243