Diodorus of Sicily

Πτολεμαίου στρατιώτας ἐπιδιεῖλεν εἰς τὰς ἰδίας
τάξεις, εἰς δὲ τὰς πόλεις παρεισήγαγε φρουρὰν τὴν
3ἀναγκάσουσαν πειθαρχεῖν τοὺς ἐνοικοῦντας. αὐτὸς
δ᾿ ἐπανελθὼν εἰς τὴν πρὸς Παλαιτύρῳ στρατοπεδείαν
παρεσκευάζετο τὰ πρὸς τὴν πολιορκίαν.
Ἐπὶ δὲ τῶν καιρῶν τούτων Ἀρίστων ὁ πιστευθεὶς
ὑπ᾿ Εὐμενοῦς τῶν ὀστῶν τῶν Κρατεροῦ παρέδωκεν
εἰς ταφὴν αὐτὰ Φίλᾳ τῇ πρότερον μὲν
Κρατερῷ συνοικούσῃ, τότε δὲ Δημητρίῳ τῷ Ἀντιγόνου.
4αὕτη δ᾿ ἡ γυνὴ συνέσει δοκεῖ διενηνοχέναι·
τούς τε γὰρ ταραχώδεις τῶν ἐν τῷ στρατοπέδῳ
κατέπαυεν ἁρμοζόντως πολιτευομένη πρὸς ἕκαστον,
τάς τε ἀδελφὰς καὶ θυγατέρας τῶν ἀπόρων ἐξεδίδου
τοῖς ἰδίοις δαπανήμασι, πολλοὺς δὲ καὶ τῶν
διαβολαῖς περιπιπτόντων μὴ δικαίαις ἀπήλλασσε
5τῶν κινδύνων. λέγεται δὲ καὶ Ἀντίπατρον τὸν
πατέρα αὐτῆς, ὃς δοκεῖ γεγονέναι φρονιμώτατος
τῶν ἐν δυναστείαις γεγονότων κατὰ τὴν αὐτὴν
ἡλικίαν, κόρης οὔσης ἔτι τῆς Φίλας συμβουλεύεσθαι
6πρὸς ταύτην περὶ τῶν μεγίστων. μηνύσει δ᾿
ἀκριβέστερον τὸ τῆς γυναικὸς ἦθος προϊὼν ὁ λόγος
καὶ τὰ πράγματα λαμβάνοντα μεταβολὴν καὶ κρίσιν
ἐσχάτην τῆς περὶ Δημήτριον βασιλείας.
Καὶ τὰ μὲν περὶ Ἀντίγονον καὶ Φίλαν τὴν Δημητρίου
γυναῖκα τοιαῦτ᾿ ἦν.
60. Τῶν δὲ πεμφθέντων ὑπ᾿ Ἀντιγόνου στρατηγῶν
Ἀριστόδημος μὲν πλεύσας εἰς τὴν Λακωνικὴν
καὶ λαβὼν παρὰ τῶν Σπαρτιατῶν ἐξουσίαν ξενολογεῖν,
στρατιώτας ἤθροισεν ὀκτακισχιλίους ἐκ τῆς
Πελοποννήσου. ἐντυχὼν δὲ Ἀλεξάνδρῳ καὶ Πολυπέρχοντι
394Book XIX

whom he captured he distributed among his own 315 b.c. ranks, but he placed in each city a garrison to force the inhabitants to obey him. He himself then went back to the camp at Old Tyre and made preparations for the siege.
At this time Ariston, to whose care the bones of Craterus1 had been entrusted by Eumenes, gave them for burial to Phila, who had formerly been the wife of Craterus, but now was married to Demetrius, the son of Antigonus. This woman seems to have been of exceptional sagacity; for example, she would quell the trouble-makers in the camp by dealing with each individual in a manner appropriate to his case, she would arrange marriages at her own expense for the sisters and daughters of the poor, and she would free from jeopardy many who had been trapped by false accusations. It is even said that her father Antipater, who is reputed to have been the wisest of the rulers of his own time, used to consult with Phila about the most important matters when she was still a child. But the character of the woman will be more clearly revealed by my narrative as it progresses and by the events that brought change and a final crisis to the reign of Demetrius.2
This was the situation of the affairs of Antigonus and of Phila, the wife of Demetrius.
60. Of the generals who had been sent out by Antigonus,3 Aristodemus sailed to Laconia and, on receiving permission from the Spartans to recruit mercenaries, enrolled eight thousand soldiers from the Peloponnesus. Meeting Alexander and Polyperchon,



1For Craterus’ death cp. Book 18. 30. 1–5.2The portion of the History referred to is lost.3Cp, chap, 57. 4–5.395