Diodorus of Sicily
4οὔτε γὰρ τοῖς στρατιώταις δυνατὸν ἦν πικρῶς
ἐπιτιμᾶν ἀμφισβητούντων πολλῶν τῆς στρατηγίας,
οὔτε τὸν καιρὸν ἐπιτήδειον ἑώρα κολάζειν τοὺς
ἀπειθοῦντας. ὁ δ᾿ Ἀντίγονος τοὐναντίον χωρὶς
δημαγωγίας βεβαίως ἔχων τὴν ἡγεμονίαν ἐβιάσατο
μὲν τὸ πλῆθος ἐπὶ τῶν νεκρῶν στρατοπεδεῦσαι,
κύριος δὲ γενόμενος τῆς τούτων ταφῆς ἠμφισβήτει
τῆς νίκης, ἀποφαινόμενος προτερεῖν ἐν ταῖς μάχαις
5τὸ τῶν πεσόντων κυριεῦσαι. ἀνῃρέθησαν δ᾿ ἐν τῇ
μάχῃ τῶν μὲν Ἀντιγόνου πεζοὶ μὲν τρισχιλίους
ἑπτακοσίους, ἱππεῖς δὲ πεντήκοντα τέσσαρες, τραυματίαι
δ᾿ ἐγένοντο πλείους τῶν τετρακισχιλίων·
τῶν δ᾿ Ἐυμενοῦς ἔπεσον πεζοὶ μὲν πεντακόσιοι
τεσσαράκοντα, ἱππεῖς δ᾿ ὀλίγοι παντελῶς, τραυματίαι
δ᾿ ἐγένοντο πλείους τῶν ἐννακοσίων.
32. Ὁ δ᾿ Ἀντίγονος μετὰ τὴν ἐκ τῆς μάχης
ἀποχώρησιν ὀρῶν τοὺς στρατιώτας ἀθυμοῦντας
διέγνω τὴν ταχίστην ἀναζευγνύειν ὡς πορρωτάτω
τῶν πολεμίων. βουλόμενος δ᾿ εὔζωνον ποιῆσαι
τὴν δύναμιν πρὸς τὴν ἀποχώρησιν τοὺς μὲν τραυματίας
καὶ τὰ βαρύτατα τῆς ἀποσκευῆς προαπέστειλεν
εἴς τινα τῶν πλησίον πόλεων, τοὺς δὲ
νεκροὺς ἅμ᾿ ἡμέρᾳ θάψας καὶ παρακατασχὼν τὸν
παρὰ τῶν πολεμίων ἥκοντα κήρυκα περὶ τῆς τῶν
νεκρῶν ἀναιρέσεως παρήγγειλε τῆς ὥρας δειπνοποιεῖσθαι.
2τῆς δ᾿ ἡμέρας διελθούσης τὸν μὲν
κήρυκα ἀπέπεμψε,1 δοὺς εἰς τὴν αὔριον τὴν ἀναίρεσιν,
αὐτὸς δὲ πρώτης φυλακῆς ἀρχομένης ἀνέζευξε
μετὰ πάσης τῆς δυνάμεως καὶ συντόνους
τὰς πορείας ποιούμενος ἀπέστη μὲν τῶν πολεμίων
μακράν, ἔσχε δὲ χώραν ἀκεραίαν εἰς ἀνάληψιν τοῦ

1ἀπέπεμψε Dindorf: ἔπεμψε.316Book XIX

punish the soldiers severely when there were many 317 b.c. who disputed his right to command, and he saw that the time was not suitable for chastising those who disobeyed. On the other hand, Antigonus, who firmly held the command without need of courting popular favour, forced his army to make camp by the bodies; and since he gained control of their burial, he claimed the victory, declaring that to possess the fallen is to be victorious in battle.1 In this battle three thousand seven hundred foot and fifty-four horse from the army of Antigonus were slain and more than four thousand men were wounded; five hundred and forty of Eumenes’ infantry and very few of his cavalry fell, and the wounded were more than nine hundred.
32. When after leaving the battle Antigonus saw that his men were disheartened, he decided to move as far as possible from the enemy with the utmost speed. Wishing to have the army unencumbered for the retirement, he sent the wounded men and the heaviest part of the baggage ahead to one of the neighbouring cities. He began to bury the dead at dawn and detained the herald who had come from the enemy to treat for the recovery of the bodies2; and he ordered his men to eat dinner at once. When the day had passed he sent the herald back, assigning the removal of the bodies to the next morning, but he himself at the beginning of the first watch broke camp with the whole army, and by making forced marches withdrew a long distance from the enemy and gained


1Cp., e.g., Book 17. 68. 4; Justin, 6. 6. 10; Xenophon, Hellenica, 7. 5. 26.2This was to prevent Eumenes from discovering that Antigonus’ losses were far greater than his own (Polyaenus, 4. 6. 10).317