Diodorus of Sicily

Διοσκουρίδην τὸν ἀδελφιδοῦν προσέταξε περιπλεῖν
τοῖς τε συμμάχοις παρεχόμενον τὴν ἀσφάλειαν καὶ
τῶν νήσων τὰς μήπω μετεχούσας τῆς συμμαχίας
προσαγόμενον.
Τὰ μὲν οὖν κατὰ τὸν Ἀντίγονον ἐν τούτοις ἦν.
63. Ἡμεῖς δ᾿ ἐπεὶ τὰ κατὰ τὴν Ἀσίαν πραχθέντα
διήλθομεν, ἐν μέρει πάλιν τὰ κατὰ τὴν Εὐρώπην
διέξιμεν. Ἀπολλωνίδης γὰρ ὁ ταχθεὶς ὑπὸ
Κασάνδρου στρατηγὸς ἐπὶ τῆς Ἀργείων πόλεως
ἐξοδεύσας εἰς Ἀρκαδίαν νυκτὸς ἐκυρίευσε τῆς τῶν
2Στυμφαλίων πόλεως· περὶ ταῦτα δ᾿ αὐτοῦ διατρίβοντος
τῶν Ἀργείων οἱ πρὸς Κάσανδρον ἀλλοτρίως
ἔχοντες ἐπεκαλέσαντο τὸν Πολυπέρχοντος Ἀλέξανδρον,
ἐπαγγελλόμενοι παραδώσειν τὴν πόλιν.
τοῦ δ᾿ Ἀλεξάνδρου βραδύνοντος Ἀπολλωνίδης
φθάσας κατήντησεν εἰς Ἄργος. τῶν δ᾿ ἐναντιουμένων
καταλαβὼν εἰς πεντακοσίους συνηδρευκότας
ἐν τῷ πρυτανείῳ τούτους μὲν ἀποκλείσας
τῆς ἐξόδου ζῶντας κατέκαυσε, τῶν δ᾿ ἄλλων τοὺς
μὲν πλείους ἐφυγάδευσεν, ὀλίγους δὲ συλλαβὼν
3ἀπέκτεινε. Κάσανδρος δὲ πυθόμενος τὸν Ἀριστοδήμου
κατάπλουν εἰς Πελοπόννησον καὶ τὸ συνηθροισμένον
πλῆθος τῶν ξένων τὸ μὲν πρῶτον
ἐπεχείρησεν ἀφιστάναι τοὺς περὶ1 Πολυπέρχοντα
τῆς Ἀντιγόνου φιλίας· οὐχ ὑπακουόντων δ᾿ αὐτῶν
συναγαγὼν δύναμιν ἧκε διὰ τῆς Θετταλίας
4εἰς Βοιωτίαν. ἐνταῦθα δὲ συνεπιλαβόμενος τοῖς
Θηβαίοις τῆς τῶν τειχῶν οἰκοδομίας παρῆλθεν εἰς
Πελοπόννησον· καὶ τὸ μὲν πρῶτον Κεγχρεὰς
ἐκπολιορκήσας ἐδῄωσε τὴν χώραν τῶν Κορινθίων,
μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα δύο φρούρια κατὰ κράτος ἑλὼν τοὺς
ὑπ᾿ Ἀλεξάνδρου καθεσταμένους φρουροὺς ὑποσπόνδους
1τοὺς περὶ Hertlein: τὸν.404Book XIX

whom he had made commander of the rest, to make 315 b.c. a circuit of the sea, guaranteeing the safety of the allies and winning the support of the islands that had not yet joined the alliance.
Such was the state of Antigonus’ affairs.1
63. Now that we have related the events that took place in Asia, we shall in turn discuss the affairs of Europe.2 Apollonides, who had been appointed general over Argos by Cassander, made a raid into Arcadia by night and captured the city of the Stymphalians. But while he was engaged in this, those of the Argives who were hostile to Cassander sent for Alexander, Polyperchon’s son, promising to hand the city over to him. Alexander, however, delayed, and Apollonides arrived back in Argos before him. Finding about five hundred of his antagonists gathered in the prytaneion, he prevented them from leaving the building and burned them alive. He exiled most of the others, but arrested and killed a few. When Cassander learned of Aristodemus’ arrival in the Peloponnesus and of the multitude of mercenaries that he had collected there,3 his first effort was to turn Polyperchon from his alliance with Antigonus. When Polyperchon, however, would not listen to him, he brought his army through Thessaly into Boeotia. After aiding the Thebans in building their walls, he went on into the Peloponnesus. First he took Cenchrcae4 and plundered the fields of the Corinthians. Then, after taking two fortresses by storm, he dismissed under a truce the garrisons that had been






1Continued in chap. 69.2Continued from chap. 54. 4.3Cp. chap. 60. 1.4The port of Corinth on the Saronic Gulf.405