Diodorus of Sicily

πραγμάτων μεταβολάς· καὶ γὰρ ἐτύγχανεν οἰκείως
ἔχων πρὸς τοῦτο τὸ ἔθνος.
53. Κάσανδρος δὲ συστησάμενος ἱκανὴν δύναμιν
ἀνέζευξεν ἐκ τῆς Μακεδονίας, σπεύδων Ἀλέξανδρον
τὸν Πολυπέρχοντος ἐκβαλεῖν ἐκ τῆς Πελοποννήσου·
οὗτος γὰρ ἦν λοιπὸς μετὰ δυνάμεως τῶν ἀντιπρασσόντων
καὶ κατειλήφει πόλεις τε καὶ τόπους
ἐπικαίρους. τὴν μὲν οὖν θεσσαλίαν ἀσφαλῶς
διῆλθεν, τὰς δ᾿ ἐν Πύλαις παρόδους εὑρὼν ὑπ᾿
Αἰτωλῶν φυλαττομένας μόγις τούτους βιασάμενος
2παρῆλθεν εἰς τὴν Βοιωτίαν. μεταπεμψάμενος δὲ
πανταχόθεν τοὺς διασωζομένους τῶν Θηβαίων ἐνεχείρει
κατοικίζειν τὰς Θήβας, ὑπολαβὼν κάλλιστον
ἔχειν καιρὸν πόλιν διωνομασμένην καὶ διὰ τὰς
πράξεις καὶ διὰ τοὺς παραδεδομένους περὶ αὐτῆς
μύθους ἀναστῆσαι καὶ διὰ τὴν εὐεργεσίαν ταύτην
3τυχεῖν ἀθανάτου δόξης. συμβέβηκε δὲ τὴν πόλιν
ταύτην πλείσταις καὶ μεγίσταις κεχρῆσθαι μεταβολαῖς,
οὐκ ὀλιγάκις ἀνάστατον γεγενημένην· περὶ ὧν
4οὐκ ἀνοίκειον ἐν κεφαλαίοις εἰπεῖν. μετὰ γὰρ τὸν
ἐπὶ Δευκαλίωνος κατακλυσμὸν Κάδμου κτίσαντος
τὴν ἀπ᾿ αὐτοῦ προσαγορευθεῖσαν Καδμείαν συνῆλθεν
ἐπ᾿ αὐτὴν λαὸς ὅν τινὲς μὲν Σπαρτὸν προσηγόρευσαν
διὰ τὸ πανταχόθεν συναχθῆναι, τινὲς δὲ Θηβαγενῆ




374Book XIX

for as it chanced he was on friendly terms with 316 b.c. this people.
53. But Cassander, after assembling an adequate force, set out from Macedonia, desiring to drive Polyperchon’s son Alexander from the Peloponnesus; for of those who opposed Cassander he alone was left with an army, and he had occupied strategically situated cities and districts. Cassander crossed Thessaly without loss, but when he found the pass at Thermopylae guarded by Aetolians, he with difficulty dislodged them and entered Boeotia. Summoning from all sides those of the Thebans who survived, he undertook to re-establish Thebes,1 for he assumed that this was a most excellent opportunity to set up once more a city that had been widely known both for its achievements and for the myths that had been handed down about it; and he supposed that by this benevolent act he would acquire undying fame. The fact is that this city has experienced many very great changes of fortune and has been destroyed on no few occasions; and it will not be out of place to recount here the chief events of its history. When, after the flood that occurred in the days of Deucalion, Cadmus built the Cadmeia,2 which was called after his name, there came together there with him a folk whom some call the Spartoi3 because they had been gathered together from all sides, and others the Thebagenes4
1Cp. Pausanias, 9. 7. 1–2. For the destruction of Thebes
cp. Book 17. 12 ff.2Cp. Book 4. 2. 1. The Cadmeia was the acropolis of
Thebes.3All ancient authorities derive the name from σπείρειν,
“to sow” or “scatter,” but with many different explanations.
The Spartoi are, variously, men who had been
scattered but were brought together by Cadmus, men sown or scattered among the other Thebans, the children of Cadmus himself born of many different mothers, or the offspring of the dragon’s teeth that had been sown by Cadmus. The last explanation is by far the commonest. Cp. scholium on Euripides, Phoenician Women, 670, and Turk in P.-W., Realmcyclopädie, 3 (2nd series), 1538–1540. For the foundation legend in general cp. Apollodorus, 3. 4. 1 ff.4i.e. “Theban-born.”375