Diodorus of Sicily
ΒΙΒΛΟΣ ΕΚΚΑΙΔΕΚΑΤΗ
1. Ἐν πάσαις μὲν ταῖς ἱστορικαῖς πραγματείαις
καθήκει τοὺς συγγραφεῖς περιλαμβάνειν ἐν ταῖς
βίβλοις ἢ πόλεων ἢ βασιλέων πράξεις αὐτοτελεῖς
ἀπ᾿ ἀρχῆς μέχρι τοῦ τέλους· οὕτως γὰρ μάλιστα
διαλαμβάνομεν τὴν ἱστορίαν εὐμνημόνευτον καὶ
2σαφῆ γενέσθαι τοῖς ἀναγινώσκουσιν. αἱ μὲν γὰρ
ἡμιτελεῖς πράξεις οὐκ ἔχουσαι συνεχὲς ταῖς ἀρχαῖς
τὸ πέρας μεσολαβοῦσι τὴν ἐπιθυμίαν τῶν φιλαναγνωστούντων,
αἱ δὲ τὸ τῆς διηγήσεως συνεχὲς περιλαμβάνουσαι
μέχρι τῆς τελευτῆς ἀπηρτισμένην τὴν
τῶν πράξεων ἔχουσιν ἀπαγγελίαν. ὅταν δ᾿ ἡ
φύσις αὐτὴ τῶν πραχθέντων συνεργῇ τοῖς συγγραφεῦσι,
τότ᾿ ἤδη παντελῶς οὐκ ἀποστατέον ταύτης
3τῆς προαιρέσεως. διόπερ καὶ ἡμεῖς παρόντες ἐπὶ
τὰς Φιλίππου τοῦ Ἀμύντου πράξεις πειρασόμεθα
τούτῳ τῷ βασιλεῖ τὰ πραχθέντα περιλαβεῖν ἐν
ταύτῃ τῇ βίβλῳ. οὗτος γὰρ εἴκοσι μὲν καὶ τέτταρα
ἔτη τῶν Μακεδόνων ἐβασίλευσεν, ἐλαχίσταις δὲ
ἀφορμαῖς χρησάμενος μεγίστην τῶν κατὰ τὴν
Εὐρώπην δυναστειῶν κατεσκεύασε τὴν ἰδίαν βασιλείαν
καὶ παραλαβὼν τὴν Μακεδονίαν δουλεύουσαν
Ἰλλυριοῖς πολλῶν καὶ μεγάλων ἐθνῶν καὶ πόλεων


232Book XVI
Book XVI
1. In all systematic historical treatises it behooves the historian to include in his books actions of states or of kings which are complete in themselves from beginning to end; for in this manner I conceive history to be most easy to remember and most intelligible to the reader. Now incomplete actions, the conclusion of which is unconnected with the beginning, interrupt the interest of the curious reader, whereas if the actions embrace a continuity of development culminating naturally, the narrative of events will achieve a well-rounded perfection. Whenever the natural pattern of events itself harmonizes with the task of the historian, from that point on he must not deviate at all from this principle.1 Consequently, now that I have reached the actions of Philip son of Amyntas, I shall endeavour to include the deeds performed by this king within the compass of the present Book. For Philip was king over the Macedonians for twenty-four years, and having started from the most insignificant beginnings built up his kingdom to be the greatest of the dominions in Europe, and having taken over Macedonia when she was a slave to the Illyrians, made her mistress of many

1In Book 1. 3 Diodorus sets forth his design for the
History. Inasmuch as it is a “universal history,” the fortunes
of a single man, e.g. Philip, might well be spread over a considerable compass, since the author pursues the chronological order. The fortunes of Philip have a particular advantage, in that Diodorus can deal with them compactly—he says here in a single book—and still maintain his chronological plan.233