Diodorus of Sicily

καὶ τὰ κατὰ τὰς Ἀθήνας ἀπογινώσκων
ἔφυγεν εἰς τὰς Θήβας, ὕστερον δὲ πρὸς Πτολεμαῖον
5εἰς Αἴγυπτον. οὗτος μὲν οὖν ἔτη δέκα τῆς πόλεως
ἐπιστατήσας ἐξέπεσεν ἐκ τῆς πατρίδος τὸν εἰρημένον
τρόπον. ὁ δὲ δῆμος τῶν Ἀθηναίων κομισάμενος
τὴν ἐλευθερίαν ἐψηφίσατο τιμὰς τοῖς αἰτίοις
τῆς αὐτονομίας.
Δημήτριος δ᾿ ἐπιστήσας τοὺς πετροβόλους καὶ
τὰς ἄλλας μηχανὰς καὶ τὰ βέλη προσέβαλλε τῇ
6Μουνυχίᾳ καὶ κατὰ γῆν καὶ κατὰ θάλατταν. ἀμυνομένων
δὲ τῶν ἔνδον ἀπὸ τῶν τειχῶν εὐρώστως
συνέβαινε τοὺς μὲν περὶ Διονύσιον προέχειν ταῖς
δυσχωρίαις καὶ ταῖς τῶν τόπων ὑπεροχαῖς, οὔσης
τῆς Μουνυχίας ὀχυρᾶς οὐ μόνον ἐκ φύσεως ἀλλὰ
καὶ ταῖς τῶν τειχῶν κατασκευαῖς, τοὺς δὲ περὶ τὸν
Δημήτριον τῷ τε πλήθει τῶν στρατιωτῶν πολλαπλασίους
εἶναι καὶ ταῖς παρασκευαῖς πολλὰ πλεονεκτεῖν.
7τέλος δ᾿ ἐπὶ δύο ἡμέρας συνεχῶς τῆς
πολιορκίας γινομένης οἱ μὲν φρουροὶ τοῖς καταπέλταις
καὶ πετροβόλοις συντιτρωσκόμενοι καὶ
διαδόχους οὐκ ἔχοντες ἠλαττοῦντο, οἱ δὲ περὶ τὸν
Δημήτριον ἐκ διαδοχῆς κινδυνεύοντες καὶ νεαλεῖς
ἀεὶ γινόμενοι, διὰ τῶν πετροβόλων ἐρημωθέντος
τοῦ τείχους, ἐνέπεσον εἰς τὴν Μουνυχίαν καὶ τοὺς
μὲν φρουροὺς ἠνάγκασαν θέσθαι τὰ ὅπλα, τὸν δὲ
φρούραρχον Διονύσιον ἐζώγρησαν.
46. Τούτων δὲ ὀλίγαις ἡμέραις κατευτυχηθέντων
ὁ μὲν Δημήτριος κατασκάψας τὴν Μουνυχίαν ὁλόκληρον
τῷ δήμῳ τὴν ἐλευθερίαν ἀποκατέστησεν καὶ
2φιλίαν καὶ συμμαχίαν πρὸς αὐτοὺς συνέθετο, οἱ δὲ
Ἀθηναῖοι γράψαντος ψήφισμα Στρατοκλέους ἐψηφίσαντο
266Book XX

up the direction of Athens, fled to Thebes and later 307 b.c. into Egypt to Ptolemy.1 And so this man, after he had been director of the city for ten years, was driven from his fatherland in the way described. The Athenian people, having recovered their freedom, decreed honours to those responsible for their liberation.
Demetrius, however, bringing up ballistae and the other engines of war and missiles, assaulted Munychia both by land and by sea. When those within defended themselves stoutly from the walls, it turned out that Dionysius had the advantage of the difficult terrain and the greater height of his position, for Munychia was strong both by nature and by the fortifications which had been constructed, but that Demetrius was many times superior in the number of his soldiers and had a great advantage in his equipment. Finally, after the attack had continued unremittingly for two days, the defenders, severely wounded by the catapults and the ballistae and not having any men to relieve them, had the worst of it; and the men of Demetrius, who were fighting in relays and were continually relieved, after the wall had been cleared by the ballistae, broke into Munychia, forced the garrison to lay down its arms, and took the commander Dionysius alive.2
46. After gaining these successes in a few days and razing Munychia completely, Demetrius restored to the people their freedom and established friendship and an alliance with them. The Athenians, Stratocles


1Cp. Diogenes Laertius, 5. 78; Strabo, 9. 1. 20 (p. 398).2Plutarch, Demetrius, 9, places the capture of Megara (cp. chap. 46. 3) between the surrender of Athens and the faking of Munychia.267