Diodorus of Sicily
67. Οἱ δὲ Θηβαῖοι πάντα τὰ προειρημένα
συντελέσαντες ἐν ἡμέραις ὀγδοήκοντα καὶ πέντε,
καὶ καταλιπόντες φυλακὴν ἀξιόλογον τῆς Μεσσήνης,
ἐπανῆλθον εἰς τὴν οἰκείαν. Λακεδαιμόνιοι
δὲ παραδόξως ἀποτετριμμένοι τοὺς πολεμίους,
ἀπέστειλαν πρεσβευτὰς εἰς τὰς Ἀθήνας τοὺς
ἐπιφανεστάτους τῶν Σπαρτιατῶν, καὶ τὰς μὲν ὁμολογίας
ἐποιήσαντο περὶ τῆς ἡγεμονίας, ὥστε τῆς
μὲν θαλάττης ἄρχειν Ἀθηναίους, τῆς δὲ γῆς τοὺς
Λακεδαιμονίους, μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα ἐν ἀμφοτέραις ταῖς
2πόλεσιν1 ἐποιήσαντο κοινὰς τὰς ἡγεμονίας. Ἀρκάδες
δὲ Λυκομήδην στρατηγὸν προχειρισάμενοι,
καὶ παραδόντες αὐτῷ τοὺς ἐπιλέκτους ὀνομαζομένους,
ὄντας πεντακισχιλίους, ἐστράτευσαν ἐπὶ
Πελλήνην2 τῆς Λακωνικῆς, καὶ τὴν μὲν3 πόλιν βίᾳ
χειρωσάμενοι τοὺς ἐγκαταλειφθέντας4 φρουροὺς τῶν
Λακεδαιμονίων ἀπέκτειναν, ὄντας. πλείους τῶν
τριακοσίων, τὴν δὲ πόλιν ἐξανδραποδισάμενοι καὶ
τὴν χώραν δῃώσαντες ἐπανῆλθον εἰς τὴν οἰκείαν,
φθάσαντες τὴν παρὰ τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων βοήθειαν.
3Βοιωτοὶ δέ, μεταπεμπομένων αὐτοὺς Θετταλῶν
ἐπ᾿ ἐλευθερώσει μὲν τῶν πόλεων καταλύσει δὲ τῆς
Ἀλεξάνδρου τοῦ Φεραίου τυραννίδος, ἐξαπέστειλαν
Πελοπίδαν μετὰ δυνάμεως εἰς Θετταλίαν, δόντες
ἐντολὰς αὐτῷ εἰς τὸ συμφέρον τῶν Βοιωτῶν διοικῆσαι
4τὰ κατὰ τὴν Θετταλίαν. οὗτος5 δὲ καταντήσας
εἰς Λάρισσαν, καὶ καταλαβὼν τὴν ἀκρόπολιν



1ταῖς πόλεσιν] deleted by Vogel but his reference (Xenophon,
Hell. 7. 1. 14) is indecisive.2Πελλήνην Palmer: Παλλίνην P, Παλλήνην Vulgate.3μὲν] placed after τοὺς by Dindorf.4So MSS. except F2J which have ἐγκαταληφθέντας.5So Schäfer: αὐτὸς.138Book XV
67. The Thebans, having accomplished in eighty-five 369/8 b.c. days1 all that is narrated above, and having left a considerable garrison for Messenê, returned to their own land; The Lacedaemonians, who had unexpectedly got rid of their enemies, sent to Athens a commission of the most distinguished Spartans, and came to an agreement over the supremacy: the Athenians should be masters of the sea, the Lacedaemonians of the land; but after this in both cities they set up a joint command.2 The Arcadians now appointed Lycomedes their general, gave him the corps they called their élite,3 five thousand in number, and took the field against Pellenê4 in Laconia. Having taken the city by force, they slew the Lacedaemonians who had been left behind there as a garrison, over three hundred men, enslaved the city, devastated the countryside, and returned home before assistance came from the Lacedaemonians. The Boeotians, summoned by the Thessalians to liberate their cities and to overthrow the tyranny of Alexander of Pherae, dispatched Pelopidas with an army to Thessaly,5 after giving him instructions to arrange Thessalian affairs in the interests of the Boeotians. Having arrived in Larissa and found the acropolis garrisoned by Alexander








1Three months in Plutarch, Agesilaüs, 32. 8.2Xenophon says (Hell. 7. 1. 14) that they each exercised alternate command of sea and land forces for periods of five days. See chap. 38. 4.3See chap. 62. 2.4Pellana in the Laconian dialect. Situated on the Eurotas River on the road from Sparta to Arcadia. See Xenophon, Hell. 7. 2. 2.5See Plutarch, Pelopidas, 26.139