Diodorus of Sicily
5ἀξιόλογον ἦγον. παραγενόμενοι δὲ πλησίον τῆς
τῶν Πλαταιέων πόλεως, ἀπροσδοκήτου τῆς ἐπιθέσεως
γενομένης, οἱ πλεῖστοι μὲν τῶν Πλαταιέων
ἐπὶ τῆς χώρας καταληφθέντες ὑπὸ τῶν ἱππέων
συνηρπάγησαν, οἱ δὲ λοιποὶ καταφυγόντες εἰς τὴν
πόλιν, καὶ συμμάχων ὄντες ἔρημοι, συνηναγκάσθησαν
ὁμολογίας συνθέσθαι τοῖς πολεμίοις εὐαρέστους·
ἔδει γὰρ αὐτοὺς τὰ ἔπιπλα λαβόντας ἀπελθεῖν ἐκ
τῆς πόλεως καὶ μηκέτι τῆς Βοιωτίας ἐπιβαίνειν.
6μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα οἱ μὲν Θηβαῖοι τὰς Πλαταιὰς κατασκάψαντες
καὶ Θεσπιὰς ἀλλοτρίως πρὸς αὐτοὺς
διακειμένας ἐξεπόρθησαν, οἱ δὲ Πλαταιεῖς εἰς
Ἀθήνας μετὰ τέκνων καὶ γυναικῶν φυγόντες τῆς
ἰσοπολιτείας ἔτυχον διὰ τὴν χρηστότητα τοῦ
δήμου.
Καὶ τὰ μὲν κατὰ Βοιωτίαν ἐν τούτοις ἦν.
47. Λακεδαιμόνιοι δὲ στρατηγὸν καταστήσαντες
Μνάσιππον ἐξαπέστειλαν ἐπὶ τὴν Κόρκυραν, ἔχοντα
τριήρεις μὲν ἑξήκοντα καὶ πέντε, στρατιώτας δὲ
χιλίους καὶ πεντακοσίους. οὗτος δὲ καταπλεύσας
εἰς τὴν νῆσον καὶ προσλαβόμενος τοὺς φυγάδας
εἰσέπλευσεν εἰς τὸν λιμένα καὶ τεττάρων μὲν νεῶν
ἐκυρίευσε, τῶν δὲ ὑπολοίπων τριῶν νεῶν φυγουσῶν
πρὸς τὴν γῆν, αὗται μὲν ἐνεπρήσθησαν ὑπὸ
τῶν Κορκυραίων, ἵνα μὴ τοῖς πολεμίοις ὑποχείριοι
γένωνται. ἐνίκησε δὲ καὶ πεζῇ τοὺς ἐπὶ τῇ γῇ



76Book XV

the Plataeans.1 They reached the neighbourhood of 374/3 b.c. Plataeae when the attack was not expected, so that a large number of the Plataeans were arrested in the fields and carried off by the cavalry, while the rest, who had escaped to the city, being helpless without any allies, were forced to make a covenant agreeable to their enemies; they were obliged, namely, to depart from the city with their movable possessions and never again to set foot on Boeotian soil. Thereupon the Thebans, having razed Plataeae completely, pillaged Thespiae2 as well, which was at odds with them. The Plataeans with their wives and children, having fled to Athens, received equality of civic rights3 as a mark of favour from the Athenian people.
Such was the state of affairs in Boeotia.
47. The Lacedaemonians appointed Mnasippus4 general and ordered him to proceed to Corcyra with sixty-five triremes, his forces consisting of fifteen hundred soldiers. Touching at the island, he picked up the exiles, then sailed into the harbour and captured four ships, the three remaining ships having fled to the shore, where they were burned by the Corcyraeans to prevent their falling into the hands of the enemy. He also defeated with his infantry


1See also Xenophon, Hell 6. 3. 1 and 5; Isocrates,
Plataïcus; Pausanias, 9. 1. 8, sets the fall of Plataeae in 373/2
when Asteius was archon.2See chap. 51. 3 and Xenophon, Hell. 6. 3. 1. Pausanias,
9. 14, seems to place the destruction of Thespiae after the
battle of Leuctra.3A privilege rarely accorded by the Athenians in these days. The democrats of Samos had been accorded this privilege near the close of the Peloponnesian War. The Plataeans had been granted citizenship in the same war and Meyer (Geschichte des Altertums, 5. 399) contends that this still held. This grant of ἰσοπολιτεία seems not to have been of the Hellenistic type (W. S. Ferguson, Greek Imperialism, 31), by which the citizen of one state enjoyed certain privileges (cp. civitas sine suffragio) in another state during residence there.4Late summer 373 (Beloch, Griechische Geschichte2, 3. 1. 158). See Xenophon, Hell. 6. 2. 3–15.77