Diodorus of Sicily

τὴν ἐπὶ τοὺς Γανδαρίδας στρατείαν οὖσαν, ὅμως
οὐκ ἀφίστατο τῆς φιλοτιμίας, ἀλλὰ πιστεύων1 ταῖς
τῶν Μακεδόνων ἀρεταῖς καὶ τοῖς χρησμοῖς ἐλπίδας
εἶχε κρατήσειν τῶν βαρβάρων· τὴν μὲν γὰρ Πυθίαν
ἀνίκητον αὐτὸν ὠνομακέναι, τὸν δ᾿ Ἄμμωνα
συγκεχωρηκέναι τὴν ἁπάσης τῆς γῆς ἐξουσίαν.
94. Ὁρῶν δὲ τοὺς στρατιώτας ταῖς συνεχέσι
στρατείαις καταπεπονημένους καὶ σχεδὸν ὀκταετῆ
χρόνον ἐν πόνοις καὶ κινδύνοις τεταλαιπωρηκότας
ὐπέλαβεν ἀναγκαῖον εἶναι τὰ πλήθη τοῖς ἁρμόζουσι
λόγοις προτρέψασθαι πρὸς τὴν ἐπὶ τοὺς Γανδαρίδας
2στρατείαν. πολλὴ μὲν γὰρ φθορὰ τῶν στρατιωτῶν
ἐγεγόνει καὶ λύσις οὐδεμία τῶν πολέμων ἠλπίζετο·
καὶ τῶν μὲν ἵππων διὰ τὴν συνέχειαν τῆς ὁδοιπορίας
τὰς ὁπλὰς ὑποτετρῖφθαι συνέβαινε, τῶν δὲ ὅπλων
τὰ πλεῖστα κατεξάνθαι καὶ τὸν μὲν Ἑλληνικὸν
ἱματισμὸν ἐκλελοιπέναι, συναναγκάζεσθαι δὲ βαρβαρικοῖς
ὑφάσμασι χρῆσθαι, συντεμόντας τὰ τῶν
3Ἰνδῶν περιβλήματα. κατὰ τύχην δὲ καὶ χειμῶνες
ἄγριοι κατερράγησαν ἐφ᾿ ἡμέρας ἑβδομήκοντα καὶ
βρονταὶ συνεχεῖς καὶ κεραυνοὶ κατέσκηπτον.
Ἃ δὴ λογιζόμενος ἐναντιοῦσθαι ταῖς ἰδίαις ἐπιβολαῖς
μίαν εἶχεν ἐλπίδα τῆς ἐπιθυμίας,2 εἰ τοὺς
στρατιώτας διὰ τῆς εὐεργεσίας εἰς εὔνοιαν μεγάλην
4προαγάγοιτο. διόπερ λεηλατεῖν μὲν αὐτοῖς συνεχώρησε

1πρωτεύων codd.; corrected by Rhodoman.2Fischer adds τυχεῖν, which certainly makes the passage read more easily.390Book XVII

would not be easy, but he was not discouraged. 326/5 b.c. He had confidence in the fighting qualities of his Macedonians, as well as in the oracles which he had received, and expected that he would be victorious. He remembered that the Pythia had called him “unconquerable,” and Ammon had given him the rule of the whole world.1
94. Alexander observed that his soldiers were exhausted with their constant campaigns.2 They had spent almost eight years among toils and dangers, and it was necessary to raise their spirits by an effective appeal if they were to undertake the expedition against the Gandaridae. There had been many losses among the soldiers, and no relief from fighting was in sight. The hooves of the horses had been worn thin by steady marching. The arms and armour were wearing out, and Greek clothing was quite gone. They had to clothe themselves in foreign materials, recutting the garments of the Indians.3 This was the season also, as luck would have it, of the heavy rains. These had been going on for seventy days, to the accompaniment of continuous thunder and lightning.
All this he accounted adverse to his project, and he saw only one hope of gaining his wish, if he might gain the soldiers’ great goodwill through gratitude. Accordingly he allowed them to ravage the enemy’s





1For the consultation of Ammon cp. chap. 51 above. The Pythian story is mentioned otherwise only by Plutarch, Alexander, 14. 4.2Curtius, 9. 2. 8–11. This reflection on the sad state of his soldiers is lacking in Arrian.3Curtius, 9. 3. 10; Arrian, Indica, 6. 5.391