Diodorus of Sicily

διαφθαρῆναι. οὐκ ὄντος δὲ φανεροῦ παρ᾿ ὁποτέροις
γενήσεται τὸ ἀτύχημα, συνέβαινε δεισιδαιμονεῖν τὰ
στρατόπεδα καὶ πρὸς μάχην ὀκνηρῶς ἔχειν.
3διόπερ ἐπὶ πολὺν χρόνον οὐδέτεροι τὸν ποταμὸν
ἐτόλμων διαβαίνειν ἀθρόοις στρατιώταις ἕως ὅτου
παράλογός τις αἰτία προεκαλέσατο αὐτοὺς εἰς τὸν
ὁλοσχερῆ κίνδυνον. τῶν γὰρ Λιβύων κατατρεχόντων
τὴν πολεμίαν Ἀγαθοκλῆς παρωξύνθη τὸ παραπλήσιον
ποιῆσαι. ἀγόντων δὲ λείαν τῶν Ἑλλήνων
καί τινα τῶν ἀπὸ τῆς παρεμβολῆς ὑποζυγίων ἀπαγαγόντων
ἐπεξῆλθον ἐκ τοῦ Καρχηδονίων χάρακος
4οἱ τούτους διώξοντες. ὁ δ᾿ Ἀγαθοκλῆς προϊδόμενος
τὸ μέλλον ἔσεσθαι παρὰ τὸν ποταμὸν ἔθηκεν
ἐνέδραν ἀνδρῶν ἐπιλέκτων ταῖς ἀρεταῖς. οὗτοι δέ,
τῶν Καρχηδονίων τοὺς τὴν λείαν ἄγοντας ἐπιδιωκόντων
καὶ διαβάντων τὸν ποταμόν, ἐξανέστησαν
ἐκ τῆς ἐνέδρας ἄφνω καὶ προσπεσόντες ἀτάκτοις
5ῥᾳδίως ἐτρέψαντο. φονευομένων δὲ τῶν βαρβάρων
καὶ πρὸς τὴν ἰδίαν παρεμβολὴν φευγόντων Ἀγαθοκλῆς,
νομίσας ἥκειν τὸν καιρὸν τοῦ διαγωνίσασθαι,
πᾶσαν ἤγαγε τὴν δύναμιν ἐπὶ τὴν τῶν
πολεμίων στρατοπεδείαν. προσπεσὼν δ᾿ αὐτοῖς
ἀπροσδοκήτως καὶ ταχὺ μέρος τῆς τάφρου χώσας
ἀνέσπασε τὸν χάρακα καὶ βιαζόμενος εἰς τὴν παρεμβολὴν
6παρεισέπεσεν. οἱ δὲ Καρχηδόνιοι διά τε
τὸ παράδοξον καταπεπληγμένοι καὶ πρὸς ἔκταξιν
οὐ δυνάμενοι λαβεῖν ἀναστροφήν, ὡς ἔτυχε τοῖς
πολεμίοις ἀπήντων καὶ ἠγωνίζοντο. περὶ δὲ τὴν
τάφρον ἀμφοτέρων ἐρρωμένως κινδυνευόντων ταχὺ
πᾶς ὁ πλησίον τόπος νεκρῶν κατεστρώθη· οἵ τε
γὰρ τῶν Καρχηδονίων ἐπιφανέστατοι τὴν παρεμβολὴν
ὁρῶντες ἁλισκομένην ἐβοήθουν, οἵ τε περὶ
126Book XIX

battle. Since, however, it was not clear to which 311 b.c. of the two sides the misfortune would happen, the armies were filled with superstitious fear and shrank from battle. Therefore for a long time neither dared to cross the river in force, until an unexpected cause brought them into general battle. The raids made by the Libyans through the enemy’s country aroused Agathocles into doing the same; and while the Greeks were engaged in plundering and were driving away some beasts of burden taken from the Carthaginian camp, soldiers issued from that encampment to pursue them. Agathocles, foreseeing what was about to happen, placed beside the river an ambush of men selected for courage. These, as the Carthaginians crossed the river in their pursuit of those who were driving the beasts, sprang suddenly from the ambush, fell upon the disordered soldiers, and easily drove them back. While the barbarians were being slaughtered and were fleeing to their own camp, Agathocles, thinking that the time had come to fight to a finish, led his whole army against the camp of the enemy. Falling on them unexpectedly and quickly filling up a part of the moat, he overthrew the palisade and forced an entrance into the camp. The Carthaginians, who had been thrown into a panic by the unexpected attack and could find no opportunity for forming their lines, faced the enemy and fought against them at random. Both sides fought fiercely for the moat, and the whole place round about was quickly covered with dead; for the most notable of the Carthaginians rushed up to give aid when they saw the camp being taken,
127