Diodorus of Sicily

συνηθροίκει μὲν τὰς πανταχόθεν δυνάμεις καὶ πάντα
τὰ πρὸς τὴν παράταξιν χρήσιμα κατεσκεύαστο. τὰ
μὲν γὰρ ξίφη καὶ τὰ ξυστὰ πολὺ μείζω τῶν προγεγενημένων
ἐποίησε διὰ τὸ δοκεῖν διὰ τούτων
πολλὰ τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον ἐν τῇ περὶ Κιλικίαν μάχῃ
πεπλεονεκτηκέναι· κατεσκεύασε δὲ καὶ ἅρματα
δρεπανηφόρα διακόσια πρὸς κατάπληξιν καὶ φόβον
2τῶν πολεμίων εὐθέτως ἐπινενοημένα. τούτων γὰρ
ἑκάστου παρ᾿ ἑκάτερον τῶν σειροφόρων1 ἵππων
ἐξέκειτο προσηλωμένα τῷ ζυγῷ ξῦστρα παραμήκη
τρισπίθαμα, τὴν ἐπιστροφὴν τῆς ἀκμῆς ἔχοντα πρὸς
τὴν κατὰ πρόσωπον ἐπιφάνειαν, πρὸς δὲ ταῖς κατακλείσεσι2
τῶν ἀξόνων ἐπ᾿ εὐθείας ἄλλα δύο, τὴν
μὲν τομὴν ὁμοίαν ἔχοντα πρὸς τὴν κατὰ πρόσωπον
ἐπιφάνειαν τοῖς προτέροις, τὸ δὲ μῆκος μείζω καὶ
πλατύτερα· συνήρμοστο δὲ ταῖς τούτων ἀρχαῖς
δρέπανα.
3Πᾶσαν δὲ τὴν δύναμιν ἔν τε ὅπλοις ἐπισήμοις
καὶ ἡγεμόνων ἀρεταῖς κοσμήσας ἀνέζευξεν ἐκ τῆς
Βαβυλῶνος ἔχων πεζοὺς μὲν περὶ ὀγδοήκοντα μυριάδας,
ἱππεῖς δὲ οὐκ ἐλάττους τῶν εἴκοσι μυριάδων.
κατὰ δὲ τὴν ὁδοιπορίαν δεξιὸν μὲν ἔχων τὸν Τίγριν,
ἀριστερὸν δὲ τὸν Εὐφράτην προῄει διὰ χώρας
εὐδαίμονος καὶ δυναμένης τοῖς κτήνεσι δαψιλῆ
χορτάσματα παρασχέσθαι, τῷ δὲ πλήθει τῶν στρατιωτῶν


1σειροφόρων F; σιροφόρων cett.2κατακλείσεσι Bosius and Reiske; κατακλίσεσι codd.270Book XVII

had already assembled his forces from all directions 331/0 b.c. and made everything ready for the battle. He had fashioned swords and lances much longer than his earlier types because it was thought that Alexander had had a great advantage in this respect in the battle in Cilicia. He had also constructed two hundred scythe-bearing chariots well designed to astonish and terrify the enemy.1 From each of these there projected out beyond the trace horses scythes three spans long,2 attached to the yoke, and presenting their cutting edges to the front. At the axle housings there were two more scythes pointing straight out with their cutting edges turned to the front like the others, but longer and broader. Curved blades were fitted to the ends of these.3
All of the force the king adorned with shining armour and with brilliant commanders. As he marched out of Babylon, he had with him eight hundred thousand infantry and no less than two hundred thousand cavalry.4 He kept the Tigris on the right of his route and the Euphrates on the left, and proceeded through a rich country capable of furnishing ample fodder for the animals and food enough for so




1Curtius, 4. 9. 3–5; Arrian, 3. 8. 6.2About twenty-seven inches.3Curtius, 4. 9. 5 is a little clearer than Diodorus. He adds that a spear projected forward from the end of the chariot pole and that blades below the chariot reached towards the ground. He also mentions swords projecting from both ends of the yoke, as would be possible in a two-horse chariot. But Diodorus’s trace horses would seem to make these impossible.4The Persian forces numbered 500,000 according to Justin (11. 12. 5), 1,000,000 according to Plutarch (Alexander, 31. 1), 1,000,000 foot and 40,000 horse according to Arrian (3. 8. 6). Curtius gives the totals later (4. 12. 13) and more reasonably: 45,000 horse and 200,000 infantry.271