Diodorus of Sicily

τάττεσθαι καὶ ὅποι προαιροῖτο τιμήσασθαι.1 τὸ
δ᾿ ὅλον, ὁρῶν τεθησαυρισμένον κατ᾿ αὐτοῦ παρὰ
τοῖς ἐπιφανεστάτοις τὸν φθόνον, ἐξέκλινε τὸ προσκόπτειν
τισὶ τῶν ἄλλων πολιτῶν, ἀντίταγμα κατασκευάζων
τῇ τῶν εὐγενῶν ἀλλοτριότητι τὴν παρὰ
5τῶν πολλῶν εὔνοιαν. καὶ κατὰ μὲν τὴν τῶν
ἱππέων δοκιμασίαν οὐδενὸς ἀφείλετο τὸν ἵππον,
κατὰ δὲ τὴν τῶν συνέδρων καταγραφὴν οὐδένα
τῶν ἀδοξούντων συγκλητικῶν ἐξέβαλεν, ὅπερ ἦν
ἔθος ποιεῖν τοῖς τιμηταῖς. εἶθ᾿ οἱ μὲν ὕπατοι διὰ
τὸν φθόνον καὶ διὰ τὸ βούλεσθαι τοῖς ἐπιφανεστάτοις
χαρίζεσθαι συνῆγον τὴν σύγκλητον οὐ τὴν
ὑπὸ τούτου καταλεγεῖσαν, ἀλλὰ τὴν ὑπὸ τῶν προγεγενημένων
6τιμητῶν καταγραφεῖσαν· ὁ δὲ δῆμος
τούτοις μὲν ἀντιπράττων τῷ δὲ Ἀππίῳ συμφιλοτιμούμενος
καὶ τὴν τῶν συγγενῶν προαγωγὴν
βεβαιῶσαι βουλόμενος ἀγορανόμον εἵλετο τῆς ἐπιφανεστέρας
ἀγορανομίας υἱὸν ἀπελευθέρου Γναῖον
Φλάυιον, ὃς πρῶτος Ῥωμαίων ἔτυχε ταύτης τῆς
ἀρχῆς πατρὸς ὢν δεδουλευκότος. ὁ δ᾿ Ἄππιος
τῆς ἀρχῆς ἀπολυθεὶς καὶ τὸν ἀπὸ τῆς συγκλήτου
φθόνον εὐλαβηθεὶς προσεποιήθη τυφλὸς εἶναι καὶ
κατ᾿ οἰκίαν ἔμενεν.
37. Ἐπ᾿ ἄρχοντος δ᾿ Ἀθήνησι Χαρίνου Ῥωμαῖοι
μὲν τὴν ὕπατον ἀρχὴν παρέδοσαν Ποπλίῳ

1ἔδωκε δὲ . . . τιμήσασθαι Fischer. ἔδωκε δὲ καὶ τοῖς πολίταις
τὴν ἐξουσίαν ὅπου προαιροῖντο τιμήσασθαι Dindorf: ἔδωκε δὲ
τοῖς πολίταις ἐξουσίαν ἐν ὁποίᾳ τις βούλεται φυλῇ τάττεσθαι καὶ τὴν ἐξουσίαν ὅποι προαιροῖτο τιμήσασθαι RX; ἔδωκε δὲ καὶ τοῖς πολίταις ἐξουσίαν ὅποι προαιροῖντο τιμήσασθαι καὶ ἐν ὁποίᾳ τις βούλεται φυλῇ τάττεσθαι F.238Book XX

he wished, and to be placed in the census class he 309 b.c. preferred.1 In short, seeing hatred toward himself treasured up by the most distinguished men, he avoided giving offence to any of the other citizens, securing as a counterpoise against the hostility of the nobles the goodwill of the many. At the inspection of the equestrian order he deprived no man of his horse, and in drawing up the album of the Senate he removed no one of the unworthy Senators, which it was the custom of the censors to do. Then the consuls, because of their hatred for him and their desire to please the most distinguished men, called together the Senate, not as it had been listed by him but as it had been entered in the album by the preceding censors; and the people in opposition to the nobles and in support of Appius, wishing also to establish firmly the promotion of their own class, elected to the more distinguished of the aedileships the son of a freedman, Gnaeus Flavius, who was the first Roman whose father had been a slave to gain that office.2 When Appius had completed his term of office, as a precaution against the ill will of the Senate, he professed to be blind and remained in his house.3
37. When Charinus was archon at Athens, the 308 b.c. Romans gave the consulship to Publius Decius and





1Cp. Livy, 9. 46. 10–11. Dindorf, followed by Mommsen (Römische Forschungen, 1. 307), omits “to be enrolled in whatever tribe he wished, and.”2For the aedileship of Flavius cp. Livy, 9. 46, where it is placed five years later.3Continued in chap. 44. 8.239