Diodorus of Sicily

φίλων ἀνῃρέθη, ἡ δὲ γυνὴ Κρατησίπολις διαδεξαμένη
τὰ πράγματα συνεῖχε τὸ στρατόπεδον,
ἀγαπωμένη διαφερόντως ὑπὸ τῶν στρατιωτῶν διὰ
τὰς εὐεργεσίας· διετέλει γὰρ βοηθοῦσα τοῖς ἀτυχοῦσι
καὶ πολλοὺς τῶν ἀπόρων ὑπολαμβάνουσα.
2ἦν δὲ περὶ αὐτὴν καὶ σύνεσις πραγματικὴ καὶ τόλμα
μείζων ἢ κατὰ γυναῖκα· τῶν γὰρ Σικυωνίων καταφρονησάντων
αὐτῆς διὰ τὴν τοῦ ἀνδρὸς τελευτὴν
καὶ συνδραμόντων μετὰ τῶν ὅπλων ἐπὶ τὴν ἐλευθερίαν,
παραταξαμένη καὶ νικήσασα πολλοὺς μὲν
ἀνεῖλε, συλλαβοῦσα δὲ περὶ τριάκοντα τὸν ἀριθμὸν
ἀνεσταύρωσεν. ἀσφαλισαμένη δὲ τὰ κατὰ τὴν
πόλιν ἐδυνάστευε τῶν Σικυωνίων, ἔχουσα πολλοὺς
στρατιώτας ἑτοίμους εἰς πάντα κίνδυνον.
Καὶ τὰ μὲν περὶ Πελοπόννησον ἐν τούτοις ἦν.
3Κάσανδρος δ᾿ ὁρῶν τοὺς Αἰτωλοὺς συναγωνιζομένους
μὲν Ἀντιγόνῳ πόλεμον δ᾿ ἔχοντας ὅμορον
πρὸς Ἀκαρνᾶνας ἔκρινε συμφέρειν ἅμα συμμάχους
μὲν Ἀκαρνᾶνας ποιήσασθαι ταπεινῶσαι δὲ τοὺς
Αἰτωλούς. διόπερ ἀναζεύξας ἐκ Μακεδονίας μετὰ
δυνάμεως μεγάλης ἧκεν εἰς Αἰτωλίαν καὶ κατεστρατοπέδευσεν
περὶ τὸν καλούμενον Καμπύλον
4ποταμόν· συναγαγὼν δὲ τοὺς Ἀκαρνᾶνας εἰς κοινὴν
ἐκκλησίαν καὶ διελθὼν ὅτι πόλεμον ἔχουσιν ὅμορον
ἐκ παλαιῶν χρόνων, συνεβούλευεν ἐκ τῶν ἀνοχύρων1
καὶ μικρῶν χωρίων εἰς ὀλίγας πόλεις μετοικῆσαι,
ὅπως μὴ διεσπαρμένης τῆς οἰκήσεως ἀδυνατῶσιν



1ἀνοχύρων Reiske, ἀνωχύρων Dindorf: ὀχυρῶν.12Book XIX

wife, Cratesipolis,1 however, succeeded to his power 314 b.c. and held his army together, since she was most highly esteemed by the soldiers for her acts of kindness; for it was her habit to aid those who were in misfortune and to assist many of those who were without resources. She possessed, too, skill in practical matters and more daring than one would expect in a woman. Indeed, when the people of Sicyon scorned her because of her husband’s death and assembled under arms in an effort to gain their freedom, she drew up her forces against them and defeated them with great slaughter, but arrested and crucified about thirty. When she had a firm hold on the city, she governed the Sicyonians, maintaining many soldiers, who were ready for any emergency.
Such, then, was the situation in the Peloponnesus.
When Cassander saw that the Aetolians were supporting Antigonus and were also engaged in a border war with the Acarnanians, he decided that it was to his advantage at a single stroke to make the Acarnanians his allies and to humble the Aetolians. For this reason, setting out from Macedonia with a large army, he moved into Aetolia and camped beside the river called the Campylus.2 When he had summoned the Acarnanians to a common assembly and had related to them in detail how they had been engaged in border warfare from ancient days, he advised them to move from their villages, which were small and unfortified, into a few cities so that they would no longer, because their homes
 
1It is probable that this name (literally, “conqueror of
the city,” cp. such a poetic word as κρατησίμαχος, Pindar, Pythian Odes, 9. 150), which is not found elsewhere, was conferred upon the princess after the episode here related. She held Sicyon for Polyperchon for some years, surrendering it to Ptolemy in 308 b.c., cp. Book 20. 37. 1.2A tributary of the Acheloüs.13