Diodorus of Sicily

Σικυωνίους ἀνέζευξε μετὰ πάσης τῆς δυνάμεως
ἐπὶ τὴν Κόρινθον, ἣν ἐφρούρει Πρεπέλαος Κασάνδρου
στρατηγός. τὸ μὲν οὖν πρῶτον νυκτὸς ὑπό
τινων πολιτῶν εἰσαχθεὶς διά τινος πυλίδος ἐκράτησε
2τῆς πόλεως καὶ τῶν λιμένων. τῶν δὲ φρουρῶν
καταφυγόντων τῶν μὲν εἰς τὸ καλούμενον Σισύφιον,
τῶν δ᾿ εἰς τὸν Ἀκροκόρινθον, προσαγαγὼν μηχανὰς
τοῖς ὀχυρώμασι καὶ πολλὰ κακοπαθήσας εἷλε τὸ
Σισύφιον κατὰ κράτος. εἶτα τῶν ἐνταῦθα1 συμφυγόντων
πρὸς τοὺς κατειληφότας τὸν Ἀκροκόρινθον
καὶ τούτους καταπληξάμενος ἠνάγκασε
3παραδοῦναι τὴν ἄκραν· σφόδρα γὰρ ἦν ἀνυπόστατος
οὗτος ὁ βασιλεὺς ἐν ταῖς προσβολαῖς, εὐμήχανος
ὑπάρχων περὶ τὴν κατασκευὴν τῶν πολιορκητικῶν
ἔργων. οὐ μὴν ἀλλὰ τοὺς Κορινθίους ἐλευθερώσας
παρεισήγαγε φυλακὴν εἰς τὸν Ἀκροκόρινθον, βουλομένων
τῶν πολιτῶν διὰ τοῦ βασιλέως τηρεῖσθαι
τὴν πόλιν μέχρι ἂν ὁ πρὸς Κάσανδρον καταλυθῇ
4πόλεμος. καὶ Πρεπέλαος μὲν αἰσχρῶς ἐκπεσὼν ἐκ
τῆς Κορίνθου πρὸς Κάσανδρον ἀπεχώρησεν, Δημήτριος
δὲ παρελθὼν εἰς τὴν Ἀχαΐαν Βοῦραν μὲν κατὰ
κράτος εἷλε καὶ τοῖς πολίταις ἀπέδωκε τὴν αὐτονομίαν,
Σκύρον2 δ᾿ ἐν ὀλίγαις ἡμέραις παραλαβὼν
5ἐξέβαλε τὴν φρουράν. μετὰ δὲ ταῦτ᾿ ἐπ᾿ Ὀρχομενὸν
τῆς Ἀρκαδίας στρατεύσας ἐκέλευσε τῷ τῆς
φρουρᾶς ἀφηγουμένῳ Στρομβίχῳ παραδοῦναι τὴν
πόλιν. οὐ προσέχοντος δ᾿ αὐτοῦ τοῖς λόγοις ἀλλὰ
καὶ πολλὰ λοιδοροῦντος ἀπὸ τοῦ τείχους βλασφήμως
προσαγαγὼν μηχανὰς ὁ βασιλεὺς καὶ καταβαλὼν
6τὰ τείχη κατὰ κράτος εἷλε τὴν πόλιν. τὸν μὲν οὖν
Στρόμβιχον τὸν ὑπὸ Πολυπέρχοντος καθεσταμένον

1ἐνταῦθα Hertlein: ἐν ταύτῃ.2Σκίρον Wesseiing.416Book XX

people of Sicyon, he set out with his whole army for 303 b.c. Corinth, which was held by Prepelaüs, a general of Cassander. At first, after he had been admitted at night by certain citizens through a postern gate, Demetrius gained possession of the city and its harbours. The garrison, however, fled, some to the place called Sisyphium,1 some to Acrocorinth; but he brought up engines of war to the fortifications and took Sisyphium by storm after suffering heavy losses. Then, when the men there fled to those who had occupied Acrocorinth, he intimidated them also and forced them to surrender the citadel; for this king was exceedingly irresistible in his assaults, being particularly skilled in the construction of siege equipment. Be that as it may, when once he had freed the Corinthians he brought a garrison into Acrocorinth, since the citizens wished the city to be protected by the king until the war with Cassander should be brought to an end. Prepelaüs, ignominiously driven out of Corinth, withdrew to Cassander, but Demetrius, advancing into Achaia, took Bura by storm and restored autonomy to its citizens; then, capturing Scyrus in a few days, he cast out its garrison. After this, making a campaign against Arcadian Orchomenus, he ordered the garrison commander, Strombichus, to surrender the city. When he paid no attention to the orders but even poured much abuse upon him from the wall in an insulting manner, the king brought up engines of war, overthrew the walls, and took the city by storm. As for Strombichus, who had been made garrison-commander by Polyperchon,



1Sisyphium is on the slope of Acrocorinth below Peirenê, Strabo, 8. 6. 21.417