Diodorus of Sicily

προκαταληψόμενος, ἀπαντήσας τοῖς ὑπ᾿ Ὀλυμπιάδος
ἐξαποσταλεῖσι στρατιώταις ἔφθασε τῶν παρόδων
4κυριεύσας. Ὀλυμπιὰς δὲ πυθομένη Κάσανδρον
μετὰ μεγάλης δυνάμεως πλησίον εἶναι τῆς Μακεδονίας,
Ἀριστόνουν μὲν ἀπέδειξε στρατηγόν,
5κελεύσασα διαπολεμεῖν τοῖς περὶ Κάσανδρον, αὐτὴ
δὲ παρῆλθεν εἰς Πύδναν ἔχουσα τὸν υἱὸν τὸν
Ἀλεξάνδρου καὶ τὴν μητέρα αὐτοῦ Ῥωξάνην καὶ
Θετταλονίκην τὴν Φιλίππου τοῦ Ἀμύντου θυγατέρα,
πρὸς δὲ τούτοις Δηιδάμειάν τε τὴν Αἰακίδου
θυγατέρα τοῦ βασιλέως τῶν Ἠπειρωτῶν, Πύρρου
δὲ1 τοῦ πρὸς Ῥωμαίους ὕστερον πολεμήσαντος
ἀδελφήν, καὶ τὰς Ἀττάλου θυγατέρας, ὁμοίως δὲ
καὶ τῶν ἄλλων τῶν ἀξιολογωτάτων φίλων τοὺς
συγγενεῖς, ὥστ᾿ ἀθροισθῆναι περὶ αὐτὴν πλῆθος μὲν
πολὺ σωμάτων, ἀχρείων δ᾿ εἰς πόλεμον τῶν πλείστων·
οὐδὲ γὰρ τροφῆς ἱκανὸν ἦν πλῆθος τοῖς
6μέλλουσι πολιορκίαν ὑπομένειν πολυχρόνιον. ὧν
ἁπάντων πρόδηλον ἐχόντων τὸν κίνδυνον οὐδὲν
ἧττον ἐνταῦθα διέγνω μένειν, ἐλπίζουσα αὐτῇ
βοηθήσειν κατὰ θάλασσαν Ἑλλήνων τε καὶ Μακεδόνων
7πολλούς. συνῆσαν δ᾿ αὐτῇ τῶν τ᾿ ἐξ Ἀμβρακίας
ἱππέων τινὲς καὶ τῶν περὶ τὴν αὐλὴν
εἰωθότων διατρίβειν στρατιωτῶν οἱ πλείους, ἔτι
δὲ τῶν μετὰ Πολυπέρχοντος ἐλεφάντων οἱ καταλειφθέντες·
τῶν μὲν γὰρ ἄλλων θηρίων2 κατὰ
τὴν προτέραν ἐμβολὴν εἰς Μακεδονίαν Κάσανδρος
ἐκεκυριεύκει.
36. Ὃς τότε διελθὼν τὰ κατὰ Περραιβίαν στενὰ
καὶ παραγενόμενος πλησίον τῆς Πύδνης τὴν μὲν
πόλιν περιεχαράκωσεν ἐκ θαλάττης εἰς θάλατταν,
παρὰ δὲ τῶν συμμαχεῖν βουλομένων μετεπέμπετο
1δὲ Dindorf: τε.2τῶν after θηρίων deleted by Dindorf.326Book XIX

however, in order to occupy the passes, went to meet 317 b.c. the soldiers who had been sent out by Olympias and gained control of the defiles ahead of them. But Olympias, on learning that Cassander and a large army were near Macedonia, designated Aristonoüs general, ordering him to fight Cassander, and she herself went to Pydna accompanied by the following: Alexander’s son, his mother Roxanê, and Thessalonicê, daughter of Philip son of Amyntas; also Deïdameia, daughter of Aeacides king of the Epirotes and sister of that Pyrrhus who later fought against the Romans, the daughters of Attalus, and finally the kinsfolk of Olympias’ other more important friends. Thus there were gathered about her a large number of persons, but persons for the most part useless in war; and there was not a sufficient supply of food for people who were about to endure a very long siege. Although the risk involved in all these circumstances was clear, none the less she decided to remain there, hoping that many Greeks and Macedonians would come to her aid by sea. She had with her some of the Ambracian horse and most of the soldiers who were accustomed to serve about the court, also those of Polyperchon’s elephants that remained, for Cassander had gained possession of the rest of the elephants in his previous expedition into Macedonia.1
36. Cassander, going through the passes of Perrhaebia and arriving near Pydna, surrounded the city from sea to sea with a stockade and requisitioned




1Cp. Book 18. 75. 1. Except for these two incidental references there is no evidence for this expedition.327