Diodorus of Sicily
Ἀνάληψις τῆς δυνάμεως ἐν Βαβυλῶνι καὶ δωρεαὶ τοῖς
ἀνδραγαθήσασι.
Παρουσία τῶν ἀποσταλέντων μισθοφόρων καὶ συμμάχων.
Διάταξις καὶ κατασκευὴ τῆς δυνάμεως.
Ὡς Ἀλέξανδρος παρέλαβε Σοῦσαν καὶ τοὺς ἐν αὐτῇ
θησαυρούς.
Ὡς τῶν παρόδων ἐγκρατὴς ἐγένετο καὶ τῶν ὀνομαζομένων
Σουσιάδων1 Πυλῶν ἐκράτησεν.
Ὡς τοὺς ἀκρωτηριασθέντας Ἑλλήνων εὐεργέτησε καὶ
τὴν Περσέπολιν παραλαβὼν διήρπασεν.
Ὡς κωμάσας ἐνέπρησε τὰ βασίλεια.
Δαρείου θάνατος ὑπὸ Βήσσου.
Ἀλεξάνδρου στρατεία εἰς τὴν Ὑρκανίαν καὶ τῶν ἐν
αὐτῇ φυομένων παραδόξων ἀπαγγελία.
Ὡς Ἀλέξανδρος ἐπὶ Μάρδους στρατεύσας κατεπολέμησε
τὸ ἔθνος.
Ὡς Θάληστρις ἡ τῶν Ἀμαζονίδων βασιλεύουσα συνέμιξεν
Ἀλεξάνδρῳ.
Ὡς ὁ βασιλεὺς ἀνικήτον ἑαυτὸν εἶναι νομίσας ἐζήλωσε
τὴν τῶν Περσῶν τρυφήν.
Στρατεία Ἀλεξάνδρου πρὸς τοὺς ἀφεστηκότας Ἀρείους
καὶ ἅλωσις τῆς Πέτρας.
Ἐπιβουλὴ τοῦ βασιλέως καὶ κόλασις τῶν ἐπιθεμένων,
ὧν οἱ ἐπιφανέστατοι Παρμενίων καὶ Φιλώτας.
Στρατεία Ἀλεξάνδρου εἰς τοὺς Παροπανισάδας καὶ τὰ
πραχθέντα κατ᾿ αὐτήν.
1Added by Wesseling (cp. chap. 68. 1, 2).108Book XVII
The refreshment of the army in Babylon and the rewards given to those who had distinguished themselves in service (chap. 64. 3–6).
The arrival of the mercenaries and allies dispatched to him (chap. 65. 1).
The organization and equipment of his army (chap. 65. 2–4).
How Alexander occupied Susa and its treasures (chap. 65. 5–66).
How he mastered the passes and took possession of the so-called Susian Gates (chaps. 67–68).
How he showed kindness to the Greeks who had been mutilated, and took and sacked Persepolis (chaps. 69–71).
How he set fire to the palace in a revel (chap. 72).
The murder of Dareius by Bessus (chap. 73. 1–4).
The expedition of Alexander into Hyrcania and an account of its marvellous plants (chap. 75).
How Alexander took the field against the Mardi and defeated them (chap. 76).
How Thalestris queen of the Amazons had relations with Alexander (chap. 77. 1–3).
How the king, thinking himself invincible, imitated the luxury of the Persians (chap. 77. 4–7).
The campaign of Alexander against the Areii who had revolted and the capture of the “Rock” (chap. 78).
The conspiracy against the king and the punishment of the conspirators, the most distinguished among them being Parmenion and Philotas (chaps. 79–80).
The campaign of Alexander into the territory of the Paropanisadae and his adventures there (chap. 82).
109