Diodorus of Sicily

παρεδέξατο τὰ σκάφη καὶ παρέπλευσεν εἰς Κίτιον,
2τῆς Σαλαμῖνος ἀπέχον σταδίους διακοσίους. εἶχε
δὲ τὰς πάσας ναῦς μακρὰς ἑκατὸν καὶ τεσσαράκοντα·
τούτων δ᾿ ἦν ἡ μεγίστη πεντήρης, ἡ δ᾿
ἐλαχίστη τετρήρης· στρατιωτικὰ δὲ πόρια ταύταις
ἐπηκολούθει πλείω τῶν διακοσίων, ἄγοντα πεζοὺς
3οὐκ ἐλάττους τῶν μυρίων. οὗτος μὲν οὖν πρὸς
τὸν Μενέλαον κατὰ γῆν ἔπεμψέ τινας, διακελευόμενος
τὰς ναῦς, ἂν ᾖ δυνατόν, κατὰ τάχος ἐκ τῆς
Σαλαμῖνος πρὸς αὐτὸν ἀποστεῖλαι, οὔσας ἑξήκοντα·
ἤλπιζε γάρ, εἰ προσλάβοι ταύτας, ῥᾳδίως κρατήσειν
τῇ ναυμαχίᾳ, διακοσίοις σκάφεσιν ἀγωνιζόμενος.
4ὁ δὲ Δημήτριος νοήσας αὐτοῦ τὴν ἐπιβολὴν ἐπὶ
μὲν τῆς πολιορκίας ἀπέλιπε μέρος τῆς δυνάμεως,
τὰς δὲ ναῦς ἁπάσας πληρώσας καὶ τῶν στρατιωτῶν
τοὺς κρατίστους ἐμβιβάσας βέλη καὶ πετροβόλους
ἐνέθετο καὶ τῶν τρισπιθάμων ὀξυβελῶν τοὺς ἱκανοὺς
5ταῖς πρῴραις ἐπέστησε. κοσμήσας δὲ πολυτελῶς
πρὸς ναυμαχίαν τὸν στόλον περιέπλευσε τὴν
πόλιν καὶ κατὰ τὸ στόμα τοῦ λιμένος μικρὸν ἔξω
βέλους ἀφεὶς τὰς ἀγκύρας διενυκτέρευσεν, ἅμα μὲν
τὰς ἐκ τῆς πόλεως ναῦς κωλύων συμμῖξαι ταῖς
ἄλλαις, ἅμα δὲ καραδοκῶν τὸν ἐπίπλουν τῶν πολεμίων
6καὶ πρὸς ναυμαχίαν ὢν ἕτοιμος. τοῦ δὲ
Πτολεμαίου πλέοντος ἐπὶ τὴν Σαλαμῖνα καὶ τῶν
ὑπηρετικῶν πλοίων συνεπομένων πόρρωθεν καταπληκτικὸν
ὁρᾶσθαι συνέβαινε τὸν στόλον διὰ τὸ
πλῆθος.
50. Ὁ δὲ Δημήτριος κατανοήσας τὸν ἐπίπλουν
Ἀντισθένην μὲν τὸν ναύαρχον ἔχοντα ναῦς δέκα


278Book XX

ships from the cities and coasted along to Citium, 307 b.c. which was distant from Salamis two hundred stades.1 He had in all one hundred and forty2 ships of war, of which the largest were quinqueremes and the smallest quadriremes; more than two hundred transports followed, which carried at least ten thousand foot-soldiers. Ptolemy sent certain men to Menelaüs by land, directing him, if possible, to send him quickly the ships from Salamis, which numbered sixty; for he hoped that, if he received these as reinforcement, he would easily be superior in the naval engagement since he would have two hundred ships in the battle. Learning of his intention, Demetrius left a part of his forces for the siege; and, manning all his ships and embarking upon them the best of his soldiers, he equipped them with missiles and ballistae and mounted on the prows a sufficient number of catapults for throwing bolts three spans3 in length. After making the fleet ready in every way for a naval battle, he sailed around the city and, anchoring at the mouth of the harbour just out of range, spent the night, preventing the ships from the city from joining the others, and at the same time watching for the coming of the enemy and occupying a position ready for battle. When Ptolemy sailed up toward Salamis, the service vessels following at a distance, his fleet was awe-inspiring to behold because of the multitude of its ships.
50. When Demetrius observed Ptolemy’s approach, he left the admiral Antisthenes with ten of the



1About 23 miles, which is approximately correct for the distance by land; but the distance by sea around Cape Pedalium is at least twice as great.2Plutarch, Demetrius, 16. 1, gives the number as 150.3About 21 inches. For this battle cp. Plutarch, Demetrius, 16; Polyaenus, 4. 7. 7.279