Diodorus of Sicily
3ὑπελάμβανον γὰρ Καρχηδονίους μὲν μόγις
ἀνθέξειν τῷ πρὸς Ἀγαθοκλέα πολέμῳ, Δεινοκράτην
δ᾿ εὐκαταγώνιστον εἶναι συνηθροικότα φυγαδικὴν
στρατιάν, τοὺς δ᾿ ἐν ταῖς Συρακούσσαις θλιβομένους
τῇ σιτοδείᾳ μηδ᾿ ἐγχειρήσειν ἀμφισβητεῖν
τῶν πρωτείων, τὸ δὲ μέγιστον, τὴν στρατείαν
ἑαυτῶν ποιουμένων ἐπ᾿ ἐλευθερώσει τῶν πόλεων
ἀσμένως ἅπαντας ὑπακούσεσθαι διά τε τὸ πρὸς
τοὺς βαρβάρους μῖσος καὶ διὰ τὴν ἔμφυτον πᾶσιν
4ἐπιθυμίαν τῆς αὐτονομίας. οὗτοι μὲν οὖν ἑλόμενοι
στρατηγὸν Ξενόδικον καὶ τὴν ἁρμόζουσαν δόντες
δύναμιν ἐξέπεμψαν ἐπὶ τὸν πόλεμον· ὁ δὲ παραχρῆμα
ἐπὶ τὴν Γέλαν ὁρμήσας καὶ διά τινων ἰδιοξένων
νυκτὸς εἰσαχθεὶς ἐκυρίευσε τῆς πόλεως ἅμα
5καὶ δυνάμεως ἁδρᾶς καὶ χρημάτων. ἐλευθερωθέντες
οὖν οἱ Γελῷοι προθυμότατα πανδημεὶ συστρατεύοντες
ἠλευθέρουν τὰς πόλεις. διαβοηθείσης
δὲ τῆς τῶν Ἀκραγαντίνων ἐπιβολῆς κατὰ πᾶσαν
τὴν νῆσον ἐνέπεσεν ὁρμὴ ταῖς πόλεσι πρὸς τὴν
ἐλευθερίαν. καὶ πρῶτοι μὲν Ἐνναῖοι πέμψαντες
τὴν πόλιν τοῖς Ἀκραγαντίνοις παρέδωκαν· οἱ δὲ
ταύτην ἐλευθερώσαντες παρῆλθον ἐπὶ τὸν Ἐρβησσόν,
φρουρᾶς ἐν αὐτῷ παραφυλαττούσης τὴν πόλιν.
γενομένης δὲ μάχης ἰσχυρᾶς καὶ τῶν πολιτικῶν
συνεργησάντων συνέβη τὴν φρουρὰν ἁλῶναι καὶ
πολλοὺς μὲν πεσεῖν τῶν βαρβάρων, εἰς πεντακοσίους
δὲ θεμένους τὰ ὅπλα παραδοῦναι σφᾶς αὐτούς.
32. Περὶ ταῦτα δ᾿ ὄντων τῶν Ἀκραγαντίνων
τῶν ἐν ταῖς Συρακούσσαις καταλελειμμένων στρατιωτῶν
224Book XX

for they believed that the Carthaginians would 309 b.c. scarcely sustain the war against Agathocles; that Deinocrates was easy to conquer since he had collected an army of exiles; that the people of Syracuse, pinched by famine, would not even try to compete for the primacy; and, what was most important, that if they took the field to secure the independence of the cities, all would gladly answer the summons both through hatred for the barbarians and through the desire for self-government that is implanted in all men. They therefore elected Xenodicus1 as general, gave him an army suitable for the undertaking, and sent him forth to the war. He at once set out against Gela, was admitted at night by certain personal friends, and became master of the city together with its strong army and its wealth. The people of Gela, having been thus freed, joined in his campaign very eagerly and unanimously, and set about freeing the cities. As news of the undertaking of the Acragantines
spread throughout the whole island, an impulse toward liberty made itself manifest in the cities. And first the people of Enna sent to the Acragantines and delivered their city over to them; and when they had freed Enna, the Acragantines went on to Erbessus, although a garrison stationed there was keeping watch over the city. After a bitter battle had taken place in which the citizens aided the Acragantines, the garrison was captured and, although many of the barbarians fell, at least five hundred of them laid down their arms and surrendered.
32. While the Acragantines were thus engaged, some of the soldiers who had been left in Syracuse by

1Called Xenodocus in chaps. 56. 2; 69. 2.225