Diodorus of Sicily

πολλῶν μὲν ἀνῃρημένων, τῶν δὲ τειχῶν ἐλλειπεῖς
ἐχόντων τὰς φυλακὰς διὰ τὴν σπάνιν τῶν ἀνδρῶν
ἐπετελέσαντο πρᾶξιν οἱ κατὰ τὴν πόλιν ἡρωικὴν καὶ
μνήμης ἀξίαν. ὁρῶντες γὰρ ἀπαραίτητον οὖσαν
τὴν κατ᾿ αὐτῶν1 τιμωρίαν καὶ δύναμιν οὐκ ἔχοντες
ἀξιόχρεων τὴν ἀμυνουμένην2 τὸ μὲν ἐγχειρίσαι τὴν
πόλιν καὶ τὰ κατ᾿ αὐτοὺς ἐπιτρέψαι τοῖς πολεμίοις
οὐκ ἔκριναν, ἐμφανοῦς οὔσης τῆς μεθ᾿ ὕβρεως
τιμωρίας, νυκτὸς δ᾿ ὁμοθυμαδὸν πρὸς τὸν εὐγενῆ
θάνατον ὁρμήσαντες τέκνα μὲν καὶ γυναῖκας καὶ
γονεῖς εἰς τὰς οἰκίας ἐγκλείσαντες ἐνέπρησαν,
κοινὸν θάνατον καὶ τάφον διὰ τοῦ πυρὸς ἑλόμενοι.
5τῆς δὲ φλογὸς ἄφνω πρὸς ὕψος αἰρομένης οἱ μὲν
Ἰσαυρεῖς τὰ κτήματα καὶ πάντα τὰ δυνάμενα τοῖς
κρατοῦσιν ὠφελείας παρέχεσθαι τῷ πυρὶ παρέβαλον,
οἱ δὲ περὶ τὸν Περδίκκαν θαυμάσαντες τὸ
γινόμενον3 περιέστησαν τὴν δύναμιν καὶ κατὰ
πάντα τόπον ἐβιάζοντο παρεισπεσεῖν εἰς τὴν πόλιν.
6τῶν δ᾿ ἐγχωρίων ἀπὸ τῶν τειχῶν ἀμυνομένων καὶ
πολλοὺς τῶν Μακεδόνων καταβαλλόντων ἔτι μᾶλλον
ὁ Περδίκκας καταπληττόμενος ἐζήτει τὴν
αἰτίαν δι᾿ ἣν οἱ τὰς οἰκίας καὶ τὰ λοιπὰ πάντα τῷ
πυρὶ παραδεδωκότες φιλοτίμως τὰ τείχη φυλάττουσι.
7τέλος δὲ τοῦ Περδίκκου καὶ τῶν Μακεδόνων
ἀπὸ τῆς πόλεως ἀποχωρησάντων οἱ Ἰσαυρεῖς
εἰς τὸ πῦρ ἑαυτοὺς ῥίψαντες ἐν ταῖς οἰκίαις συνετάφησαν
8τοῖς οἰκείοις. Περδίκκας δὲ νυκτὸς4
διελθούσης ἔδωκε τοῖς στρατιώταις τὴν πόλιν εἰς
διαρπαγήν. οὗτοι δὲ τὴν φλόγα κατασβέσαντες


1Dindorf reads καθ᾿ αὑτῶν.2ἀμυνουμένην Dindorf: ἀμυνομένην MSS., followed by
Fischer.3γινόμενον Hertlein: γενόμενον.4Dindorf adds τῆς before νυκτὸς.78Book XVIII

On the third day, when many had been slain and the 322 b.c. walls had few defenders because of the lack of men, the citizens performed a heroic and memorable deed. Seeing that the punishment that hung over them could not be averted, and not having a force that would be adequate to stave the enemy off, they determined not to surrender the city and place their fate in the hands of the enemy, since in that way their punishment combined with outrage was certain; but at night all with one accord, seeking the noble kind of death, shut up their children, wives, and parents in their houses, and set the houses on fire, choosing by means of the fire a common death and burial. As the blaze suddenly flared aloft, the Isaurians cast into the fire their goods and everything that could be of use to the victors; Perdiccas and his officers, astounded at what was taking place, stationed their troops about the city and made a strong effort to break into the city on all sides. When now the inhabitants defended themselves from the walls and struck down many of the Macedonians, Perdiccas was even more astonished and sought the reason why men who had given their homes and all else to the flames should be so intent upon defending the walls. Finally Perdiccas and the Macedonians withdrew from the city, and the Isaurians, throwing themselves into the fire, found burial in their homes along with their families.1 When the night was over, Perdiccas gave the city to his soldiers for booty. They, when they had put out the fire, found an abundance of




1Justin (13. 6. 1–3) tells much the same tale but in connection with Perdiccas’ war against Ariarathes.79