Diodorus of Sicily

οὐδὲν ἀξιοῖ μεταλαβεῖν τῆς παρ᾿ αὐτοῦ φιλανθρωπίας·
τοῦ δ᾿ εἰπόντος ὅτι βούλεται παρ᾿ αὐτοῦ
τυχεῖν τινος δωρεᾶς δεδοικέναι δὲ μήποτε δηλώσας
τὴν προκεχειρισμένην ἔντευξιν ἀποτύχῃ, ὁ μὲν βασιλεὺς
περιχαρὴς γενόμενος διεβεβαιώσατο πᾶν ὅ τι
ἂν αἰτήσῃ χαρίσασθαι· ὁ δ᾿ εἶπεν ὅτι ξένου τινὸς
ἑαυτοῦ δύο παρθένοι τὴν ἡλικίαν ἔχουσαι γάμου
τυγχάνουσιν ἐν ταῖς αἰχμαλώτοις οὖσαι· ταύτας οὖν
βούλεσθαι λαβεῖν, οὐχ ἵνα λυσιτέλειάν τινα περιποιήσηται
τυχὼν τῆς δωρεᾶς, ἀλλ᾿ ἵνα προικίσας
ἀμφοτέρας συνοικίσῃ καὶ μὴ περιίδῃ μηδὲν παθούσας
4ἀνάξιον τῆς ἡλικίας. μετὰ δὲ ταῦθ᾿ ὁ Φίλιππος
ἀσμένως τὴν αἴτησιν προσδεξάμενος παραχρῆμα
τὰς παρθένους ἐδωρήσατο τῷ Σατύρῳ. πολλὰς δὲ
καὶ ἄλλας παντοδαπὰς εὐεργεσίας καὶ δωρεὰς διασπείρων
ἐκομίζετο τοὺς μισθοὺς πολλαπλασίους τῆς
χάριτος· πολλοὶ γὰρ ταῖς τῆς εὐεργεσίας ἐλπίσι
προκληθέντες ἔφθασαν ἀλλήλους προσνέμοντες ἑαυτοὺς
τῷ Φιλίππῳ καὶ τὰς πατρίδας ἐγχειρίζοντες.
56. Ἐπ᾿ ἄρχοντος δ᾿ Ἀθήνησι Θεμιστοκλέους
ἐν Ῥώμῃ τὴν ὑπατικὴν ἀρχὴν διεδέξαντο Γάιος
Κορνήλιος καὶ Μάρκος Ποπίλιος.1 ἐπὶ δὲ τούτων
Βοιωτοὶ πολλὴν τῆς Φωκίδος χώραν πορθήσαντες
περὶ τὴν ὀνομαζομένην Ὕαν πόλιν2 ἐνίκησαν τοὺς
πολεμίους καὶ κατέβαλον αὐτῶν περὶ ἑβδομήκοντα.
2μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα Βοιωτοὶ περὶ Κορώνειαν συμπλακέντες
τοῖς Φωκεῦσιν ἡττήθησαν καὶ συχνοὺς ἀπέβαλον.
ἔπειτα τῶν Φωκέων κατασχόντων3 ἱκανάς
τινας πόλεις ἐν τῇ Βοιωτίᾳ στρατεύσαντες οἱ Βοιωτοὶ


1So RV (cp. Livy, 7. 23): Πόπλιος PXFMO.2So R (cp. Strabo, 9. 2. 3; CIG, ix. 94); Ὑάν πολιν
PXF; generally Ὑάμπολιν.3So Fischer: κατεχόντων.392Book XVI

partake of the friendly courtesy he offered; and when 348/7 b.c. Satyrus said that he wished to obtain a boon from him but he feared lest, if he disclosed the request he had decided upon, he should be refused, the king, exceedingly pleased, affirmed that he granted forthwith any favour he might ask. He replied that there were two virgin daughters of a friend of his who were of marriageable age among the captive women; these girls he wished to obtain, not in order to derive any profit if he were granted the gift, but to give them both a dowry and husbands and not permit them to suffer any indignity unworthy of their years. Thereupon Philip gladly acceded to his request and immediately made a present of the girls to Satyrus. And by dispensing many other benefactions and gifts of every kind he reaped returns many times greater than his favour; for many who were incited by hopes of his beneficence outstripped one another in devoting themselves to Philip and in delivering their countries to him.
56. When Themistocles was archon at Athens, at 347/0 b.c Rome Gaius Cornelius and Marcus Popilius succeeded to the consular office. During their term of office the Boeotians, after sacking much of the Phocian territory about the city named Hya,1 defeated their enemies and slew about seventy of them. After this the Boeotians, having come to grips near Coroneia with the Phocians, were defeated and lost many men. When the Phocians now seized several cities of considerable size in Boeotia, the Boeotians took the field and



1A town, usually called Hyampolis, situated at the entrance to Phocis from Thessaly and Boeotia; cp. Herod. 8. 28.393