Diodorus of Sicily

ἀποβεβληκὼς τῶν ἵππων τοὺς πλείους κατὰ
τὴν ὁδοιπορίαν· διέτεινε γὰρ ἓξ ἡμέραις ἐπὶ1
Μάλου σταθμοὺς εἴκοσι καὶ τέσσαρας, ὥστε διὰ
τὴν ὑπερβολὴν τῆς κακοπαθίας μήτε σκευοφόρον
ἀκολουθῆσαι μηδένα μήτε τοὺς ἱπποκόμους.
3Ὁ δὲ Πτολεμαῖος, κατὰ νοῦν αὐτῷ τῶν πραγμάτων
ἀπηντηκότων, τότε μὲν ἀπῆρεν εἰς Αἴγυπτον,
μετ᾿ ὀλίγον δὲ χρόνον παροξυνόμενος ὑπὸ
Σελεύκου διὰ τὴν πρὸς Ἀντίγονον ἀλλοτριότητα
διέγνω στρατεύειν ἐπὶ Κοίλην Συρίαν καὶ παρατάττεσθαι
4τοῖς περὶ τὸν Δημήτριον. συναγαγὼν
οὖν πανταχόθεν τὰς δυνάμεις ἀνέζευξεν ἀπὸ Ἀλεξανδρείας
εἰς Πηλούσιον, ἔχων πεζοὺς μὲν μυρίους
ὀκτακισχιλίους, ἱππεῖς δὲ τετρακισχιλίους, ὧν ἦσαν
οἱ μὲν Μακεδόνες, οἱ δὲ μισθοφόροι, Αἰγυπτίων δὲ
πλῆθος, τὸ μὲν κομίζον βέλη καὶ τὴν ἄλλην παρασκευήν,
τὸ δὲ καθωπλισμένον καὶ πρὸς μάχην
5χρήσιμον. ἀπὸ δὲ Πηλουσίου διὰ τῆς ἐρήμου διελθὼν
κατεστρατοπέδευσε πλησίον τῶν πολεμίων
περὶ τὴν παλαιὰν Γάζαν τῆς Συρίας. ὁμοίως δὲ
καὶ Δημήτριος μεταπεμψάμενος πανταχόθεν τοὺς
ἐκ τῆς χειμασίας στρατιώτας εἰς τὴν παλαιὰν
Γάζαν ὑπέμεινε τὴν τῶν ἐναντίων ἔφοδον.
81. Τῶν δὲ φίλων αὐτῷ συμβουλευόντων μὴ
παρατάττεσθαι πρὸς ἡγεμόνα τηλικοῦτον καὶ δύναμιν
μείζω, τούτοις μὲν οὐ προσεῖχεν, εἰς δὲ τὸν
κίνδυνον παρεσκευάζετο τεθαρρηκώς, καίπερ2 νέος
ὢν παντελῶς καὶ τηλικαύτην μάχην μέλλων ἀγωνίζεσθαι




1ἐπὶ Geer: ἀπὸ.2καίπερ Fischer: καὶ γὰρ.54Book XIX

back to his camp, having lost most of his horses 313 b.c. during the march; for in six days’ march towards Malus1 he covered twenty-four stages, with the result that on account of the excessive hardship not one of his sutlers or of his grooms kept up the pace.
Ptolemy, since his undertakings had turned out 312 b.c. as he wished, now sailed away to Egypt; but after a little while, spurred on by Seleucus because of his hostility toward Antigonus, he decided to make a campaign into Coelê Syria and take the field against the army of Demetrius. He therefore gathered together his forces from all sides and marched from Alexandria to Pelusium with eighteen thousand foot and four thousand horse. Of his army some were Macedonians and some were mercenaries, but a great number were Egyptians, of whom some carried the missiles and the other baggage but some were armed and serviceable for battle. Marching through the desert from Pelusium, he camped near the enemy at Old Gaza in Syria.2 Demetrius, who had likewise summoned his soldiers to Old Gaza from their winter quarters3 on all sides, awaited the approach of his opponents.
81. Although his friends were urging him not to take the field against so great a general and a superior force, Demetrius paid no heed to them but confidently prepared for the conflict even though he was very young and was about to engage in so great a battle



1Cp. the critical note. The forced march must have been
the one from his base in Coelê Syria toward Malus in Cilicia.
The length of the stage or distance between posting stations on the Persian roads was not uniform. If we take 17 miles as an average, the army covered some 400 miles in 6 days, but the distance seems actually to have been very much less.2According to Strabo (16. 2. 30), Alexander had destroyed Gaza; but the city clearly retained its importance at least as a fortress (Arrian, Anabasis, 2. 26–27).3The winter of 313/12 b.c.55