Diodorus of Sicily

ἔτι δὲ Χαβρίας τε καὶ Ἰφικράτης οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι,
πρὸς δὲ τούτοις Ἀγησίλαος ὁ Σπαρτιάτης, βραχὺ
τοῖς χρόνοις προτερῶν1· ἐν δὲ τοῖς πρὸ τοῦ2 χρόνοις,
ἐπὶ τῶν Μηδικῶν καὶ Περσικῶν καιρῶν, Σόλων
καὶ Θεμιστοκλῆς καὶ Μιλτιάδης, ἔτι δὲ Κίμων
καὶ Μυρωνίδης καὶ Περικλῆς καί τινες ἕτεροι παρὰ
τοῖς Ἀθηναίοις, κατὰ δὲ τὴν Σικελίαν Γέλων ὁ
3Δεινομένους καί τινες ἕτεροι. ἀλλ᾿ ὅμως εἴ τις
συγκρίναι τὰς τούτων ἀρετὰς τῇ Ἐπαμεινώνδου
στρατηγίᾳ τε καὶ δόξῃ, πολὺ ἂν προέχουσαν εὕροι
τὴν περὶ τὸν Ἐπαμεινώνδαν ἀρετήν. παρὰ μὲν
γὰρ ἑκάστῳ τῶν ἄλλων ἓν ἂν εὕροι προτέρημα
τῆς δόξης, παρὰ δὲ τούτῳ πάσας τὰς ἀρετὰς
ἠθροισμένας. καὶ γὰρ ῥώμῃ σώματος καὶ λόγου
δεινότητι, πρὸς δὲ τούτοις ψυχῆς λαμπρότητι καὶ
μισαργυρίᾳ καὶ ἐπιεικείᾳ, καὶ τὸ μέγιστον, ἀνδρείᾳ
καὶ στρατηγικῇ συνέσει πολὺ διήνεγκε πάντων.
4τοιγαροῦν ἡ πατρὶς αὐτοῦ ζῶντος μὲν ἐκτήσατο
τὴν ἡγεμονίαν τῆς Ἑλλάδος, τελευτήσαντος δὲ
ταύτης ἐστερήθη καὶ τῆς ἐπὶ τὸ χεῖρον ἀεὶ μεταβολῆς
ἐπειράθη, καὶ πέρας διὰ τὴν ἀφροσύνην
τῶν ἡγουμένων ἀνδραποδισμοῦ καὶ κατασκαφῆς
ἔλαβε πεῖραν. Ἐπαμεινώνδας μὲν οὖν παρὰ πᾶσι
περιβόητον ἔχων τὴν ἀρετήν, τοιαύτης ἔτυχε
καταστροφῆς τοῦ βίου.
89. Οἱ δ᾿ Ἕλληνες μετὰ τὴν μάχην ἀμφισβητουμένην
ἔχοντες τὴν νίκην καὶ ταῖς ἀνδραγαθίαις
ἐφάμιλλοι καθεστῶτες, ἔτι δὲ τῇ συνεχείᾳ τῶν
κινδύνων καταπονούμενοι, διελύσαντο πρὸς ἀλλήλους.
συνθέμενοι δὲ κοινὴν εἰρήνην καὶ συμμαχίαν,
κατέταττον ἐν τῇ συμμαχίᾳ καὶ τοὺς Μεσσηνίους.
2οἱ δὲ Λακεδαιμόνιοι διὰ τὴν πρὸς τούτους ἀκατάλλακτον
1So Dindorf: πρότερον.2So Dindorf: τούτου.198Book XV

also Chabrias and Iphicrates, Athenians all, and, 363/2 b.c. besides, Agesilaüs the Spartan, who belonged to a slightly older generation. Still earlier than these, in the times of the Medes and Persians, there were Solon, Themistocles, Miltiades, and Cimon, Myroni-des, and Pericles and certain others in Athens, and in Sicily Gelon, son of Deinomenes, and still others. All the same, if you should compare the qualities of these with the generalship and reputation of Epameinondas, you would find the qualities possessed by Epameinondas far superior. For in each of the others you would discover but one particular superiority as a claim to fame; in him, however, all qualities combined. For in strength of body and eloquence of speech, furthermore in elevation of mind, contempt of lucre, fairness, and, most of all, in courage and shrewdness in the art of war, he far surpassed them all. So it was that in his lifetime his native country acquired the primacy of Hellas, but when he died lost it and constantly suffered change for the worse and finally, because of the folly of its leaders, experienced slavery and devastation. So Epameinondas, whose valour was approved among all men, in the manner we have shown met his death.
89. The states of Greece after the battle, since the victory credited to them all was in dispute and they had proved to be evenly matched in the matter of valour, and, furthermore, were now exhausted by the unbroken series of battles, came to terms with one another. When they had agreed upon a general peace and alliance, they sought to include the Messenians in the compact. But the Lacedaemonians, because



199