Diodorus of Sicily

προελθούσης πορρωτέρω καὶ περὶ Φοινίκην καταστρατοπεδευούσης,
ὁ καθεσταμένος ἐπὶ τῆς Αἰγύπτου
στρατηγὸς ἀπέστη ἀπὸ τοῦ βασιλέως,
διαπεμψάμενος δὲ πρὸς τὸν υἱὸν Νεκτανεβώ, καὶ
πείσας ἀντέχεσθαι τῆς ἐν Αἰγύπτῳ βασιλείας,
4μέγαν πόλεμον ἐξέκαυσεν· ὁ γὰρ Νεκτανεβὼς ὑπὸ
τοῦ βασιλέως τεταγμένος ἡγεμὼν τῶν ἐξ Αἰγύπτου
στρατιωτῶν, καὶ πεμφθεὶς ἀπὸ τῆς Φοινίκης
πολιορκεῖν τὰς ἐν τῇ Συρίᾳ πόλεις, συγκάταινος
γενόμενος ταῖς τοῦ πατρὸς ἐπιβολαῖς, τοὺς μὲν
ἡγεμόνας δωρεαῖς τοὺς δὲ στρατιώτας ἐπαγγελίαις
προτρεψάμενος, ἔπεισε συναγωνιστὰς γενέσθαι.
5τέλος δὲ καταληφθείσης ὑπὸ τῶν ἀποστατῶν τῆς
Αἰγύπτου, ὁ μὲν Ταχὼς καταπλαγεὶς ἐτόλμησε
διὰ τῆς Ἀραβίας ἀναβῆναι πρὸς τὸν βασιλέα, καὶ
συγγνώμην ἠξίου δοῦναι περὶ τῶν ἡμαρτημένων·
ὁ δὲ Ἀρταξέρξης οὐ μόνον αὐτὸν ἀπέλυσε τῶν
ἐγκλημάτων, ἀλλὰ καὶ στρατηγὸν ἀπέδειξε τοῦ
πρὸς Αἰγυπτίους πολέμου.
93. Μετ᾿ ὀλίγον δὲ ὁ μὲν βασιλεὺς τῶν Περσῶν
ἐτελεύτησεν ἄρξας ἔτη τρία πρὸς τοῖς τετταράκοντα,
τὴν δὲ βασιλείαν διεδέξατο Ὦχος ὁ μετονομασθεὶς
Ἀρταξέρξης, καὶ ἐβασίλευσεν ἔτη τρία
πρὸς τοῖς εἴκοσι· τοῦ γὰρ Ἀρταξέρξου καλῶς
βεβασιλευκότος καὶ γενομένου παντελῶς εἰρηνικοῦ
καὶ ἐπιτυχοῦς, τοὺς μετὰ τοῦτον βασιλεύοντας
μετωνόμαζον καὶ τὴν τούτου προσηγορίαν ἔχειν
2προσέταττον. τοῦ δὲ βασιλέως Ταχὼ ἐπανελθόντος
πρὸς τοὺς περὶ τὸν Ἀγησίλαον, Νεκτανεβὼς


212Book XV

the armament had gone far afield and was encamped 362/1 b.c. near Phoenicia, the general left in charge of Egypt revolted from the king, and having thereupon sent word to his son Nectanebôs prevailed upon him to take the kingship in Egypt, and thereby kindled a great war. For Nectanebôs, who had been appointed by the king commander of the soldiers from Egypt and had been sent from Phoenicia to besiege the cities in Syria, after approving of his father’s designs, solicited the officers with bribes and the common soldiers with promises, and so prevailed upon them to be his accomplices. At last Egypt was seized by the insurgents, and Tachos, panic-stricken, made bold to go up to the King by way of Arabia and beg forgiveness for his past errors. Artaxerxes not only cleared him of the charges against him but even appointed him general in the war against Egypt.
93. Shortly after, the King of Persia died, having ruled forty-three years, and Ochus, who now assumed a new name, Artaxerxes, succeeded to the kingdom and ruled twenty-three years;—for since the first Artaxerxes had ruled well and had shown himself altogether peace-loving and fortunate, the Persians changed the names of those who ruled after him and prescribed that they should bear that name.1 When King Tachos had returned to the army of Agesilaüs,2
1Since Xerxes II and Darius II intervened between Artaxerxes
I (465/4–425/4, see Books 11. 69.6 and 12. 64. 1) and
Artaxerxes II (405/4–362/1, see Book 13. 108. 1), this state- ment is not quite accurate. The name Artaxerxes seems not to have been used for Arses and Darius III.2Diodorus’s account of Agesilaüs in Egypt differs considerably from the other accounts: Xenophon, Agesilaüs, 2. 28–31; Plutarch, Agesilaus, 36–40; and Nepos, Agesilaus, 8. Plutarch appears to be the most reliable. In particular Agesilüs is elsewhere reported to have changed allegiance from Tachôs to Nectanebôs. According to Olmstead (History of the Persian Empire, 417, 419–420) Agesilaüs served in Egypt from 360 to 358.213