Diodorus of Sicily

συμφέροντος καὶ παρορμήσας διὰ τῶν λόγων πρὸς
τοὺς ἀγῶνας θυσίας μεγαλοπρεπεῖς τοῖς θεοῖς συνετέλεσεν
ἐν Δίῳ τῆς Μακεδονίας καὶ σκηνικοὺς
ἀγῶνας Διὶ καὶ Μούσαις, οὓς Ἀρχέλαος ὁ προβασιλεύσας
4πρῶτος κατέδειξε. τὴν δὲ πανήγυριν
ἐφ᾿ ἡμέρας ἐννέα συνετέλεσεν, ἑκάστῃ τῶν Μουσῶν
ἐπώνυμον ἡμέραν ἀναδείξας. σκηνὴν δὲ κατασκευασάμενος
ἑκατοντάκλινον τούς τε φίλους καὶ
τοὺς ἡγεμόνας ἔτι δὲ τοὺς ἀπὸ τῶν πόλεων πρέσβεις
παρέλαβεν ἐπὶ τὴν εὐωχίαν. λαμπραῖς δὲ
παρασκευαῖς χρησάμενος καὶ πολλοὺς μὲν ἑστιάσας,
πάσῃ δὲ τῇ δυνάμει διαδοὺς ἱερεῖα καὶ τἄλλα
τὰ πρὸς τὴν εὐωχίαν ἀνήκοντα προσανέλαβε τὸ
στρατόπεδον.
17. Ἐπ᾿ ἄρχοντος δ᾿ Ἀθήνησι Κτησικλέους Ῥωμαῖοι
μὲν ὑπάτους κατέστησαν Γάιον Σουλπίκιον
καὶ Λεύκιον Παπίριον. Ἀλέξανδρος δὲ μετὰ τῆς
δυνάμεως πορευθεὶς ἐπὶ τὸν Ἑλλήσποντον διεβίβασε
τὴν δύναμιν ἐκ τῆς Εὐρώπης εἰς τὴν Ἀσίαν.
2αὐτὸς δὲ μακραῖς ναυσὶν ἑξήκοντα καταπλεύσας
πρὸς τὴν Τρῳάδα χώραν πρῶτος τῶν Μακεδόνων
ἀπὸ τῆς νεὼς ἠκόντισε μὲν τὸ δόρυ, πήξας δ᾿ εἰς
τὴν γῆν καὶ αὐτὸς ἀπὸ τῆς νεὼς ἀφαλλόμενος παρὰ
τῶν θεῶν ἀπεφαίνετο τὴν Ἀσίαν δέχεσθαι δορίκτητον.
3καὶ τοὺς μὲν τάφους τῶν ἡρώων Ἀχιλλέως
τε καὶ Αἴαντος καὶ τῶν ἄλλων ἐναγίσμασι καὶ τοῖς
ἄλλοις τοῖς πρὸς εὐδοξίαν ἀνήκουσιν ἐτίμησεν,


162Book XVII

to show them where their advantage lay and by 335/4 b.c. appeals aroused their enthusiasm for the contests which lay ahead. He made lavish sacrifices to the gods at Dium in Macedonia and held the dramatic contests in honour of Zeus and the Muses which Archelaus, one of his predecessors, had instituted.1 He celebrated the festival for nine days, naming each day after one of the Muses. He erected a tent to hold a hundred couches2 and invited his Friends and officers, as well as the ambassadors from the cities, to the banquet. Employing great magnificence, he entertained great numbers in person besides distributing to his entire force sacrificial animals and all else suitable for the festive occasion, and put his army in a fine humour.
17. When Ctesicles was archon at Athens, the Romans 334/3 b.c. elected as consuls Gaius Sulpicius and Lucius Papirius.3 Alexander advanced with his army to the Hellespont and transported it from Europe to Asia. He personally sailed with sixty fighting ships to the Troad, where he flung his spear from the ship and fixed it in the ground,4 and then leapt ashore himself the first of the Macedonians, signifying that he received Asia from the gods as a spear-won prize. He visited the tombs of the heroes Achilles, Ajax, and the rest and honoured them with offerings and other
 


1Arrian (1. 11. 1), after mentioning the sacrifice to Olympian
Zeus, adds: “others say that he held games in honour of
the Muses.” That is to say, this was not mentioned by
Ptolemy or (probably) Aristobulus, Arrian’s primary sources.2The size of this structure may be judged from the fact that Agathocles’s Hall of the Sixty Couches was one of the wonders of Sicily (Book 16. 83. 2). The tent accompanied Alexander on his expedition (Athenaeus, 12. 538 c, 539 d).3Ctesicles was archon from July 334 to June 333 b.c. Broughton (1. 138 f.) lists C. Sulpicius Longus as one of the consuls of 337, and L. Papirius Crassus as one of the consuls of 336. The latter is apparently repeated in chap. 29. 1.4Justin, 11. 5. 10.163