Diodorus of Sicily

διέδωκε δὲ καὶ τοῖς ἑταίροις περιπορφύρους στολὰς
6καὶ τοῖς ἵπποις Περσικὰς σκευὰς περιέθηκε. πρὸς
δὲ τούτοις τὰς παλλακίδας ὁμοίως τῷ Δαρείῳ
περιήγετο,1 τὸν μὲν ἀριθμὸν οὔσας οὐκ ἐλάττους
πλήθει τῶν κατὰ τὸν ἐνιαυτὸν ἡμερῶν, κάλλει δὲ
διαπρεπεῖς ὡς ἂν ἐξ ἁπασῶν τῶν κατὰ τὴν Ἀσίαν
7γυναικῶν ἐπιλελεγμένας. αὗται δὲ ἑκάστης νυκτὸς
περιῄεσαν τὴν κλίνην τοῦ βασιλέως, ἵνα τὴν ἐκλογὴν
αὐτὸς ποιήσηται τῆς μελλούσης αὐτῷ συνεῖναι.2
τούτοις μὲν οὖν τοῖς ἐθισμοῖς Ἀλέξανδρος σπανίως
ἐχρῆτο, τοῖς δὲ προϋπάρχουσι κατὰ τὸ πλεῖστον
ἐνδιέτριβε, φοβούμενος τὸ προσκόπτειν τοῖς Μακεδόσιν.
78. Ὅμως δὲ πολλῶν αὐτῷ μεμψιμοιρούντων
τούτους μὲν ταῖς δωρεαῖς ἐθεράπευεν, αὐτὸς δὲ
πυθόμενος τὸν Ἀρείας σατράπην3 Σατιβαρζάνην
ἀνῃρηκέναι μὲν τοὺς καταλελειμμένους4 ὑπ᾿ αὐτοῦ
στρατιώτας, συμφρονεῖν δὲ Βήσσῳ καὶ κεκρικέναι
μετ᾿ αὐτοῦ διαπολεμεῖν Μακεδόσιν ἐστράτευσεν ἐπ᾿
αὐτόν. | ὁ δὲ Σατιβαρζάνης5 τὴν μὲν δύναμιν








1περιῆγε codd.; corrected by Hertlein.2συνιέναι codd.; corrected by Schaefer.3The text of Reiske; τὸν μὲν Δαρείου σατράπην RX; τὸν ἐν
Δαρείας σατράπην F.4καταλελεγμένους RX; κατελεγμένους F; corrected by Wesseling.5Σατιβαρσάνης F.342Book XVII

long-sleeved upper garment.1 He distributed to his 829/8 b.c. companions cloaks with purple borders and dressed the horses in Persian harness. In addition to all this, he added concubines to his retinue in the manner of Dareius, in number not less than the days of the year and outstanding in beauty as selected from ail the women of Asia. Each night these paraded about the couch of the king so that he might select the one with whom he would lie that night.2 Alexander, as a matter of fact, employed these customs rather sparingly and kept for the most part to his accustomed routine, not wishing to offend the Macedonians.
78. Many, it is true, did reproach him for these things, but he silenced them with gifts. At this juncture he learned that the satrap of Areia, Satibarzanes, had put to death the soldiers who were left with him,3 had made common cause with Bessus and with him had decided to attack the Macedonians, so Alexander set out against the man. This Satibarzanes had brought his forces into Chortacana,4
1Curtius, 6. 6. 4; Justin, 12. 3. 8; Plutarch, Alexander,
45. 1–2. Plutarch (De Fortuna aut Virtute Alexandri, 1. 8.
329 f—330 a) praises Alexander for conciliating his subjects
in this way.2Curtius, 3. 3. 24; 6. 6. 8; Justin, 12. 3. 10. This retinue of concubines was part of the traditional ceremonial of the Persian court. Solomon had a similar establishment (1 Kings 4), including a harem (1 Kings 11. 3). There were three hundred and sixty of them, according to Ctesias (Plutarch, Artaxerxes, 27), but three hundred and sixty-five in the Alexander tradition (Curtius, l.c.). Modern scholars are not inclined to accept this statement as true, but Alexander’s army notoriously did not travel light, and if he had placed his court under a Persian chamberlain, that official would doubtless have attempted to equip it in the proper fashion. Cp. the many anecdotes of Alexander’s luxury in Athenaeus, 12. 537–540 (and of Dareius, idem, 13. 557 b).3Satibarzanes had been one of the murderers of Dareius, but, after defeating him, Alexander had confirmed him in his satrapy, leaving a small force of Macedonians with him to ensure his good behaviour (Berve, Alexanderreich, 2, no. 697).4The city is usually called Artacoana.343