Diodorus of Sicily

τέλος δὲ τοξευθεὶς ὑπὸ τὸν μαστὸν ἔπεσεν εἰς γόνυ,
κατισχυθεὶς ὑπὸ τῆς πληγῆς. εὐθὺ δ᾿ ὁ μὲν τοξεύσας
Ἰνδὸς καταφρονήσας προσέδραμε καὶ καταφέροντος
αὐτοῦ πληγὴν ὁ Ἀλέξανδρος ὑπέθηκε τῇ
λαγόνι τὸ ξίφος καὶ καιρίου γενομένου τοῦ τραύματος
ὁ μὲν βάρβαρος ἔπεσεν, ὁ δὲ βασιλεὺς
ἐπιλαβόμενος τοῦ πλησίον κλάδου καὶ διαναστὰς
προεκαλεῖτο τῶν Ἰνδῶν τοὺς βουλομένους διαγωνίσασθαι.
4Κατὰ δὲ τοῦτον τὸν χρόνον Πευκέστης, εἷς τῶν
ὑπασπιστῶν, δι᾿ ἐτέρας κλίμακος προσαναβὰς πρῶτος
ὑπερήσπισε τὸν βασιλέα· μετὰ δὲ τοῦτον ἕτεροι
πλείους ἐπιφανέντες καὶ καταπληξάμενοι τοὺς βαρβάρους
διέσωσαν τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον. τῆς δὲ πόλεως
ἁλούσης κατὰ κράτος οἱ μὲν Μακεδόνες διὰ τὸν
ὑπὲρ τοῦ βασιλέως θυμὸν πάντας τοὺς περιτυχόντας
ἀνῄρουν καὶ τὴν πόλιν νεκρῶν ἐπλήρωσαν.
5Ἐπὶ πολλὰς δὲ ἡμέρας τοῦ βασιλέως ἀσχοληθέντος
περὶ τὴν θεραπείαν οἱ κατὰ τὴν Βακτριανὴν
καὶ Σογδιανὴν κατοικισθέντες Ἕλληνες ἐκ πολλοῦ
μὲν τὸν ἐν τοῖς βαρβάροις κατοικισμὸν χαλεπῶς
ἔφερον, τότε δὲ φήμης προσπεσούσης αὐτοῖς ὅτι
τρωθεὶς ὁ βασιλεὺς τετελεύτηκεν ἀπέστησαν ἀπὸ
6τῶν Μακεδόνων. ἀθροισθέντες δὲ εἰς τρισχιλίους,
κατὰ τὴν εἰς οἶκον ἀνακομιδὴν πολλὰ πονήσαντες,
ὕστερον ὑπὸ τῶν Μακεδόνων κατεκόπησαν μετὰ
τὴν Ἀλεξάνδρου τελευτήν.
404Book XVII

was struck by an arrow1 below the breast and fell 326/5 b.c. upon one knee, overborne by the blow. Straightway the Indian who had shot him, thinking that he was helpless, ran up and struck at him; Alexander thrust his sword up into the man’s side, inflicting a mortal wound. The Indian fell, and the king caught hold of a branch close by and getting on his feet, defied the Indians to come forward and fight with him.2
At this point Peucestes, one of the guards, who had mounted another ladder, was the first to cover the king with his shield. After him a good many appeared together, which frightened the natives and saved Alexander.3 The city was taken by storm. In a fury at the injury to their king, the Macedonians killed all whom they met and filled the city with corpses.
For many days the king lay helpless under his treatment,4 and the Greeks who had been settled in Bactria and Sogdiana, who had long borne unhappily their sojourn among peoples of another race and now received word that the king had died of his wounds, revolted against the Macedonians. They formed a band of three thousand men and underwent great hardship on their homeward route. Later they were massacred by the Macedonians after Alexander’s death.5
1An arrow three feet long (Plutarch, De Fortuna aut Virtute
Alexandri, 2. 9. 341 c).2Curtius, 9. 5. 11–13.3There is general agreement that Peucestas deserves the
credit for saving Alexander’s life at this time. Curtius (9. 5.
14–18) reports that Timaeus, Leonnatus, and Aristonus were
present also. Plutarch (Alexander, 63) names Limnaeus; Arrian (6. 10–11), Leonnatus and Abreas. According to Cleitarchus, Ptolemy was present also, but Ptolemy denied this (Curtius, 9. 5. 21; Arrian, 6. 11. 8). He is named only by Plutarch, De Fortuna ant Virtute Alexandri, 1. 2. 327 b, and 2. 13. 343 d–345 (naming also Limnaeus and Leonnatus, but omitting Peucestas).4Curtius, 9. 5. 22-30.5Curtius, 9. 7. 1–11, who reports that they all eventually made good their escape. Diodorus is thinking of the 20,000 foot and 3000 horse killed by the soldiers of Pithon (Book 18. 4. 8; 7. 1–9).405