Diodorus of Sicily

τοῦ πατρὸς αὐτῷ γράψαντος διαλύσασθαι πρὸς
Ῥοδίους ὡς ἄν ποτε δύνηται, τὸν κάλλιστον ἐπετήρει
καιρόν, δώσοντα προφάσεις εὐλόγους τῆς
2συνθέσεως. Πτολεμαίου δὲ γράψαντος τοῖς Ῥοδίοις
τὸ μὲν πρῶτον ὅτι πέμψει σίτου πλῆθος
αὐτοῖς καὶ στρατιώτας τρισχιλίους, μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα
συμβουλεύοντος, ἐὰν ᾖ δυνατόν, μετρίως διαλύσασθαι
πρὸς Ἀντίγονον, ἅπαντες ἔρεπον πρὸς τὴν
3εἰρήνην. καθ᾿ ὃν δὴ χρόνον τοῦ κοινοῦ τῶν Αἰτωλῶν
ἀποστείλαντος πρεσβευτὰς περὶ διαλύσεων οἱ
Ῥόδιοι συνέθεντο πρὸς Δημήτριον ἐπὶ τοῖσδε, αὐτόνομον
καὶ ἀφρούρητον εἶναι τὴν πόλιν καὶ ἔχειν
τὰς ἰδίας προσόδους, συμμαχεῖν δὲ Ῥοδίους Ἀντιγόνῳ
πλὴν ἐὰν ἐπὶ Πτολεμαῖον στρατεύηται, καὶ
δοῦναι τῶν πολιτῶν ὁμήρους ἑκατὸν οὓς ἂν ἀπογράψηται
Δημήτριος πλὴν τῶν ἀρχὰς ἐχόντων.
100. Οἱ μὲν οὖν Ῥόδιοι πολιορκηθέντες ἐνιαύσιον
χρόνον τούτῳ τῷ τρόπῳ κατελύσαντο τὸν πόλεμον.
τοὺς δ᾿ ἐν τοῖς κινδύνοις ἄνδρας ἀγαθοὺς γενομένους
ἐτίμησαν ταῖς ἀξίαις δωρεαῖς καὶ τῶν
δούλων τοὺς ἀνδραγαθήσαντας ἐλευθερίας καὶ πολιτείας
2ἠξίωσαν. ἔστησαν δὲ καὶ τῶν βασιλέων
εἰκόνας Κασάνδρου καὶ Λυσιμάχου1 τῶν δευτερευόντων
μὲν ταῖς δόξαις, συμβεβλημένων δὲ
3μεγάλα πρὸς τὴν τῆς πόλεως σωτηρίαν. τὸν δὲ
Πτολεμαῖον ἐν ἀνταποδόσει μείζονος χάριτος ὑπερβάλλεσθαι
βουλόμενοι θεωροὺς ἀπέστειλαν εἰς Λιβύην
τοὺς ἐπερωτήσοντας τὸ παρ᾿ Ἄμμωνι μαντεῖον
1καὶ after Λυσιμάχου omitted by Wesseling.406Book XX

father thereafter wrote to him to come to terms with 3064 b.c. the Rhodians as best he could, he awaited a favourable opportunity that would provide a specious excuse for the settlement. Since Ptolemy had written to the Rhodians, first saying that he would send them a great quantity of grain and three thousand soldiers, but then advising them, if it should be possible, to make equitable terms with Antigonus, everyone inclined toward peace. At just this time the Aetolian League sent envoys to urge a settlement, and the Rhodians came to terms with Demetrius on these conditions: that the city should be autonomous and ungarrisoned and should enjoy its own revenue; that the Rhodians should be allies of Antigonus unless he should be at war with Ptolemy; and that they should give as hostages a hundred of their citizens whom Demetrius should select, those holding office being exempt.1
100. In this way, then, the Rhodians, after they had been besieged for a year, brought the war to an end. Those who had proved themselves brave men in the battles they honoured with the prizes that were their due, and they granted freedom and citizenship to such slaves as had shown themselves courageous. They also set up statues of King Cassander and King Lysimachus, who though they held second place in general opinion, yet had made great contributions to the salvation of the city. In the case of Ptolemy, since they wanted to surpass his record by repaying his kindness with a greater one, they sent a sacred mission into Libya to ask the oracle at



1Cp. Plutarch, Demetrius, 22. 4.407