Diodorus of Sicily

περὶ Πελοπόννησον διατρίβων καὶ Κασάνδρῳ μὲν
ἐγκαλῶν, τῆς δὲ Μακεδόνων ἡγεμονίας πάλαι ὀρεγόμενος
ἐκ Περγάμου μετεπέμψατο τὸν ἐκ Βαρσίνης
Ἡρακλέα, ὃς ἦν ἀλεξάνδρου μὲν υἱός, τρεφόμενος
δὲ ἐν Περγάμῳ, τὴν δ᾿ ἡλικίαν περὶ ἑπτακαίδεκα
2ἔτη γεγονώς. ὁ δ᾿ οὖν Πολυπέρχων διαπέμπων
πολλαχοῦ πρὸς τοὺς ἰδιοξένους καὶ τοὺς ἀλλοτρίως
διακειμένους πρὸς Κάσανδρον ἠξίου κατάγειν τὸ
3μειράκιον ἐπὶ τὴν πατρῴαν βασιλείαν. ἔγραψε δὲ
καὶ πρὸς τὸ κοινὸν τῶν Αἰτωλῶν, ἀξιῶν δίοδόν τε
δοῦναι καὶ συστρατεύειν, ἐπαγγελλόμενος πολλαπλασίους
χάριτας ἀποδώσειν, ἐὰν συγκατάγωσι τὸ
μειράκιον ἐπὶ τὴν πατρῴαν βασιλείαν. τῶν δὲ
πραγμάτων αὐτῷ κατὰ νοῦν γενομένων προθύμως
θ᾿ ὑπακουόντων τῶν Αἰτωλῶν καὶ πολλῶν ἄλλων
συντρεχόντων ἐπὶ τὴν κάθοδον τοῦ βασιλέως, οἱ
σύμπαντες ἠθροίσθησαν πεζοὶ μὲν ὑπὲρ τοὺς δισμυρίους,
4ἱππεῖς δ᾿ οὐκ ἐλάττους χιλίων. καὶ Πολυπέρχων
μὲν περὶ τὰς εἰς τὸν πόλεμον παρασκευὰς
γινόμενος χρήματά τε συνῆγε καὶ πρὸς τοὺς οἰκείως
ἔχοντας τῶν Μακεδόνων διαπεμπόμενος ἠξίου
συνεργεῖν.
21. Πτολεμαῖος δὲ τῶν ἐν Κύπρῳ πόλεων κυριεύων,
ἐπειδή τινων ἐπύθετο Νικοκλέα τὸν βασιλέα
τῶν Παφίων ἐν ἀπορρήτοις ἰδίᾳ πρὸς Ἀντίγονον



194Book XX

time in the Peloponnesus, and who was nursing 310 b.c. grievances against Cassander and had long craved the leadership of the Macedonians, summoned from Pergamon Barsinê’s1 son Heracles,2 who was the son of Alexander but was being reared in Pergamon, being about seventeen years of age.3 Moreover, Polyperchon, sending to his own friends in many places and to those who were at odds with Cassander, kept urging them to restore the youth to his ancestral throne. He also wrote to the Federal League of the Aetolians, begging them to grant a safe conduct and to join forces with him and promising to repay the favour many times over if they would aid in placing the youth on his ancestral throne. Since the affair proceeded as he wished, the Aetolians being in hearty agreement and many others hurrying to aid in the restoration of the king, in all there were assembled more than twenty thousand infantry and at least one thousand horsemen. Meanwhile Polyperchon, intent on the preparations for the war, was gathering money; and sending to those of the Macedonians who were friendly, he kept urging them to join in the undertaking.4
21. Ptolemy, however, who was master of the cities of Cyprus, on learning from certain persons that Nicocles,5 the king of Paphos, had secretly and




1This Barinê was the daughter of Artabazus, a Persian
follower of Darius (Plutarch, Alexander, 21. 4; Justin,
11. 10. 2; 13. 2. 7), and must be distinguished from the
daughter of Darius whom Alexander married at Susa in
324 b.c., who is called Barisinê by Arrian (7. 4. 4) but Stateira
by our other sources (Book 17. 107. 6; Plutarch, Alexander,
70. 2; Justin, 12. 10. 9).2It is probable that he was not a son of Alexander but a pretender sponsored by Antigonus, cp. Tarn, Journal of Hellenic Studies, 14 (1921), 18 ff.3Justin, 15. 2. 3, gives the age as fifteen years.4Continued in chap. 28. 1.5Nicocreon of Salamis (Book 19. 59. 1; 62. 5; 79. 5) is not identical with Nicocles of Paphos since Arrian (FGrH, 156. F 10. 6) clearly distinguishes them; but it seems certain that in this passage Diodorus has confused them, and that the fate described is that of the former (Parian Marble for 311/10 b.c. FGrH, 239. B 17).195