Diodorus of Sicily

ἐκ τῶν Ἑλληνίδων πόλεων ἔπεισε καὶ
Λακεδαιμονίους συμμαχεῖν· οἱ γὰρ Σπαρτιᾶται πρὸς
Ἀρταξέρξην ἀλλοτρίως εἶχον διὰ τὸ τοὺς Μεσσηνίους
ὁμοίως τοῖς ἄλλοις Ἕλλησιν ὑπὸ τοῦ
βασιλέως εἰς τὴν κοινὴν εἰρήνην κατατετάχθαι. τηλικαύτης
δὲ συνδρομῆς κατὰ τῶν Περσῶν γενομένης,
καὶ ὁ βασιλεὺς παρεσκευάζετο τὰ πρὸς τὸν
3πόλεμον. ὑπὸ γὰρ τὸν αὐτὸν καιρὸν ἔδει πρός τε
τὸν τῶν Αἰγυπτίων βασιλέα πολεμεῖν καὶ πρὸς τὰς1
κατὰ τὴν Ἀσίαν Ἑλληνίδας πόλεις καὶ Λακεδαιμονίους
καὶ τοὺς τούτων συμμάχους, σατράπας καὶ
στρατηγοὺς τοὺς ἄρχοντας μὲν τῶν παραθαλαττίων
τόπων, συντεθειμένους δὲ κοινοπραγίαν· ὧν ἦσαν
ἐπιφανέστατοι Ἀριοβαρζάνης μὲν ὁ τῆς Φρυγίας
σατράπης, ὃς καὶ Μιθριδάτου τελευτήσαντος τῆς



1τὰς πρὸς τὰς PA; τὰς πρὸς FK, Vogel deletes πρὸς, πρὸς
τὰς Dindorf, Bekker.202Book XV

Having procured many mercenaries from the Greek 362/1 b.c. cities, he persuaded the Lacedaemonians likewise to fight with him, for the Spartans were estranged from Artaxerxes because the Messenians had been included by the King on the same terms as the other Greeks in the general peace. When the general uprising against the Persians reached such large proportions, the King also began making preparations for the war. For at one and the same time he must needs fight the Egyptian king, the Greek cities of Asia, the Lacedaemonians and the allies of these,—satraps and generals who ruled the coastal districts and had agreed upon making common cause with them. Of these the most distinguished were Ariobarzanes,1 satrap of Phrygia, who at the death of Mithridates had taken

1The difficulties with the identification of Ariobarzanes
and Mithridates hinge on the following facts: (1) Ariobarzanes
in 407 was subordinate to Pharnabazus, satrap of
Dascyleion (Xenophon, Hell. 1. 4. 7). (2) Ariobarzanes
about 387 succeeded Pharnabazus in the satrapy of Dascyleion
when Pharnabazus was summoned to the court to marry
the daughter of Artaxerxes (Xenophon, op. cit. 5. 1. 28);
(3) Ariobarzanes refused to give up his throne to Pharnabazus’
son, Artabazus (chap. 91. 2), by the King’s daughter when
Artabazus grew up, and so became ringleader of the Satraps’
Revolt. (Cp. Nepos, Datames, 2. 5: Trogus, Prol. 10;
Demosthenes, 15. 9; Isocrates, 15. 111 ff.; Nepos, Timotheüs,
1. 2, 3.) (4) Ariobarzanes was betrayed by his son
Mithridates, sent up to court and crucified about 362. (See
Harpocration; Xenophon, Education of Cyrus, 8. 8. 4;
Aristotle, Politics, 5. 1312 a, and Valerius Maximus, 9. 11,
ext. 2.) (5) Ariobarzanes (this passage) succeeded Mithridates
in the kingship (sc. of Pontus). (6) Ariobarzanes died
(Book 16. 90. 2) in 337/6 after ruling (sc. in Pontus) for twenty-six years (fits with this passage) and was succeeded by Mithridates. Note that Harpocration alone speaks of the crucifixion of Ariobarzanes. The mention by Aristotle of the attack on Ariobarzanes by Mithridates is tentatively placed in the year 337/6 by Rackham, L.C.L. 450. Since Xenophon mentions the murder in the Education of Cyrus in juxtaposition with Rheomithres and Tachos, it seems probable that the death of Ariobarzanes is to be placed in 362 and not in 337/6 when Xenophon was probably dead and the Education of Cyrus was almost certainly finished. One must therefore agree with Judeich (P.-W. Realencyclopädiey s.v. “Ariobarzanes”) that numbers 1, 2, 3, and 4 refer to the same man, a different Ariobarzanes from numbers 5 and 6. Beloch (Griechische Geschichte2, 3. 2. § 60) comes to this conclusion and says that Diodorus is here mistaken in stating that Ariobarzanes takes over the throne from Mithridates. If this is Mithridates I of Pontus, he is succeeded by his son Ariobarzanes who is most likely the nephew of the satrap Ariobarzanes in question here. The nephew Ariobarzanes, probably known as Ariobarzanes of Cios (and Arrhine (?), cp. Book 20. 111, 4), is succeeded by his son Mithridates II, The uncle, the revolting satrap, also had a son Mithridates who betrayed him and caused his death.203