Diodorus of Sicily

Ἡρακλείας μετεπέμπετο, ποιησάμενος ἐπιγαμίαν
7πρὸς τοὺς Ἡρακλεώτας· ἔγημε γὰρ Ἄμηστριν τὴν
Ὀξυάρτου μὲν θυγατέρα, Δαρείου δὲ τοῦ βασιλέως
ἀδελφιδῆν, Κρατεροῦ δὲ γυναῖκα γενομένην
ὑπ᾿ Ἀλεξάνδρου δοθεῖσαν, τότε δυναστεύουσαν τῆς
πόλεως.
Καὶ τὰ μὲν περὶ τὴν Ἀσίαν ἐν τούτοις ἦν.
110. Κατὰ δὲ τὴν Ἑλλάδα Δημήτριος διατρίβων
ἐν ταῖς Ἀθήναις ἔσπευδε μυηθῆναι καὶ παραλαβεῖν1
τὴν ἐν Ἐλευσῖνι τελετήν. ἀπεχούσης δὲ χρόνον
ἱκανὸν τῆς κατὰ νόμους ἡμέρας, καθ᾿ ἣν εἰώθεισαν
Ἀθηναῖοι συντελεῖν τὴν τελετήν, ἔπεισε τὸν δῆμον
διὰ τὰς εὐεργεσίας κινῆσαι τὸ πάτριον ἔθος. παραδοὺς
οὖν αὑτὸν ἄνοπλον τοῖς ἱερεῦσι καὶ πρὸ τῆς
ὡρισμένης ἡμέρας μυηθεὶς ἀνέζευξεν ἐκ τῶν Ἀθηνῶν.
2καὶ τὸ μὲν πρῶτον εἰς Χαλκίδα τῆς Εὐβοίας
ἤθροισε τὸν στόλον καὶ τὴν πεζὴν δύναμιν· μετὰ δὲ
ταῦτα πυθόμενος τοὺς περὶ Κάσανδρον προκατειλῆφθαι
τὰς παρόδους, πεζῇ μὲν ἀπέγνω τὴν εἰς
Θετταλίαν ποιεῖσθαι πορείαν, παραπλεύσας δὲ μετὰ
τῆς δυνάμεως εἰς τὸν ἐν Λαρίσῃ λιμένα καὶ τὴν δύναμιν
ἐκβιβάσας τὴν μὲν πόλιν ἐξ ἐφόδου παρέλαβε,
τὴν δ᾿ ἄκραν ἐκπολιορκήσας τοὺς μὲν φρουροὺς
δήσας παρέδωκεν εἰς φυλακήν, τοῖς δὲ Λαρισαίοις
3τὴν αὐτονομίαν ἀποκατέστησεν. μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα
Ἀντρῶνας2 μὲν καὶ Πτελεὸν προσηγάγετο, Δίον δὲ




1παραλαβεῖν Fischer (in apparatus): καταλαβεῖν.2Ἀντρῶνας Unger, Fischer, Ἄντρωνας Madvig, Ἄντρωνα
Wesseling: Πρώνας.434Book XX

supplies from Heraclea, having made a marriage 302 b.c. alliance with the Heracleotes; for he had married Amestris, the daughter of Oxyartes and niece of King Darius. She had been wife of Craterus, given him by Alexander, and at the time in question was ruler of the city.1
Such was the situation in Asia.
110. In Greece Demetrius, who was tarrying in Athens, was eager to be initiated and to participate in the mysteries at Eleusis.2 Since it was a considerable time before the legally established day on which the Athenians were accustomed to celebrate the mysteries, he persuaded the people because of his benefactions to change the custom of their fathers. And so, giving himself over unarmed to the priests, he was initiated before the regular day and departed from Athens. And first he gathered together his fleet and his land army in Chalcis of Euboea; then, learning that Cassander had already occupied the passes in advance, he gave up the attempt to advance into Thessaly by land, but sailed along the coast with the army into the port of Larisa.3 Disembarking the army, he captured the city at once; and taking the acropolis, he imprisoned the garrison and put them under guard, but he restored their autonomy to the people of Larisa. Thereafter he won over Antrones and Pteleum,4 and when Cassander would have transported 




1After Craterus deserted Amestris (or Amastris) in order
to marry Phila (Book 18. 18. 7), she married Dionysius, the ruler of Heraclea. On his death she continued to rule that city for their minor children until her marriage with Lysimachus
(Strabo, 12. 3. 10), Lysimachus in his turn soon deserted her to marry Arsinoë.2Cp. Plutarch, Demetrius, 26.3This is Larisa Cremastê in Phthiotis.4Antron (or Antrones) and Pteleum are also in Phthiotis, a little north-east of Larisa.435