Diodorus of Sicily
3ὑπομεῖναι πανδημεὶ τὴν πολιορκίαν. ἔχοντες
δὲ πολλὴν δαψίλειαν καταπελτῶν καὶ τῶν ἄλλων
μηχανῶν τῶν πρὸς πολιορκίαν χρησίμων ἑτέρας
πολλαπλασίους κατεσκεύασαν ῥᾳδίως διὰ τῶν ἐν
τῇ Τύρῳ μηχανοποιῶν καὶ τῶν ἄλλων τεχνιτῶν
4παντοδαπῶν ὄντων. διὰ δὲ τούτων ὀργάνων1 παντοδαπῶν
καὶ ξένων ταῖς ἐπινοίαις κατασκευαζομένων
ἅπας μὲν ὁ περίβολος τῆς πόλεως ἐπληρώθη
τῶν μηχανῶν, μάλιστα δὲ κατὰ τὸν τόπον τοῦτον
ἐν ᾧ τὸ χῶμα συνήγγιζε τῷ τείχει.
5Ὡς δ᾿ εἰς τὴν ἄφεσιν τοῦ βέλους διέτεινε τὸ
κατασκευαζόμενον ὑπὸ τῶν Μακεδόνων ἔργον, καὶ
παρὰ τῶν θεῶν τινα προεσημαίνετο τοῖς κινδυνεύουσιν.
ἐκ μὲν γὰρ τοῦ πελάγους ὁ κλύδων
προσεπέλασε τοῖς ἔργοις κῆτος ἄπιστον τὸ μέγεθος,
ὃ προσπεσὸν τῷ χώματι κακὸν μὲν οὐδὲν εἰργάσατο,
τῷ δ᾿ ἑτέρῳ μέρει τοῦ σώματος προσανακεκλιμένον
ἐτὶ πολὺν χρόνον ἔμενε καὶ πολλὴν κατάπληξιν
6παρείχετο τοῖς θεωμένοις τὸ παράδοξον, πάλιν δ᾿
εἰς τὸ πέλαγος νηξάμενον εἰς δεισιδαιμονίαν ἀμφοτέρους
προηγάγετο· ἑκάτεροι γὰρ ὡς τοῦ Ποσειδῶνος
αὐτοῖς βοηθήσειν μέλλοντος διέκρινον τὸ
σημεῖον, ῥέποντες ταῖς γνώμαις πρὸς τὸ ἴδιον
συμφέρον.
7Ἐγίνετο δὲ καὶ ἄλλα σημεῖα παράδοξα, δυνάμενα
διατροπὴν καὶ φόβον τοῖς ὄχλοις παρασχέσθαι.
κατὰ γὰρ τὰς τροφὰς παρὰ τοῖς Μακεδόσιν οἱ
διακλώμενοι τῶν ἄρτων αἱματοειδῆ τὴν πρόσοψιν
εἶχον. ἑωρακέναι δέ τις ἔφησεν ὄψιν καθ᾿ ἣν ὁ
Ἀπόλλων ἔλεγε μέλλειν ἑαυτὸν ἐκλιπεῖν τὴν πόλιν.
8τοῦ δὲ πλήθους ὑπονοήσαντος ὅτι πεπλακὼς εἴη
τὸν λόγον χαριζόμενος Ἀλεξάνδρῳ καὶ διὰ τοῦτο
1τῶν ὀργάνων MSS.; Fischer deleted τῶν.234Book XVII

almost their whole population still in the city. They 332/1 b.c. had a wealth of catapults and other engines employed for sieges and they had no difficulty in constructing more because of the engineers and artisans of all sorts who were in the city. All kinds of novel devices were fashioned by them, so that the entire circuit of the walls was covered with machines, especially on that side where the mole was approaching the city.1
As the Macedonian construction came within range of their missiles, portents were sent by the gods to them in their danger. Out of the sea a tidal wave tossed a sea-monster of incredible size into the midst of the Macedonian operations. It crashed into the mole but did it no harm, remained resting a portion of its body against it for a long time and then swam off into the sea again.2 This strange event threw both sides into superstition, each imagining that the portent signified that Poseidon would come to their aid, for they were swayed by their own interest in the matter.
There were other strange happenings too, calculated to spread confusion and terror among people. At the distribution of rations on the Macedonian side, the broken pieces of bread had a bloody look.3 Someone reported, on the Tyrian side, that he had seen a vision in which Apollo told him that he would leave the city. Everyone suspected that the man had made up the story in order to curry favour with





1Curtius, 4. 2. 12.2Curtius (4. 4. 3–4) places this event a little later in the siege.3Curtius, 4. 2. 14. Diodorus omits Alexander’s favouring dream of Heracles (Curtius, 4. 2. 17; Arrian, 2, 18. 1).235