Diodorus of Sicily

ἔχοντες πεζοὺς μὲν πεντακισχιλίους, ἱππεῖς δὲ
3διακοσίους. τούτων δὲ τῶν δυνάμεων ἀθροισθεισῶν
εἰς ἕνα τόπον, οἱ μὲν Θηβαῖοι λόφον τινὰ
κατελάβοντο παραμήκη, σταδίους ἀπέχοντα τῆς
πόλεως εἴκοσι, καὶ πρόβλημα ποιησάμενοι τὰς δυσχωρίας
ἀνέμενον τὴν τῶν πολεμίων ἔφοδον· τὴν
γὰρ Ἀγησιλάου δόξαν καταπεπληγμένοι τὸν ἐν τοῖς
4πεδίοις ἐξ ἴσου κίνδυνον ὑπομένειν εὐλαβοῦντο. ὁ
δ᾿ Ἀγησίλαος συντεταγμένῃ τῇ δυνάμει προάγων
ἐπὶ τοὺς Βοιωτούς, ὡς ἤγγισε τοῖς πολεμίοις, τὸ
μὲν πρῶτον τοὺς ψιλοὺς ἐπαφῆκε τοῖς ἐναντίοις,
πειρώμενος πῶς ἔχουσι πρὸς τὴν μάχην. ἀποκρουσαμένων
δὲ αὐτοὺς τῶν Θηβαίων ῥᾳδίως ἐκ τόπων
ὑπερδεξίων, ἐπήγαγε πᾶσαν ἐπ᾿ αὐτοὺς τὴν δύναμιν
5συντεταγμένην καταπληκτικῶς. Χαβρίας δ᾿ ὁ
Ἀθηναῖος τῶν μισθοφόρων ἀφηγούμενος παρήγγειλε
τοῖς στρατιώταις δέχεσθαι τοὺς πολεμίους
καταπεφρονηκότως ἅμα καὶ τεταγμένως,1 καὶ τὰς
ἀσπίδας πρὸς τὸ γόνυ κλίναντας ὀρθῷ2 τῷ
6δόρατι μένειν. ὧν ποιησάντων τὸ προσταχθὲν
ὥσπερ ἀφ᾿ ἑνὸς παρακελεύσματος, ὁ Ἀγησίλαος
θαυμάσας τήν τε εὐταξίαν τῶν πολεμίων καὶ
τὴν καταφρόνησιν, τὸ μὲν βιάζεσθαι πρὸς ὑπερδεξίους
τόπους καὶ συναναγκάζειν τοὺς ἐναντίους
ἄνδρας ἀγαθοὺς γίνεσθαι πρὸς τὸν ἐκ χειρὸς κίνδυνον
οὐκ ἔκρινε, πεῖραν δὲ λαβὼν ὅτι τολμήσουσιν
ἀναγκαζόμενοι διαγωνίζεσθαι περὶ τῆς νίκης, ἐν
τῷ πεδίῳ προεκαλεῖτο. οὐ συγκαταβαινόντων δὲ
τῶν Θηβαίων, τὴν μὲν φάλαγγα τῶν πεζῶν ἀπήγαγε,
τοὺς δ᾿ ἱππεῖς καὶ τὰ ψιλικὰ τῶν ταγμάτων


1τεταγμένως Post: (ἐν Dindorf) τῇ τάξει μένοντας.2So Post, σὺν ὀρθῷ Hertlein: ἐν ὀρθῷ.36Book XV

Thebes with five thousand foot-soldiers and two 377/6 b.c. hundred cavalry. When these forces had assembled, the Thebans occupied an oblong crest about twenty stades from the city and, having transformed the obstacle into a bastion, awaited the attack of the enemy; for the reputation of Agesilaüs so overawed them that they were too timid to await his attack on equal terms in the level country. As for Agesilaüs,1 he led out his army in battle array against the Boeotians, and, when he had drawn near, in the first place launched his light-armed troops against his opponents, thus testing their disposition to fight him. But when the Thebans had easily from their higher position thrust his men back, he led the whole army against them closely arrayed to strike them with terror. Chabrias2 the Athenian, however, leading his mercenary troops, ordered his men to receive the enemy with a show of contempt, maintaining all the while their battle lines, and, leaning their shields against their knees, to wait with upraised spear. Since they did what they were ordered as at a single word of command, Agesilaüs, marvelling at the fine discipline of the enemy and their posture of contempt, judged it inadvisable to force a way against the higher ground and compel his opponents to show their valour in a hand-to-hand contest, and, having learned by trial that they would dare, if forced, to dispute the victory, he challenged them in the plain. But when the Thebans would not come down to meet him, he withdrew the phalanx of infantry, dispatched the cavalry and light-armed ranks


1For the campaign of this year (actually 378) see Xenophon,
Hell. 5. 4. 35–41, Agesilaüs, 26.2For the rôle of Chabrias see Polyaenus, 2. 1. 2; Nepos, Chabrias, 1; Demosthenes, 20. 76.37