Diodorus of Sicily

πορευθεὶς εἰς τὴν Φωκίδα καὶ τὰς μὲν πλείους
τῶν πόλεων προσαγόμενος ἐξέβαλε πανταχόθεν τὰς
Κασάνδρου φρουράς· ἐπῆλθε δὲ καὶ τὴν Λοκρίδα
καὶ τῶν Ὀπουντίων τὰ Κασάνδρου φρονούντων
συνεστήσατο πολιορκίαν καὶ συνεχεῖς προσβολὰς
ἐποιεῖτο.
79. Τῆς δ᾿ αὐτῆς θερίας οἱ1 Κυρηναῖοι μὲν
ἀποστάντες Πτολεμαίου τὴν ἄκραν περιεστρατοπέδευσαν,
ὡς αὐτίκα μάλα τὴν φρουρὰν ἐκβαλοῦντες,
παραγενομένων δὲ πρεσβευτῶν ἐκ τῆς
Ἀλεξανδρείας καὶ παρακαλούντων παύσασθαι τῆς
φιλοτιμίας τούτους μὲν ἀπέκτειναν, τὴν δ᾿ ἄκραν
2ἐνεργέστερον ἐπολιόρκουν. ἐφ᾿ οἷς παροξυνθεὶς
ὁ Πτολεμαῖος ἀπέστειλεν Ἄγιν στρατηγὸν μετὰ
δυνάμεως πεζῆς, ἐξέπεμψε δὲ καὶ στόλον τὸν συλληψόμενον
τοῦ πολέμου, ναύαρχον ἐπιστήσας Ἐπαινετόν.
3ὁ δὲ Ἄγις ἐνεργῶς διαπολεμήσας τοῖς
ἀφεστηκόσιν ἐκυρίευσε κατὰ κράτος τῆς πόλεως
καὶ τοὺς μὲν αἰτίους τῆς ἀποστάσεως δήσας ἀπέστειλεν
εἰς τὴν Ἀλεξάνδρειαν καὶ τῶν ἄλλων τὰ
ὅπλα παρελόμενος καὶ τὰ κατὰ τὴν πόλιν διοικήσας
ὥς ποτ᾿ ἔδοξεν αὐτῷ συμφέρειν ἐπανῆλθεν εἰς τὴν
Αἴγυπτον.
4Πτολεμαῖος δέ, τῶν περὶ Κυρήνην αὐτῷ κατὰ
νοῦν ἀπηντηκότων, διῆρεν ἐκ τῆς Αἰγύπτου μετὰ
δυνάμεως εἰς τὴν Κύπρον ἐπὶ τοὺς ἀπειθοῦντας τῶν
βασιλέων. Πυγμαλίωνα δὲ εὑρὼν διαπρεσβευόμενον
πρὸς Ἀντίγονον ἀνεῖλε, Πράξιππον δὲ τὸν
τῆς Λαπιθίας βασιλέα καὶ2 τὸν τῆς Κερυνίας δυνάστην

1οἱ added by Capps.2Fischer suspects the loss of a proper name after καὶ.50Book XIX

where he won over most of the cities and from all 313 b.c. of these expelled the garrisons of Cassander. He also marched against Locris; and, since the Opuntians belonged to the party of Cassander, he began a siege and made continuous attacks.1
79. In that same summer2 the people of Cyrenê revolted from Ptolemy, invested the citadel, and seemed on the point of immediately casting out the garrison; and, when envoys came from Alexandria and bade them cease from their sedition, they killed them and continued the attack on the citadel with greater vigour. Enraged at them, Ptolemy dispatched Agis as general with a land army and also sent a fleet to take part in the war, placing Epaenetus in command. Agis attacked the rebels with vigour and took the city by storm. Those who were guilty of the sedition he bound and sent to Alexandria; and then, after depriving the others of their arms and arranging the affairs of the city in whatever way seemed best to himself, he returned to Egypt.
But Ptolemy, now that the matter of Cyrenê had been disposed of according to his wishes, crossed over with an army from Egypt into Cyprus against those of the kings who refused to obey him. Finding that Pygmalion was negotiating with Antigonus, he put him to death; and he arrested Praxippus, king of Lapithia and ruler of Cerynia,3 whom he suspected of





1Opus was probably taken, but no statement to the effect survives in our sources. Diodorus returns to Greek affairs in chap. 87.2The summer of 313 b.c.3It is quite probable that the name of the ruler of Cerynia has been lost from the MSS. Lapithia and Cerynia are near the middle of the north coast of Cyprus.51