Diodorus of Sicily
2Τοῦ γὰρ βασιλέως ἀλειφομένου καὶ τῆς βασιλικῆς
ἐσθῆτος καὶ διαδήματος ἐπί τινος θρόνου τεθέντος
τῶν ἐγχωρίων τις δεδεμένος ἐλύθη τὰς πέδας αὐτομάτως
καὶ λαθὼν τοὺς φύλακας διῆλθε διὰ τῶν τῆς
3αὐλῆς θυρῶν ἀνεπικωλύτως. προσελθὼν δὲ τῷ
θρόνῳ καὶ τὴν βασιλικὴν ἐνδυσάμενος ἐσθῆτα καὶ
τὸ διάδημα περιθέμενος ἐκάθισεν ἐπὶ τὸν θρόνον
καὶ τὴν ἡσυχίαν ἦγε. γνωσθείσης1 δὲ τῆς πράξεως
ὁ βασιλεὺς καταπλαγεὶς τὸ παράδοξον προσῆλθε
τῷ θρόνῳ καὶ χωρὶς καταπλήξεως ἡσυχῇ τὸν ἄνθρωπον
ἀνέκρινε τίς ὢν καὶ τί βουλόμενος τοῦτο
4ἔπραξε. τοῦ δὲ εἰπόντος μηδὲν ἁπλῶς γινώσκειν
τοῖς μάντεσι προσαναθέμενος περὶ τοῦ σημείου
τοῦτον μὲν κατὰ τὴν ἐκείνων κρίσιν ἀπέκτεινεν,
ὅπως τὰ σημαινόμενα δυσχερῆ εἰς ἐκεῖνον τρέπηται,
αὐτὸς δὲ ἀναλαβὼν τὴν ἐσθῆτα καὶ θεοῖς ἀποτροπαίοις
θύσας ἐν ἀγωνίᾳ καθειστήκει καὶ τῆς τῶν
Χαλδαίων προρρήσεως ἐμνημόνευσε καὶ τοὺς μὲν
συμπείσαντας φιλοσόφους παρελθεῖν εἰς τὴν Βαβυλῶνα2
κατεμέμφετο, τὴν δὲ τέχνην τῶν Χαλδαίων
καὶ τὴν τῶν ἀνδρῶν ἀγχίνοιαν ἐθαύμαζε, καθόλου





1γνωρισθείσης F.2Βαβυλωνίαν RX.462Book XVII
Once when the king was being rubbed with oil and 324 /3 b.c. the royal robe and diadem were lying on a chair, one of the natives who was kept in bonds was spontaneously freed from his fetters, escaped his guards’ notice, and passed through the doors of the palace with no one hindering.1 He went to the royal chair, put on the royal dress and bound his head with the diadem, then seated himself upon the chair and remained quiet.2 As soon as the king learned of this, he was terrified at the odd event, but walked to the chair and without showing his agitation asked the man quietly who he was and what he meant by doing this. When he made no reply whatsoever,3 Alexander referred the portent to the seers for interpretation and put the man to death in accordance with their judgement, hoping that the trouble which was forecast by his act might light upon the man’s own head.4 He picked up the clothing and sacrificed to the gods who avert evil, but continued to be seriously troubled. He recalled the prediction of the Chaldaeans and was angry with the philosophers who had persuaded him to enter Babylon. He was impressed anew with the skill of the Chaldaeans and their insight,



1Plutarch, Alexander, 73. 3–4, says that the prisoner had
been miraculously freed by Serapis; Arrian, 7. 24. 1–3, that
he had not been held in bonds.2The significance of the royal throne in the Orient has
appared in chap. 66. 3–7 (p. 306, note 2). If the man was a
native, he may have regarded it as a sanctuary, or at least as
a place of refuge from the pursuing guards; in Arrian’s
account, they did not venture to remove him by force “because
of some Persian custom.” (According to the anecdote
traced back to Trogus by O. Seel (Pompeius Trogus, Frag- menta, 1956, 109 f.), it was “capital” for anyone to sit on the throne of the king of Persia.) Plutarch, Alexander, 73. 4, states that he was a Greek. It is possible that he did not put on the royal garments, but merely held them. Later references to the significance of the throne are Dio, 50. 10. 2; 56. 29. 1; Script. Hist. Aug., Septimius Severus, 1. 9. See Addenda.3Either because he was too frightened to speak, or because he did not speak Greek. Plutarch makes him claim to have been inspired by Serapis, but this did not save him from execution.4Plutarch, Alexander, 74. 1. Arrian (7. 24. 3) reports only that he was tortured to make him explain his actions.463