Diodorus of Sicily

ἤθροισεν εἰς Χορτάκανα, πόλιν ἐπιφανεστάτην τῶν
ἐν τούτοις τοῖς τόποις καὶ φυσικῇ διαφέρουσαν
2ὀχυρότητι, τοῦ δὲ βασιλέως ἐγγίσαντος κατεπλάγη
τό τε μέγεθος τῆς δυνάμεως καὶ τὰς διαβεβοημένας
τῶν Μακεδόνων ἀνδραγαθίας. διόπερ αὐτὸς μὲν
μετὰ δισχιλίων ἱππέων ἐξίππευσε πρὸς Βῆσσον,
παρακαλέσων βοηθεῖν κατὰ τάχος, τοῖς δ᾿ ἄλλοις
παρήγγειλε καταφυγεῖν εἰς ὄρος καλούμενον1 . . . ,
ἔχον πολλὰς δυσχωρίας καὶ καταφυγὰς2 εὐθέτους
3τοῖς μὴ τολμῶσι κατὰ στόμα διακινδυνεύειν. ὧν
πραξάντων τὸ παραγγελθὲν ὁ βασιλεὺς τῇ συνήθει
φιλοτιμίᾳ χρησάμενος καὶ τοὺς καταφυγόντας εἴς
τινα πέτραν ὀχυρὰν καὶ μεγάλην πολιορκήσας ἐνεργῶς
4ἠνάγκασεν ἑαυτοὺς παραδοῦναι.3 μετὰ δὲ
ταῦτα πάσας τὰς κατὰ τὴν σατραπείαν ταύτην πόλεις
ἐν τριάκονθ᾿ ἡμέραις κατακτησάμενος προῆγεν
ἐκ τῆς Ὑρκανίας καὶ διανύσας εἰς τὰ βασίλεια τῆς
Δραγγινῆς ἐνταῦθα διέτριβε καὶ τὴν δύναμιν ἀνελάμβανε.
79. Κατὰ δὲ τούτους τοὺς καιροὺς περιέπεσε
πράξει μοχθηρᾷ καὶ τῆς ἰδίας χρηστότητος ἀλλοτρίᾳ.





1There is clearly a lacuna here, but Fischer’s restoration
Βαγῶον, from Ptolemy, vi. 17, does not fit the geographical
situation (cp. note 6 on the opposite page), and is otherwise
entirely conjectural.2καταφυγὰς Cobet; φυγὰς codd., which is possible but
unlikely.3προδοῦναι RX.344Book XVII

a notable city of that region and one of great natural 329/8 b.c. strength, but as the king approached, he became alarmed at the size of the latter’s forces and at the fighting reputation of the Macedonians. He himself with two thousand horsemen1 rode off to the protection of Bessus, asking him to send help with all speed, but told his other followers to take refuge in a mountain called . . .,2 which afforded difficult terrain and a secure refuge for those who did not dare to meet their enemies face to face. After they had done so, and had secured themselves upon a steep and high “rock,”3 the king with his accustomed spirit invested the place, attacked them vigorously, and compelled them to surrender. In the course of thirty days thereafter, he brought into submission all the cities of the satrapy.4 Then he left Hyrcania and marched to the capital of Dranginê,5 where he paused and rested his army.6
79. At this same time, Alexander stumbled into a base action which was quite foreign to his goodness





1Curtius, 6. 6. 22.2It is futile to guess what name is missing in the manuscripts.3The same term occurs in Curtius, 6. 6. 23–26. Cp. on chap. 28, p. 195, note 5.4Curtius, 6. 6. 13–36; Arrian, 3. 25. 1–7.5Arrian (3. 25. 8) calls these people “Zarangaioi.” The usual term is Drangianê.6Diodorus has compressed the movements involved in this operation. Alexander had left Hyrcania and passed through Parthia and Aria, where he left Satibarzanes as satrap. He advanced east toward Bactria. At the revolt of Satibarzanes, he returned to Aria; the satrap in his flight must have passed Alexander going in the opposite direction. He can have encountered Satibarzanes’s foot troops in the mountains east of Artacoana and not have proceeded to that city. Finally, after thirty days, he turned south into Drangianê abandoning his original route.345