Diodorus of Sicily

βοηθεῖν ἐψηφίσαντο πέμπειν στρατηγὸν Τιμολέοντα
Τιμαινέτου,1 πρωτεύοντα τῶν πολιτῶν ἀνδρείᾳ τε
καὶ συνέσει στρατηγικῇ καὶ καθόλου πάσαις ταῖς
ἀρεταῖς κεκοσμημένον. ἴδιον δέ τι συνέβη περὶ
τὸν ἄνδρα συμπεσεῖν, ὃ συνελάβετο αὐτῷ πρὸς τὴν
3τῆς στρατηγίας αἵρεσιν. Τιμοφάνης γὰρ ὁ ἀδελφὸς
αὐτοῦ προέχων τῶν Κορινθίων πλούτῳ τε καὶ
τόλμῃ πάλαι μὲν ἦν φανερὸς τυραννίδος ὀρεγόμενος,
τότε δὲ τοὺς ἀπόρους ἀναλαμβάνων καὶ πανοπλίας2
κατασκευαζόμενος καὶ τοὺς πονηροτάτους ἔχων
μεθ᾿ ἑαυτοῦ κατὰ τὴν ἀγορὰν περιῄει, οὐ προσποιούμενος
ὅτι τύραννός ἐστι, τὰ δὲ τῆς τυραννίδος
4ἔργα διαπραττόμενος. ὁ δὲ Τιμολέων ἀλλοτριώτατος
ὢν μοναρχίας τὸ μὲν πρῶτον ἐπεχείρει πείθειν
τὸν ἀδελφὸν ἀποστῆναι τῆς ἐπιβολῆς, ὡς δ᾿
οὐχ ὑπήκουεν, ἀλλ᾿ αἰεὶ καὶ μᾶλλον ἐπετείνετο τῇ
τόλμῃ, ἀδυνατῶν αὐτὸν λόγῳ διορθώσασθαι περιπατοῦντα3
5κατὰ τὴν ἀγορὰν ἀπέσφαξεν. θορύβου
δὲ γενομένου καὶ τῶν πολιτῶν συνδραμόντων διά
τε τὸ παράδοξον καὶ τὴν δεινότητα τῆς πράξεως
στάσις ἐγίνετο. οἱ μὲν γὰρ ἔφασαν δεῖν ὡς ἐμφύλιον
φόνον πεπραχότα τὸν Τιμολέοντα τυγχάνειν τῆς ἐκ
τῶν νόμων τιμωρίας, οἱ δὲ τοὐναντίον ἀπεφαίνοντο
6δεῖν4 ἐπαινεῖν τὸν ἄνδρα ὡς τυραννοκτόνον. τῆς δὲ
γερουσίας συνεδρευούσης ἐν τῷ βουλευτηρίῳ καὶ




1Τιμοδήμου Plutarch, Timoleon, 3; cp. Clasen, Timoleon,
p. 13; Holm, Geschichte Siciliens, 2. 194, 464.2πανοπλίαις Fischer.3Hertlein: περιπατῶν (καὶ π. PX).4δεῖν added by Fischer (cp. Books 12. 55. 8; 16. 84. 5).418Book XVI

was only right to assist people who were offshoots of 346/5 b.c. themselves,1 voted to send as general Timoleon, son of Timaenetus, a man of highest prestige amongst his fellow citizens for bravery and sagacity as a general and, in a word, splendidly equipped with every virtue. A peculiar coincidence befell him which contributed toward his being chosen to the generalship. Timophanes,
his brother, a man of outstanding wealth and effrontery amongst the Corinthians, had for some time past been clearly aiming at a tyranny and at the moment was winning the poor to his cause and laying up a store of suits of armour and parading about the market-place accompanied by a band of ruffians, not actually claiming to be tyrant but practising the arts of tyranny. Timoleon, who was much averse to the rule of one man, first attempted to dissuade his brother from his overt attempt, but when the latter refused to heed and continued all the more his headstrong career, Timoleon, being unable by reasoning with him to make him mend his ways, put him to death as he was promenading in the market-place.2 A scuffle ensued and a mob of citizens came surging up stirred by the surprising character and the enormity of the deed, and dissension broke out. One side claimed that as the perpetrator of a kin-murder Timoleon should receive the punishment prescribed by the laws, whereas the other party asserted just the opposite, that they should applaud him as a tyrannicide. When the senate met to deliberate in the


1Syracuse was a Corinthian colony founded in 734.2According to Plutarch the murder of Timophanes (not by Timoleon’s own hand) occurred about twenty years before Timoleon’s departure for Syracuse. Diodorus’ account should be compared with Plutarch’s and Nepos’ Timoleon.419