Diodorus of Sicily

παραδόσιμον εἶναι τοῦτον. διὰ δὲ τῆς αὐτοματιζούσης
φήμης ὥσπερ θείᾳ τινὶ προνοίᾳ διεσήμαινε
τὸ δαιμόνιον τὴν ἐσομένην ἐπιβουλὴν εὐθὺς τῷ Φιλίππῳ.
3ἀκολούθως δὲ τούτοις καὶ ἕτεραί τινες ὥσπερ
ἐνθεάζουσαι ἐγένοντο φωναὶ προδηλοῦσαι τὴν
τοῦ βασιλέως καταστροφήν.
Ἐν γὰρ τῷ βασιλικῷ πότῳ Νεοπτόλεμος ὁ τραγῳδός,
πρωτεύων τῇ μεγαλοφωνίᾳ καὶ τῇ δόξῃ,
προστάξαντος αὐτῷ τοῦ Φιλίππου προενέγκασθαι
τῶν ἐπιτετευγμένων ποιημάτων καὶ μάλιστα τῶν
ἀνηκόντων πρὸς τὴν κατὰ τῶν Περσῶν στρατείαν,
ὁ μὲν τεχνίτης κρίνας οἰκεῖον ὑποληφθήσεσθαι τὸ
ποίημα τῇ διαβάσει τοῦ Φιλίππου καὶ τὴν εὐδαιμονίαν
ἐπιπλῆξαι βουλόμενος τοῦ Περσῶν βασιλέως,
καίπερ οὖσαν μεγάλην καὶ περιβόητον, ὅπως
μεταπέσοι ποτ᾿ ἂν1 εἰς τοὐναντίον ὑπὸ τῆς τύχης,
ἤρξατο λέγειν τόδε τὸ ποίημα·

φρονεῖτε νῦν αἰθέρος ὑψηλότερον
καὶ μεγάλων πεδίων ἀρούρας,
φρονεῖθ᾿ ὑπερβαλλόμενοι
δόμων δόμους, ἀφροσύνᾳ
πρόσω βιοτὰν τεκμαιρόμενοι.
ὁ δ᾿ ἀμφιβάλλει ταχύπουν2
κέλευθον ἕρπων3 σκοτίαν,
ἄφνω δ᾿ ἄφαντος προσέβα
μακρὰς ἀφαιρούμενος ἐλπίδας
θνατῶν4 πολύμοχθος Ἅιδας,5
1So L. A. Post: ὅπως μεταπέσοιτ᾿ ἂν PX, μεταπέσοι ποτὲ R,
μεταπέση ποτε F.2ταχύπουν] ταχύπους Burges.3ἕρπων Bücheler: ἕρπω Pal. Vat., ἕ . . . . P, αἴ X, ἔργῳ cet.4So Reiske: θανάτων.5So Rhodoman: Ἀΐδας.92Book XVI

up.1 The casual phrase seemed like an omen sent by 336/5 b.c. Providence to let Philip know that a plot was coming. There were other like words also spoken, seemingly divinely inspired, which forecast the king’s death.
At the state banquet, Philip ordered the actor Neoptolemus, matchless in the power of his voice and in his popularity, to present some well-received pieces, particularly such as bore on the Persian campaign. The artist thought that his piece would be taken as appropriate to Philip’s crossing and intended to rebuke the wealth of the Persian king, great and famous as it was, (suggesting) that it could some day be overturned by fortune. Here are the words that he first sang:

“Your thoughts reach higher than the air;
You dream of wide fields’ cultivation.
The homes you plan surpass the homes
That men have known, but you do err,
Guiding your life afar.
But one there is who’ll catch the swift,
Who goes a way obscured in gloom,
And sudden, unseen, overtakes
And robs us of our distant hopes——
Death, mortals’ source of many woes.”2
1Such protective decrees were common (cp. Demosthenes, C. Aristocr, 95), the most famous being the decree of Aristocrates proposed in honour of Cersobleptes in 353 b.c.2Nauck, Trag. Graec. Frag.2, Adesp. 127; Bergk, Poet. Lyr. Graec.2 3. 744–745. The ode has been thought Aeschylean. Lines 8–9 are quoted, with slight grammatical change, by Philodemus, De Morte, col. 38. 12–14 (D. Bassi, Papiri Ercolanesi, 1; Milan, 1914).93