Diodorus of Sicily

φόνων καὶ παντοίων ἀνομημάτων. οἱ μὲν γὰρ διὰ
τὰς προϋπαρχούσας ἔχθρας οὐδεμιᾶς ἐπηρείας ἀπείχοντο
κατὰ τῶν μισουμένων, ἔχοντες ἐξουσίαν
διατιθέναι πᾶν τὸ κεχαρισμένον τῷ θυμῷ· οἱ δὲ ταῖς
τῶν εὐπόρων σφαγαῖς οἰόμενοι τὰς ἰδίας ἀπορίας1
ἐπανορθώσασθαι2 πᾶν ἐμηχανῶντο πρὸς τὸν κατ᾿
3αὐτῶν ὄλεθρον. οἱ μὲν γὰρ τὰς αὐλείους3 θύρας
ἐξέκοπτον, οἱ δὲ διὰ κλιμάκων ἐπὶ τὰς ὀροφὰς
προσανέβαινον, ἄλλοι δὲ διηγωνίζοντο πρὸς τοὺς
ἀπὸ τῶν στεγῶν ἀμυνομένους. οὐ μὴν οὐδὲ τοῖς
εἰς τὰ τεμένη καταφυγοῦσιν ἡ τῶν θεῶν ἱκετεία
παρείχετο τὴν ἀσφάλειαν, ἀλλ᾿ ἡ πρὸς θεοὺς εὐσέβεια
4ἐνικᾶτο πρὸς ἀνθρώπων. καὶ ταῦτ᾿ ἐτόλμων
ἐν εἰρήνῃ καὶ πατρίδι παρανομεῖν Ἕλληνες καθ᾿
Ἑλλήνων, οἰκεῖοι κατὰ συγγενῶν, οὐ φύσιν, οὐ
σπονδάς, οὐ θεοὺς ἐντρεπόμενοι, ἐφ᾿ οἷς οὐχ ὅτι
φίλος, ἀλλὰ καὶ παντελῶς ἐχθρός, μέτριός γε τὴν
ψυχήν, οὐκ ἔστιν ὅστις οὐκ ἂν τὴν τῶν πασχόντων
τύχην ἐλεήσειεν.
8. Πᾶσαι μὲν γὰρ αἱ πύλαι τῆς πόλεως ἐκλείσθησαν,
πλείους δὲ τῶν τετρακισχιλίων ἀνῃρέθησαν
αὐθημερόν, τοῦτο μόνον ἐγκληθέντες ὅτι χαριέστεροι
τῶν ἄλλων ἦσαν. τῶν δὲ φυγόντων οἱ μὲν
ἐπὶ τὰς πύλας ὁρμήσαντες συνελήφθησαν, οἱ δὲ
κατὰ τῶν τειχῶν ῥίπτοντες αὑτοὺς εἰς τὰς ἀστυγείτονας
πόλεις διεσώθησαν, τινὲς δὲ διὰ τὸν φόβον
2ἀπρονοήτως ἁλλόμενοι κατεκρημνίσθησαν. τὸ δὲ
πλῆθος ἦν τῶν ἐκπεσόντων ἐκ τῆς πατρίδος ὑπὲρ
τοὺς ἑξακισχιλίους, ὧν οἱ πλεῖστοι κατέφυγον πρὸς
τοὺς Ἀκραγαντίνους κἀκεῖ τῆς καθηκούσης ἐπιμελείας

1ἀπορίας Stephanus: εὐπορίας (but second hand of R
gives ἀπορίας).2ἐπανορθώσασθαι MSS., Fischer, ἐπανορθώσεσθαι Dindorf.3αὐλείους Dindorf: αὐλίους MSS., Fischer.246Book XIX

all manner of lawlessness. For some men because of 317 b.c. long-existing hatred abstained from no form of insult against the objects of their enmity now that they had the opportunity to accomplish whatever seemed to gratify their rage; others, thinking by the slaughter of the wealthy to redress their own poverty, left no means untried for their destruction. Some broke down the doors of houses, others mounted to the housetops on ladders, still others struggled against men who were defending themselves from the roofs; not even to those who fled into the temples did their prayers to the gods bring safety, but reverence due the gods was overthrown by men. In time of peace and in their own city Greeks dared commit these crimes against Greeks, relatives against kinsfolk, respecting neither common humanity nor solemn compacts nor gods, crimes such that there is no one—I do not say no friend but not even any deadly enemy if he but have a spark of compassion in his soul—who would not pity the fate of the victims.
8. All the gates of the city were closed, and more than four thousand persons were slain on that day whose only crime was to be of gentler birth than the others. Of those who fled, some who rushed for the gates were arrested, while others who cast themselves from the walls escaped to the neighbouring cities; some, however, who in panic cast themselves down before they looked, crashed headlong to their doom. The number of those who were driven from their native city was more than six thousand, most of whom fled to the people of Acragas where they were



247