Diodorus of Sicily

λάθρᾳ, φωραθέντες ἅπαντες κατεκόπησαν.
8οἱ δὲ τῆς Κυρήνης στρατηγοῦντες δημοτικοί, φοβηθέντες
τὴν τῶν φυγάδων κάθοδον, διελύσαντο πρὸς
τὸν Θίβρωνα καὶ κοινῇ πολεμεῖν πρὸς τὸν Ὀφέλλαν
9παρεσκευάζοντο. Ὀφέλλας δὲ καταπολεμήσας τὸν
Θίβρωνα καὶ ζωγρήσας, ἔτι δὲ τῶν πόλεων ἐγκρατὴς
γενόμενος παρέδωκε τάς τε πόλεις καὶ τὴν
χώραν Πτολεμαίῳ τῷ βασιλεῖ. οἱ μὲν οὖν Κυρηναῖοι
καὶ αἱ περιοικοῦσαι πόλεις τοῦτον τὸν τρόπον
ἀποβαλοῦσαι τὴν ἐλευθερίαν ὑπὸ τὴν Πτολεμαϊκὴν
βασιλείαν ἐτάχθησαν.
22. Περδίκκας δὲ καὶ ὁ βασιλεὺς Φίλιππος καταπεπολεμηκότες
Ἀριαράθην καὶ τὴν σατραπείαν
αὐτοῦ Εὐμενεῖ παραδόντες ἐχωρίσθησαν ἐκ τῆς
Καππαδοκίας. καταντήσαντες δὲ εἰς τὴν Πισιδικὴν
ἔκριναν ἀναστάτους ποιῆσαι δύο πόλεις, τήν
τε τῶν Λαρανδέων καὶ τὴν τῶν Ἰσαυρέων· αὗται
γὰρ ἔτι ζῶντος Ἀλεξάνδρου Βάλακρον τὸν Νικάνορος
ἀπέκτειναν, ἀποδεδειγμένον στρατηγὸν ἅμα
2καὶ σατράπην. τὴν μὲν οὖν τῶν Λαρανδέων πόλιν
ἐξ ἐφόδου χειρωσάμενοι καὶ τοὺς ἡβῶντας κατασφάξαντες
τοὺς δ᾿ ἄλλους ἐξανδραποδισάμενοι
κατέσκαψαν· τὴν δὲ τῶν Ἰσαυρέων, οὖσαν ὀχυρὰν
καὶ μεγάλην, ἔτι δὲ πλήθουσαν ἀλκίμων ἀνδρῶν,
ἐπὶ μὲν ἡμέρας1 δύο πολιορκήσαντες ἐνεργῶς καὶ
3πολλοὺς τῶν ἰδίων ἀποβαλόντες ἀνεχώρησαν· οἱ
γὰρ ἐγχώριοι βελῶν καὶ τῶν ἄλλων τῶν πρὸς
πολιορκίαν ἀνηκόντων εὐποροῦντες, ἔτι δὲ ταῖς
ψυχαῖς ὑπομένοντες τὸ δεινὸν παραστατικῶς ἑτοίμως
4ὑπὲρ τῆς ἐλευθερίας ἀπέθνησκον. τῇ δὲ τρίτῃ

1ἡμέρας Hertlein: ἡμέραις MSS. followed by Fischer.76Book XVIII

go over to them secretly at night, were detected and 322 b.c. cut down to a man. The democratic leaders of Cyrenê becoming alarmed at the return of the exiles, made terms with Thibron and prepared to fight against Ophellas in common with him; but Ophellas, after defeating and capturing Thibron and also gaining control of the cities, delivered both the cities and the country over to Ptolemy the king.1 Thus the Cyrenians and the surrounding cities lost their freedom and were annexed to the kingdom of Ptolemy.
22. Now when Perdiccas and King Philip had defeated Ariarathes and delivered his satrapy to Eumenes,2 they departed from Cappadocia. And having arrived in Pisidia, they determined to lay waste two cities, that of the Larandians and that of the Isaurians; for while Alexander was still alive these cities had put to death Balacrus the son of Nicanor, who had been appointed general and satrap. Now the city of the Larandians they took by assault, and after killing the men of fighting age and enslaving the rest of the population, razed it to the ground. The city of the Isaurians, however, was strongly fortified and large and moreover was filled with stout warriors; so when they had besieged it vigorously for two days and had lost many of their own men, they withdrew; for the inhabitants, who were well provided with missiles and other things needed for withstanding a siege and were enduring the dreadful ordeal with desperate courage in their hearts, were readily giving their lives to preserve their freedom.


1The capture of Cyrenê is placed in 322/1 by the Parian Marble. Ptolemy had not yet become king (Book 20. 53. 3). For the later attempt of the Cyrenians to recover their freedom see Book 19. 79. 1–3.2p. chap. 16. 3.77