Diodorus of Sicily

τοῦ στρατηγοῦ ὁ μὲν βασιλεὺς πλησίον τῆς πόλεως
στρατοπεδεύσας καθ᾿ ἡμέραν συνεχεῖς προσβολὰς
2τοῖς τείχεσιν ἐκ διαδοχῆς ἐποιεῖτο, οἱ δὲ πολιορκούμενοι
τὸ μὲν πρῶτον ῥᾳδίως ἀπὸ τῶν τειχῶν
ἠμύνοντο, πολλῶν μὲν στρατιωτῶν ἠθροισμένων εἰς
τὴν πόλιν, βελῶν δὲ καὶ τῶν ἄλλων τῶν εἰς τὴν
πολιορκίαν χρησίμων δαψιλῆ χορηγίαν ἔχοντες·
3ἐπεὶ δὲ ὁ βασιλεὺς φιλοτιμότερον ταῖς τε μηχαναῖς
ἐσάλευε τὰ τείχη καὶ τὴν πολιορκίαν ἐνεργεστάτην
ἐποιεῖτο κατὰ γῆν ἅμα καὶ κατὰ θάλατταν οἵ τε
Μακεδόνες διὰ τῶν πιπτόντων τειχῶν εἰσεβιάζοντο,
τηνικαῦτα κατισχυόμενοι πρὸς φυγὴν ἐτράποντο.
4εὐθὺ δ᾿ οἱ Μιλήσιοι μεθ᾿ ἱκετηριῶν τῷ βασιλεῖ
προσπίπτοντες παρέδωκαν σφᾶς αὐτοὺς καὶ τὴν
πόλιν. τῶν δὲ βαρβάρων οἱ μὲν ὑπὸ τῶν Μακεδόνων
ἀνῃρέθησαν, οἱ δὲ τῆς πόλεως ἐκπίπτοντες
5ἔφευγον, οἱ δ᾿ ἄλλοι πάντες ἥλωσαν. ὁ δ᾿ Ἀλέξανδρος
τοῖς μὲν Μιλησίοις φιλανθρώπως προσηνέχθη,
τοὺς δ᾿ ἄλλους ἅπαντας ἐξηνδραποδίσατο.
τῆς δὲ ναυτικῆς δυνάμεως οὔσης ἀχρήστου καὶ
δαπάνας μεγάλας ἐχούσης κατέλυσε τὸ ναυτικὸν
πλὴν ὀλίγων νεῶν, αἷς ἐχρῆτο πρὸς τὴν παρακομιδὴν
τῶν πολιορκητικῶν ὀργάνων, ἐν αἷς ἦσαν αἱ
παρ᾿ Ἀθηναίων νῆες συμμαχίδες εἴκοσιν.
23. Ἔνιοι δὲ λέγουσι τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον στρατηγικῶς
ἐπινοῆσαι τὴν τοῦ στόλου κατάλυσιν· προσδοκίμου
γὰρ ὄντος τοῦ Δαρείου καὶ μελλούσης
μεγάλης παρατάξεως συντελεῖσθαι νομίσαι τοὺς
Μακεδόνας ἐκθυμότερον ἀγωνιεῖσθαι παραιρεθείσης
2τῆς κατὰ τὴν φυγὴν ἐλπίδος. τὸ δ᾿ αὐτὸ πρᾶξαι


180Book XVII

in Miletus, the king set up camp near the city and 334/3 b.c. every day, using his men in relays, made continuous assaults on the walls. At first the besieged easily defended themselves from the walls, for many soldiers were gathered in the city, and they had abundant provision of missiles and other things useful for the emergency. But when the king, in a more determined fashion, brought up siege engines and rocked the walls and pressed the siege very actively both by land and by sea, and the Macedonians forced an entry through the crumbling walls, then at last yielding to superior force, they took to flight. Immediately the Milesians, falling before the king with suppliant olive boughs, put themselves and their city into his hands. Some of the Persians were slain by the Macedonians, others, breaking out of the city, sought refuge in flight, and all the remainder were taken captive. Alexander treated the Milesians kindly but sold all the rest as slaves.1 Since the naval force was now useless and entailed great expense, he dismissed the fleet with the exception of a few ships which he employed for the transport of his siege engines. Among these was the Athenian contingent of twenty ships.2
23. There are those who say that Alexander’s strategic conception was sound, when he dismissed his fleet. For Dareius was still to be reckoned with and there was bound to be a great battle, and he judged that the Macedonians would fight more desperately if he deprived them of all hope of escape by flight. He employed the same device, they say, at

1Plutarch, Alexander. 17. 1; Arrian, 1. 18. 3–19. 6.2Arrian, 1. 20. 1, Naval operations were resumed six months later under the command of Hegelochus and Amphoterus (Curtius, 3. 1. 19).181