Diodorus of Sicily

Εὐρυδίκης τῆς βασιλίσσης πολλὰ περιεργαζομένης
καὶ ταῖς τῶν ἐπιμελητῶν ἐπιβολαῖς ἀντιπραττούσης
οἱ μὲν περὶ τὸν Πίθωνα δυσχρηστούμενοι καὶ τοὺς
Μακεδόνας ὁρῶντες τοῖς ἐκείνης προστάγμασιν ἀεὶ
μᾶλλον προσέχοντας συνήγαγον ἐκκλησίαν καὶ τὴν
ἐπιμέλειαν ἀπείπαντο, οἱ δὲ Μακεδόνες ἐπιμελητὴν
3εἵλοντο τὸν Ἀντίπατρον αὐτοκράτορα. οὗτος δὲ
μετ᾿ ὀλίγας ἡμέρας καταντήσας εἰς Τριπαράδεισον
κατέλαβε τὴν Εὐρυδίκην στασιάζουσαν καὶ τοὺς
Μακεδόνας ἀπαλλοτριοῦσαν ἀπὸ τοῦ Ἀντιπάτρου.
4ταραχῆς δὲ μεγάλης οὔσης ἐν ταῖς δυνάμεσι καὶ
κοινῆς ἐκκλησίας συναχθείσης ὁ μὲν Ἀντίπατρος
διαλεχθεὶς τοῖς πλήθεσι τὴν μὲν ταραχὴν κατέπαυσε,
τὴν δ᾿ Εὐρυδίκην καταπληξάμενος ἔπεισε
τὴν ἡσυχίαν ἄγειν.
5Μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα τὰς σατραπείας ἐξ ἀρχῆς ἐμερίσατο
καὶ Πτολεμαίῳ μὲν τὴν προϋπάρχουσαν
προσώρισεν· ἀδύνατον γὰρ ἦν τοῦτον μεταθεῖναι
διὰ τὸ δοκεῖν τὴν Αἴγυπτον διὰ τῆς ἰδίας ἀνδρείας
6ἔχειν οἱονεὶ δορίκτητον. καὶ Λαομέδοντι μὲν τῷ
Μιτυληναίῳ Συρίαν ἔδωκε, Φιλοξένῳ δὲ τὴν Κιλικίαν,
τῶν δ᾿ ἄνω σατραπειῶν Μεσοποταμίαν μὲν
καὶ τὴν Ἀρβηλῖτιν Ἀμφιμάχῳ, τὴν δὲ Βαβυλωνίαν
Σελεύκῳ, Ἀντιγένει1δὲ τὴν Σουσιανὴν διὰ τὸ τοῦτον
πρῶτον πεποιῆσθαι τὴν ἐπὶ τὸν Περδίκκαν

1Ἀντιγένει Freinshem, Wesseling, cp. Arrian, FGrH,156.
9. 35: Ἀντιγόνῳ.120Book XVIII

There Eurydicê,1 the queen, was interfering in
many 321 b.c. matters and working against the efforts of the guardians. Pithon and his colleague were
distressed by this, and when they saw that the Macedonians were paying more and more attention to her commands, they summoned a meeting of the assembly and resigned the guardianship; whereupon the Macedonians elected Antipater guardian with full power. When Antipater arrived at Triparadeisus a few days later, he found Eurydicê stirring up
discord and turning the Macedonians away from him.
There was great disorder in the army; but a general assembly was called together, and Antipater put an end to the tumult by addressing the crowd, and by thoroughly frightening Eurydicê he persuaded her to keep quiet.2
Thereafter he distributed the satrapies anew. To Ptolemy he assigned what was already his, for it
was impossible to displace him, since he seemed to be holding Egypt by virtue of his own prowess as if it were a prize of war. He gave Syria to Laomedon
of Mitylenê and Cilicia to Philoxenus. Of the upper satrapies Mesopotamia and Arbelitis3 were given
to Amphimachus, Babylonia to Seleucus, Susianê to Antigenes because he had been foremost in
making



1i.e. Eurydicê Adeia, whose father was a son of Perdiccas III and whose mother was an illegitimate daughter of Philip II. She was betrothed or married to Philip
Arrhidaeus (who is not to be confused with the Arrhidaeus
of the paragraph).2According to Arrian (FGrH, 156. 9. 33), Antipater narrowly escaped being mobbed by the troops of Perdiccas’ army, and only made his way to his own men when
Antigonus and Seleucus came to his aid and diverted the
angry soldiers at the risk of their own lives.3The country about Arbela in the upper Tigris valley.121