Diodorus of Sicily

νικήσας συνέκλεισε τοὺς Ὀλυνθίους εἰς πολιορκίαν·
τέλος δὲ καταπληξάμενος τοὺς πολεμίους προσέταξεν
ὑποταγῆναι Λακεδαιμονίοις. ἐγγραφέντων δὲ
τῶν Ὀλυνθίων εἰς τὴν τῶν Σπαρτιατῶν συμμαχίαν,
πολλαὶ καὶ τῶν ἄλλων πόλεων ἔσπευσαν εἰς τὴν
τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων ἡγεμονίαν καταλεχθῆναι. διὸ
καὶ κατὰ τούτους τοὺς καιροὺς πλεῖστον ἴσχυσαν
Λακεδαιμόνιοι, καὶ τῆς Ἑλλάδος ἔσχον τὴν ἡγεμονίαν
4κατὰ γῆν ἅμα καὶ κατὰ θάλατταν. Θηβαῖοι
μὲν γὰρ ὑπῆρχον ἔμφρουροι, Κορίνθιοι δὲ καὶ
Ἀργεῖοι διὰ τοὺς προγεγονότας πολέμους ὑπῆρχον
τεταπεινωμένοι, Ἀθηναῖοι δὲ διὰ τὰς1 τῶν καταπολεμουμένων2
κληρουχίας ἠδόξουν ἐν τοῖς Ἕλλησιν·
οἱ δὲ Λακεδαιμόνιοι τῆς τε πολυανθρωπίας
καὶ τῆς ἐν τοῖς ὅπλοις μελέτης πολλὴν πρόνοιαν
ἐπεποίηντο, καὶ φοβεροὶ πᾶσιν ὑπῆρχον διὰ τὴν
5δύναμιν τῆς ἡγεμονίας. διόπερ οἱ μέγιστοι τῶν
τότε δυναστῶν, λέγω δὲ τὸν Περσῶν βασιλέα καὶ
τὸν Σικελίας δυνάστην Διονύσιον, ἐθεράπευον τὴν
Σπαρτιατῶν ἡγεμονίαν καὶ συμμαχίαν ἔσπευδον
συντίθεσθαι πρὸς αὐτούς.
24. Ἐπ᾿ ἄρχοντος δ᾿ Ἀθήνησι Νίκωνος Ῥωμαῖοι
χιλιάρχους ἓξ ἀντὶ τῶν ὑπάτων κατέστησαν,
Λεύκιον Παπίριον, Γάιον Σερουίλιον,3 Λεύκιον
Κοΐνκτιον, Λεύκιον Κορνήλιον, Λεύκιον Οὐαλέριον,







1τὰς Wesseling: τῆς.2So Reiske: πολεμουμένων.3Σερουίλιον P] Κορνήλιον.10Book XV

the Olynthians to a state of siege. In the end he 380/79 b.c. thoroughly cowed his enemies and forced them to become subjects of the Lacedaemonians.1 With the enrolment of the Olynthians in the Spartan alliance many other states likewise were eager to enlist under the Lacedaemonian standard. As a result the Lacedaemonians at this particular juncture reached their greatest power and won the overlordship of Greece on both land and sea.2 For the Thebans were secured by a garrison; the Corinthians and the Argives were safely humbled as a result of the previous wars; the Athenians, because of their policy of occupying with colonists the lands of those whom they subdued,3 had a bad reputation with the Greeks; the Lacedaemonians, however, had given their constant attention to securing a large population4 and practice in the use of arms, and so were become an object of terror to all because of the strength of their following. Consequently the greatest rulers of that time, the Persian King and Dionysius5 the tyrant of Sicily, paid court to the Spartan overlordship and sought alliance with them.
24. When Nicon was archon at Athens, the Romans 379/8 b.c. elected six military tribunes with consular power, Lucius Papirius, Gaius Servilius, Lucius Quinctius, Lucius Cornelius, Lucius Valerius, and Aulus Manlius.


1See Xenophon, Hell. 5. 3. 26.2See Xenophon, Hell. 5. 3. 27.3The sending of κληροῦχοι or settlers from Athens to the
territory of her subjects to serve as garrison and owners of the soil was one of the grievances against Athens in the eyes of her subjects during her fifth-century empire.4This must refer to the “perioeci,” free inhabitants of Laconia,
not Spartans, and to the Helots, Spartan serfs, who tilled the land for their masters. The population of true Spartiatae was constantly on the wane owing to the accumulation of land in a few hands and the resulting inability of ever greater numbers of citizens to contribute their share of products from the soil to the general mess or syssitia. Those who failed to make their contributions were degraded, i.e. became “hypomeiones,”
though they still served as soldiers.5See Isocrates, Panegyricus, 126, Peace, 99, Archidamus, 63.11