Diodorus of Sicily

κατὰ δὲ τὴν ἐπιοῦσαν νύκτα τὰς δυνάμεις
ἀμφοτέρας συνέβη περιπεσεῖν παραλόγῳ τινὶ συμφορᾷ
καὶ πᾶσιν ἀνελπίστῳ.
65. Τῶν γὰρ Καρχηδονίων μετὰ τὴν νίκην τοὺς
καλλίστους τῶν αἰχμαλώτων θυόντων χαριστήρια
νυκτὸς τοῖς θεοῖς καὶ πολλοῦ πυρὸς τοὺς ἱεροκαυτουμένους
ἄνδρας κατέχοντος ἐξαίφνης πνεύματος
ἐπιπεσόντος συνέβη τὴν ἱερὰν σκηνὴν ἀναφθῆναι,
πλησίον οὖσαν τοῦ βωμοῦ, ἀπὸ δὲ ταύτης τὴν
στρατηγικὴν καὶ τὰς1 κατὰ τὸ συνεχὲς οὔσας τῶν
ἡγεμόνων, ὥστε πολλὴν ἔκπληξιν γενέσθαι καὶ
φόβον κατὰ πᾶν τὸ στρατόπεδον. τινὲς μὲν γὰρ
τὸ πῦρ ἐπιχειροῦντες σβέσαι, τινὲς δὲ τὰς πανοπλίας
καὶ τὰ πολυτελέστατα τῶν παρεσκευασμένων ἐκκομίζοντες
ὑπὸ τῆς φλογὸς ἀπελαμβάνοντο· τῶν
γὰρ σκηνῶν ἐκ καλάμου καὶ χόρτου συγκειμένων
καὶ τοῦ πυρὸς ὑπὸ τοῦ πνεύματος βιαιότερον ἐκριπισθέντος
ἡ παρὰ τῶν στρατιωτῶν βοήθεια κατεταχεῖτο.
2διὸ καὶ τῆς παρεμβολῆς ταχὺ πάσης
φλεγομένης πολλοὶ μὲν ἐν στεναῖς ταῖς διόδοις ἀποληφθέντες
ζῶντες κατεκαύθησαν καὶ τῆς εἰς τοὺς
αἰχμαλώτους ὠμότητος παραχρῆμα τὴν κόλασιν
ὑπέσχον, αὐτῆς τῆς ἀσεβείας ἴσην τὴν τιμωρίαν
πορισαμένης· τοῖς δ᾿ ἐκ τῆς παρεμβολῆς ἐκπίπτουσι
μετὰ θορύβου καὶ κραυγῆς ἕτερος μείζων ἐπηκολούθησε
κίνδυνος.
66. Τῶν μὲν γὰρ Ἀγαθοκλεῖ συντεταγμένων Λιβύων
εἰς πεντακισχιλίους ἀποστάντες τῶν Ἑλλήνων
νυκτὸς ηὐτομόλουν πρὸς τοὺς βαρβάρους. τούτους
δὲ οἱ πρὸς τὴν κατασκοπὴν ἐκπεμφθέντες ὡς ἴδον
ἐπὶ τὴν παρεμβολὴν τῶν Καρχηδονίων προσάγοντας,
νομίσαντες τὴν τῶν Ἑλλήνων δύναμιν ἅπασαν
1τὰς added by Reiske.320Book XX

Agathocles’ men were killed; but on the following 307 b.c night it so happened that each army was visited by a strange and totally unexpected mishap.
65. While the Carthaginians after their victory were sacrificing the fairest of their captives as thank-offerings to the gods by night, and while a great blaze enveloped the men who were being offered as victims, a sudden blast of wind struck them, with the result that the sacred hut, which was near the altar, caught fire, and from this the hut of the general caught and then the huts of the leaders, which were in line with it, so that great consternation and fear sprang up throughout the whole camp. Some were trapped by the conflagration while trying to put out the fire and others while carrying out their armour and the most valued of their possessions; for, since the huts were made of reeds and straw and the fire was forcibly fanned by the breeze, the aid brought by the soldiers came too late. Thus when almost the entire camp was in flames, many, caught in the passages which were narrow, were burned alive and suffered due punishment on the spot for their cruelty to the captives, the impious act itself having brought about a punishment to match it; and as for those who dashed from the camp amid tumult and shouting, another greater danger awaited them.
66. As many as five thousand of the Libyans who had been taken into Agathocles’ army had deserted the Greeks and were going over by night to the barbarians. When those who had been sent out as scouts saw these men coming toward the Carthaginian camp, believing that the whole army of the Greeks


321