Diodorus of Sicily

πεντήκοντα, καὶ πλαγίας φυλαττούσας ἔξω
τοῦ κέρατος εἴλας τέσσαρας, ἐν αἷς ἦσαν ἱππεῖς
4ἐπίλεκτοι διακόσιοι. χωρὶς δὲ τούτων ἀπὸ πασῶν
τῶν ἱππαρχιῶν ἐπιλελεγμένους τοῖς τάχεσι καὶ
ταῖς ῥώμαις ἱππεῖς τριακοσίους ἔστησε κατόπιν
τοῦ περὶ αὐτὸν ἀγήματος. παρὰ δὲ τὴν ὅλην τοῦ
κέρατος τάξιν προέταξεν ἐλέφαντας τεσσαράκοντα.
ἡ δὲ πᾶσα δύναμις ἦν τῶν περὶ τὸν Εὐμενῆ
πεζοὶ μὲν τρισμύριοι πεντακισχίλιοι, ἱππεῖς δὲ
ἑξακισχίλιοι ἑκατόν, ἐλέφαντες δὲ ἑκατὸν
τεσσαρεσκαίδεκα.
29. Ἀντίγονος δ᾿ ἐκ μετεώρων τόπων κατιδὼν
τὴν τῶν πολεμίων τάξιν πρὸς ταύτην ἁρμοζόντως
διεκόσμησε τὴν ἰδίαν δύναμιν. ὁρῶν γὰρ τὸ τῶν
ἐναντίων δεξιὸν κέρας ὠχυρωμένον τοῖς τε θηρίοις
καὶ τοῖς κρατίστοις τῶν ἱππέων ἀντέταξε τοὺς ἐλαφροτάτους
τῶν ἱππέων, οἳ κατὰ στόμα μὲν ἤμελλον
φυγομαχήσειν ἀραιοὶ διαστάντες, ἐκ μεταβολῆς
δὲ διαγωνιεῖσθαι καὶ τούτῳ τῷ τρόπῳ ποιήσειν
ἄπρακτον τῶν ἐναντίων τοῦτο τὸ μέρος ᾧ μάλιστα
2ἐπίστευον.1 ἔστησε δ᾿ ἐπὶ τούτου τοῦ κέρατος2
τούς τε ἐκ Μηδίας καὶ Παρθυαίας3 ἀφιπποτοξότας
καὶ λογχοφόρους, ὄντας μὲν χιλίους, πεφυκότας δ᾿
εὖ πρὸς τὴν ἐκ μεταβολῆς κλίσιν,4 ἑξῆς δὲ τοὺς
ἀπὸ θαλάσσης συναναβεβηκότας Ταραντίνους δισχιλίους
καὶ διακοσίους, ἐπιλέκτους ἐν ἐνέδραις καὶ
καλῶς διακειμένους ταῖς εὐνοίαις πρὸς αὐτόν,




1ἐπίστευον Rhodoman: ἐπίστευεν.2τούτου τοῦ κέρατος Capps, ταῦτα τῆς φάλαγγος Post:
ταύτης τῆς φάλαγγος.3Παρθυαίας Wesseling: Παρουλίας.4κλίσιν Capps, cp. Polybius, 18. 30. 4 κλίσις, ἡ ἐς τοὔπισθε
μεταβολή: κρίσιν.306Book XIX

an angle beyond the end of the wing and guarding it 317 b.c. were four troops, in which there were two hundred selected horsemen. In addition to these, three hundred men selected from all the cavalry commands for swiftness and strength were stationed by Eumenes behind his own squadron. Along the whole of the wing he drew up forty elephants. The entire army of Eumenes consisted of thirty-five thousand foot soldiers, sixty-one hundred horsemen, and one hundred and fourteen elephants.1
29. As Antigonus looked down from a high position, he saw the battle line of his enemy and disposed his own army accordingly. Seeing that the right wing of the enemy had been strengthened with the elephants and the strongest of the cavalry, he arrayed against it the lightest of his horsemen, who, drawn up in open order, were to avoid a frontal action but maintain a battle of wheeling tactics and in this way thwart that part of the enemies’ forces in which they had the greatest confidence. On this wing he stationed the mounted archers and lancers from Media and Parthia, a thousand in number, men well trained in the execution of the wheeling movement; and next he placed the twenty-two hundred Tarentines2 who had come up with him from the sea, men selected for their skill in ambushing, and very well disposed to


1To make these figures agree approximately with the totals of the separate units, we must either assume a considerable lacuna in chap. 27. 6 or 28. 1, or else suppose that the light armed troops numbered about 18,000 and are included in the total; the 28,000 foot soldiers of Antigonus (chap. 27. 1) include only those capable of standing in the phalanx (chap. 29. 3).2The Tarentines were cavalrymen equipped with javelins. The connection with Tarentum is obscure, but Tarentine coins show such troops (A. Martin in Daremberg et Saglio, 2. 770).307