Diodorus of Sicily

Ἀνανίαν ἐκθύμως ἀγωνισάμενον ἀναιρεθῆναι καὶ
συχνοὺς τῶν ἄλλων στρατιωτῶν ἀποθανεῖν.
98. Ἅμα δὲ τούτοις πραττομένοις Πτολεμαῖος
μὲν ὁ βασιλεὺς ἀπέστειλε τοῖς Ῥοδίοις σῖτον καὶ
τὴν ἄλλην ἀγορὰν οὐκ ἐλάττονα τῆς πρότερον ἐκπεμφθείσης
καὶ στρατιώτας χιλίους καὶ πεντακοσίους,
ὧν ἦν ἡγεμὼν Ἀντίγονος ὁ Μακεδών.
2καθ᾿ ὃν δὴ χρόνον ἧκον πρὸς τὸν Δημήτριον πρέσβεις
παρά τε Ἀθηναίων καὶ τῶν ἄλλων Ἑλληνίδων
πόλεων, τὸν ἀριθμὸν μὲν ὄντες ὑπὲρ τοὺς πεντήκοντα,
πάντες δὲ ἀξιοῦντες διαλύσασθαι τὸν βασιλέα
3πρὸς τοὺς Ῥοδίους. γενομένων οὖν ἀνοχῶν καὶ
πολλῶν καὶ παντοδαπῶν ῥηθέντων λόγων πρός τε
τὸν δῆμον καὶ πρὸς τοὺς περὶ τὸν Δημήτριον οὐδαμῶς
ἐδυνήθησαν συμφωνῆσαι· διόπερ οἱ πρέσβεις
ἀπῆλθον ἄπρακτοι.
4Δημήτριος δὲ διανοηθεὶς νυκτὸς ἐπιθέσθαι τῇ
πόλει κατὰ τὸ πεπτωκὸς τοῦ τείχους ἐπέλεξε τῶν
τε μαχίμων τοὺς κρατίστους καὶ τῶν ἄλλων τοὺς
5εὐθέτους εἰς χιλίους καὶ πεντακοσίους. τούτους
μὲν οὖν προσέταξεν ἡσυχῇ προσελθεῖν τῷ τείχει
περὶ δευτέραν φυλακήν, αὐτὸς δὲ διασκευάσας
παρήγγειλε τοῖς ἐφ᾿ ἑκάστῳ μέρει τεταγμένοις,
ὅταν σημήνῃ, συναλαλάξαι καὶ προσβολὰς ποιεῖσθαι
6καὶ κατὰ γῆν καὶ κατὰ θάλατταν. πάντων δὲ τὸ
παραγγελθὲν ποιούντων οἱ μὲν ἐπὶ τὰ πεπτωκότα
τῶν τειχῶν ὁρμήσαντες τοὺς προφυλάττοντας ἐπὶ
τῆς τάφρου κατασφάξαντες παρεισέπεσον εἰς τὴν
πόλιν καὶ τοὺς περὶ τὸ θέατρον τόπους κατελαμβάνοντο·
7οἱ δὲ τῶν Ῥοδίων πρυτάνεις1 πυθόμενοι τὸ



1πρυτάνεις added by Dindorf, cp. chap. 88.3.402Book XX

result that their leader Ananias was killed fighting 304 b.c. desperately and many of the soldiers were slain also.
98. While these events were taking place, King Ptolemy sent to the Rhodians grain and other supplies in no less quantity than those formerly sent,1 and fifteen hundred soldiers, whose leader was Antigonus, the Macedonian. At this very time there came to Demetrius more than fifty envoys from the Athenians and the other Greek cities, all of them asking the king to come to terms with the Rhodians. A truce, therefore, was made; but although many arguments of all sorts were presented to the city and to Demetrius, they could in no way agree; and so the envoys returned without accomplishing their aim.2
Demetrius, having determined to attack the city at night through the breach in the wall, selected the strongest of his fighting men and of the rest those fitted for his purpose to the number of fifteen hundred. These, then, he ordered to advance to the wall in silence during the second watch; as for himself, when he had made his preparations, he gave orders to those stationed on each side that when he gave the signal they should raise the battle cry and make attacks both by land and sea. When they all carried out the order, those who had advanced against breaches in the walls, after dispatching the advance guards at the moat, charged past into the city and occupied the region of the theatre; but the magistrates of the Rhodians, learning what had happened 


1Cp. chap. 96. 1.2According to Plutarch, Demetrius, 22. 4, Demetrius, who was looking for a pretext to end the siege, was induced by the Athenians to make terms on condition that the Rhodians should be allies of Antigonus and Demetrius except in a war with Ptolemy. Cp. chap. 99. 3.403