Diodorus of Sicily

ἀπετύγχανον τῶν σκοπῶν· ἄλλοι δ᾿ ἐκ χειρὸς τοῖς
λίθοις βάλλοντες τοὺς βιαζομένους τῶν Μακεδόνων
ἀνέστελλον. πολλὰ δ᾿ αὐτοῖς τῆς δυσχωρίας συνεργούσης
ἐπλεονέκτουν καὶ συχνοὺς μὲν ἀπέκτεννον,
οὐκ ὀλίγους δὲ κατετίτρωσκον.
3Ὁ δ᾿ Ἀλέξανδρος τῇ δεινότητι τοῦ πάθους
ἀδυνατῶν βοηθεῖν καὶ θεωρῶν μηδένα τῶν πολεμίων
μήτε τεθνηκότα μήτε ὅλως τετρωμένον, τῶν
δὲ ἰδίων ἀπολωλότας μὲν πολλούς, κατατετρωμένους
δὲ σχεδὸν ἅπαντας τοὺς προσβάλλοντας
ἀνεκαλέσατο τῇ σάλπιγγι τοὺς στρατιώτας ἀπὸ τῆς
4μάχης. ἀναχωρήσας δὲ ἀπὸ τῶν παρόδων σταδίους
τριακοσίους1 κατεστρατοπέδευσε καὶ παρὰ τῶν ἐγχωρίων
ἐπυνθάνετο μή τις ἑτέρα ἐστὶ διεκβολή.
πάντων δ᾿ ἀποφαινομένων δίοδον μὲν μηδεμίαν
ἄλλην ὑπάρχειν, περίοδον δὲ εἶναι πολλῶν ἡμερῶν
αἰσχρὸν εἶναι νομίσας ἀτάφους ἀπολιπεῖν τοὺς τετελευτηκότας
καὶ τὴν αἴτησιν τῶν νεκρῶν οὖσαν
ὁρῶν ἀσχήμονα καὶ περιέχουσαν ἥττης ὁμολόγησιν
προσέταξεν ἀναγαγεῖν ἅπαντας τοὺς αἰχμαλώτους.
5ἐν δὲ τούτοις ἧκεν ὑπαγόμενος2 ἀνὴρ δίγλωττος,
εἰδὼς τὴν Περσικὴν διάλεκτον.
Οὗτος δὲ ἑαυτὸν ἀπεφαίνετο Λύκιον μὲν εἶναι τὸ
γένος, αἰχμάλωτον δὲ γενόμενον ποιμαίνειν κατὰ
τὴν ὑποκειμένην ὀρεινὴν ἔτη πλείω· δι᾿ ἣν αἰτίαν
ἔμπειρον γενέσθαι τῆς χώρας καὶ δύνασθαι τὴν
δύναμιν ἀγαγεῖν διὰ τῆς καταδένδρου καὶ κατόπιν




1τριακοσίους RX; τετρακοσίους F.2ἀπαγόμενος RX; ὑπαγόμενος F (with ἀπ added by a
second hand); ἀναγόμενος Dindorf.312Book XVII

Still others coming to close quarters flung stones at 330/29 b.c. the Macedonians who pressed on. The Persians had a tremendous advantage because of the difficulty of the country, killed many and injured not a few.
Alexander was quite helpless to avert the sufferings of his men and seeing that no one of the enemy was killed or even wounded, while of his own force many were slain and practically all the attacking force were disabled, he recalled the soldiers from the battle with a trumpet signal. Withdrawing from the pass for a distance of three hundred furlongs,1 he pitched camp and from the natives sought to learn whether there was any other route through the hills. All insisted that there was no other way through, although it was possible to go around them at the cost of several days’ travel. It seemed to Alexander, however, discreditable to abandon his dead and unseemly to ask for them, since this carried with it the acknowledgement of defeat, so he ordered all his captives to be brought up. Among these came hopefully a man who was bilingual,2 and knew the Persian language.
He said that he was a Lycian, had been brought there as a captive, and had pastured goats in these mountains for a number of years. He had come to know the country well and could lead a force of men over a path concealed by bushes3and bring them to


1Curtius, 5. 3. 17–23, more reasonably, says thirty furlongs.2Strictly speaking, that is, he knew Persian and Lycian (Plutarch, Alexander, 37. 1), but Curtius (5. 4. 4) adds more relevantly that he also knew Greek.3This is a somewhat unexpected term which editors have viewed with suspicion, but a path which follows folds in the mountains is often marked by vegetation. Curtius (5. 4. 24) locates these bushes in a great ravine.313