Diodorus of Sicily

παρανομήμασιν ἐπακολουθοῦσαν κόλασιν· καὶ γὰρ
ὁ βασιλεὺς ἠπειληκὼς ἦν ὡς οὐκ Οἰνιαδῶν παῖδες,
7ἀλλ᾿ αὐτὸς ἐπιθήσει τὴν δίκην αὐτοῖς· ὁμοίως
δὲ τούτοις Ἀθηναῖοι τὴν Σάμον κατακεκληρουχηκότες
οὐδαμῶς τὴν νῆσον ταύτην προΐεντο. οὐκ
ὄντες δ᾿ ἀξιόμαχοι ταῖς τούτου δυνάμεσι κατὰ μὲν
τὸ παρὸν ἡσυχίαν ἦγον, ἐπιτηροῦντες καιρὸν εὔθετον,
ὃν ἡ τύχη ταχέως αὐτοῖς παρεσκεύασε.
9. Μετ᾿ ὀλίγον γὰρ τελευτήσαντος Ἀλεξάνδρου
καὶ τῆς βασιλείας υἱοὺς διαδόχους οὐκ ἔχοντος1
ἐτόλμησαν ἀντιλαβέσθαι τῆς ἐλευθερίας καὶ τῆς
κοινῆς τῶν Ἑλλήνων ἡγεμονίας. ἀφορμὰς δὲ
ἔσχον εἰς τὸν πόλεμον τό τε πλῆθος τῶν καταλειφθέντων
ὑφ᾿ Ἁρπάλου χρημάτων, περὶ ὧν τὰ
κατὰ μέρος ἐν τῇ πρὸ ταύτης βύβλῳ διήλθομεν,
ὁμοίως δὲ καὶ τοὺς κατὰ τὴν Ἀσίαν ἀμίσθους
γενομένους ὑπὸ τῶν σατραπῶν μισθοφόρους, ὄντας
μὲν ὀκτακισχιλίους, διατρίβοντας δὲ περὶ Ταίναρον
2τῆς Πελοποννήσου. διὸ καὶ τούτους προσέταξαν
ἐν ἀπορρήτοις Λεωσθένει τῷ Ἀθηναίῳ τὸ μὲν
πρῶτον ἀναλαβεῖν αὐτοὺς ὡς ἰδιοπραγοῦντα χωρὶς
τῆς τοῦ δήμου γνώμης, ὅπως ὁ μὲν Ἀντίπατρος
ῥᾳθυμότερον διατεθῇ πρὸς τὰς παρασκευάς, καταφρονῶν
τοῦ Λεωσθένους, οἱ δ᾿ Ἀθηναῖοι σχολὴν
λάβωσι καὶ χρόνον προκατασκευάσαι τι τῶν εἰς
3τὸν πόλεμον χρησίμων. διὸ καὶ Λεωσθένης μετὰ
πολλῆς ἡσυχίας μισθωσάμενος τοὺς προειρημένους




1ἔχοντος Fischer: ἐχούσης.36Book XVIII

expected the punishment appropriate to their wrong-doing; 323 b.c. for the king himself had threatened that no sons of the Oeniadae, but he himself, would punish them.1 Likewise the Athenians, who had distributed Samos in allotments to their citizens, were by no means willing to abandon that island. Being no match, however, for the forces of the king, they remained quiet for the time being, waiting for a favourable opportunity, which Fortune quickly gave them.
9. When Alexander died a short time thereafter and left no sons as successors to the kingdom, the Athenians ventured to assert their liberty and to claim the leadership of the Greeks. As a resource for the war they had the sum of money left by Harpalus,
the story of which we told in full in the preceding Book,2 and likewise the mercenaries who, some eight thousand in number, had been dismissed from service by the satraps and were waiting near Taenarum
in the Peloponnesus.3 They therefore gave secret instructions about these to Leosthenes the Athenian,4 ordering him at first to enrol them as if acting on his own responsibility without authority from the city, in order that Antipater, regarding Leosthenes with contempt, might be less energetic in his preparations, and the Athenians, on the other hand, might gain leisure and time for preparing some of the things necessary for the war. Accordingly Leosthenes had very quietly hired the troops mentioned above and, contrary to general belief,



1Cp. Plutarch, Alexander, 49. 8.2Cp. Book 17. 108. 4–8. The mercenaries brought to Greece by Harpalus were no longer available (chap. 19. 2).3Cp. Book 17. 111. 1–3.4Leosthenes himself had been instrumental in repatriating many of these mercenaries (Pausanias, 1. 25. 5; 8. 52. 5), possibly as an agent of Athens.37