Diodorus of Sicily

ἐπὶ τῷ διασεσῶσθαι παραδόξως αὐτὸν ἐκ
τῶν μεγίστων κινδύνων ἐπηγγέλλοντο πάντα συμπράξειν
αὐτῷ προθύμως· οἵ τε ἀργυράσπιδες
Μακεδόνες, ὄντες περὶ τρισχιλίους, ὁμοίως ἀπήντησαν
4μετὰ φιλοφροσύνης τε καὶ ὁρμῆς. πάντες δ᾿
ἐθαύμαζον τὸ τῆς τύχης εὐμετάβολον καὶ παράδοξον,
ὁρῶντες τούς τε βασιλεῖς καὶ τοὺς Μακεδόνας
ὀλίγῳ μὲν χρόνῳ πρότερον κατεγνωκότας
Εὐμενοῦς καὶ τῶν φίλων αὐτοῦ θάνατον, τότε δὲ
ἐπιλαθομένους τῆς ἰδίας κρίσεως μὴ μόνον ἀθῷον
ἀφεικότας τῆς τιμωρίας, ἀλλὰ καὶ πάσης τῆς
βασιλείας τὴν ἡγεμονίαν αὐτῷ παραδεδωκότας.
5καὶ τοῦτ᾿ εὐλόγως ἔπασχον ἅπαντες οἱ τότε τὰς
Εὐμενοῦς ἐπισκοπούμενοι περιπετείας. τίς γὰρ
οὐκ ἂν λαβὼν ἔννοιαν τῆς κατὰ τὸν ἀνθρώπινον
βίον ἀνωμαλίας καταπλαγείη τὴν ἐπ᾿ ἀμφότερα τὰ
μέρη τῆς τύχης παλίρροιαν; ἢ τίς ἂν ταῖς κατὰ
τὴν εὐτυχίαν ἐξουσίαις πιστεύσας ἀναλάβοι φρόνημα
6μεῖζον τῆς ἀνθρωπίνης ἀσθενείας; ὁ γὰρ
κοινὸς βίος ὥσπερ ὑπὸ θεῶν τινος οἰακιζόμενος
ἐναλλὰξ ἀγαθοῖς τε καὶ κακοῖς κυκλεῖται πάντα
τὸν αἰῶνα. διόπερ παράδοξόν ἐστιν οὐκ εἰ γέγον᾿
ἕν1 τι παράλογον, ἀλλ᾿ εἰ μὴ πᾶν ἐστι τὸ γινόμενον
ἀνέλπιστον. διὸ καὶ τὴν ἱστορίαν προσηκόντως ἄν
τις ἀποδέξαιτο· τῇ γὰρ τῶν πράξεων ἀνωμαλίᾳ καὶ
μεταβολῇ διορθοῦται τῶν μὲν εὐτυχούντων τὴν
ὑπερηφανίαν, τῶν δ᾿ ἀκληρούντων τὴν ἀψυχίαν.2
60. Ἃ καὶ τότε διανοούμενος Εὐμενὴς ἐμφρόνως
τὰ καθ᾿ ἑαυτὸν ἠσφαλίσατο, προορώμενος τὴν τῆς


1γέγον᾿ ἕν Capps: γέγονέν.2ἀψυχίαν Pos, ἀθυμίαν Wurm: ἀτυχίαν MSS., Dindorf,
Fischer.174Book XVIII

him on his unexpected escape from very 318 b.c. great dangers, they promised to co-operate willingly with him in everything. The Macedonian Silver Shields, about three thousand in number, likewise met him with friendship and zeal. All wondered at the incredible fickleness of Fortune, when they considered that a little while before the kings and the Macedonians had condemned Eumenes and his friends to death, but now, forgetting their own decision, they not only had let him off scot-free of punishment, but also had entrusted to him the supreme command over the entire kingdom. And it was with good reason that these emotions were shared by all who then beheld the reversals in Eumenes’ fortunes; for who, taking thought of the inconstancies of human life, would not be astonished at the alternating ebb and flow of fortune? Or who, putting his trust in the predominance he enjoys when Fortune favours him, would adopt a bearing too high for mortal weakness? For human life, as if some god were at the helm, moves in a cycle through good and evil alternately for all time. It is not strange, then, that some one unforeseen event has taken place, but rather that all that happens is not unexpected. This is also a good reason for admitting the claim of history, for in the inconstancy and irregularity of events history furnishes a corrective for both the arrogance of the fortunate and the despair of the destitute.
60. Eumenes, who at this time also kept these things in mind, prudently made his own position secure, for he foresaw that Fortune would change
175