Diodorus of Sicily

καὶ τἄλλα τὰ καταλείπεσθαι μέλλοντα τοῖς μεγέθεσιν
αὐξῆσαι. ταῦτα δὲ πράττειν ἤμελλεν, ἅμα μὲν
ἡρωικὴν βουλόμενος ποιήσασθαι στρατοπεδείαν, ἅμα
δὲ τοῖς ἐγχωρίοις ἀπολιπεῖν σημεῖα μεγάλων ἀνδρῶν,
ἀποφαίνοντα ῥώμας σωμάτων ὑπερφυεῖς.
3Ἀπὸ δὲ τούτων γενόμενος μετὰ πάσης τῆς
δυνάμεως ταῖς αὐταῖς ὁδοῖς πορευθεὶς ἀνέκαμψεν
ἐπὶ τὸν Ἀκεσίνην ποταμόν· καταλαβὼν δὲ τὰ
σκάφη νεναυπηγημένα καὶ ταῦτα καταρτίσας ἕτερα
4προσεναυπγήσατο. κατὰ δὲ τοῦτον τὸν χρόνον
ἧκον ἐκ τῆς Ἑλλάδος σύμμαχοι καὶ μισθοφόροι διὰ
τῶν στρατηγῶν ἠγμένοι, πεζοὶ μὲν πλείους τρισμυρίων,
ἱππεῖς δ᾿ οὐ πολὺ λείποντες τῶν ἑξακισχιλίων,
ἐκομίσθησαν δὲ καὶ πανοπλίαι διαπρεπεῖς
πεζοῖς μὲν δισμυρίοις καὶ πεντακισχιλίοις, φαρμάκων
δ᾿ ἰατρικῶν ἑκατὸν τάλαντα. ταῦτα μὲν
5οὖν διέδωκε τοῖς στρατιώταις. τῆς δὲ ναυτικῆς
παρασκευῆς συντελεσθείσης καὶ διακοσίων μὲν ἀφράκτων
ἡτοιμασμένων, ὀκτακοσίων δὲ ὑπηρετικῶν
τὰς μὲν παρὰ τὸν ποταμὸν κτισθείσας πόλεις
ὠνόμασε τὴν μὲν διὰ τὸ τῷ πολέμῳ κρατῆσαι
Νίκαιαν, τὴν δ᾿ ἀπὸ τοῦ τελευτήσαντος ἵππου κατὰ
τὴν πρὸς Πῶρον μάχην Βουκεφάλαν.
96. Αὐτὸς δὲ μετὰ τῶν φίλων ἐμβὰς εἰς τὰς
ναῦς τὸν διὰ τοῦ ποταμοῦ πλοῦν ἐπὶ τὸν Ὠκεανὸν
τὸν κατὰ μεσημβρίαν ἐποιεῖτο. τὸ δὲ πολὺ μέρος



394Book XVII

the same way, everything else which would be left 326/5 b.c. behind was exaggerated in size.1 His idea in this was to make a camp of heroic proportions and to leave to the natives evidence of men of huge stature, displaying the strength of giants.
After all this had been done, Alexander marched back with all his army to the Acesines River by the same route by which he had come.2 There he found the ships built which he had ordered. He fitted these out and built others. At this juncture there arrived from Greece allied and mercenary troops under their own commanders, more than thirty thousand infantry and a little less than six thousand cavalry.3 They brought with them elegant suits of armour for twenty-five thousand foot soldiers, and a hundred talents of medical supplies. These he distributed to the soldiers. Now the naval flotilla was ready; he had prepared two hundred open galleys and eight hundred service ships.4 He gave names to the two cities which had been founded on either side of the river, calling one of them Nicaea in celebration of his victory in war, and the other Bucephala in honour of his horse, who had died in the battle against Porus.5
96. He himself embarked with his Friends, and sailed down the river toward the southern Ocean.6 The bulk of his army marched along the bank of the





1Curtius, 9. 3. 19: Plutarch, Alexander, 62. 4.2Nicaea and Bucephala lay on what should be called the
Hydaspes, but this river (the Jhelum) became the Acesines
after its confluence with the Sandabal and the Hyarotis. Below,
however (chap. 96. 1) Diodorus mentions the confluence
of the Acesines and Hydaspes, as if they were different. Or perhaps the Acesines is the Sandabal (Chenab) after all (as Arrian, 6. 14. 5).3Curtius (9. 3. 21) mentions 7000 foot and 5000 horse, with 25,000 sets of armour inlaid with gold and silver.4Arrian, 6. 2. 4: eighty triaconters and 2080 ships in all (from Ptolemy).5Above, chap. 89. 6, and note. Arrian (5. 29. 5) states that the cities had been partly destroyed by floods.6It was now the autumn of 326 b.c. (Strabo. 15. 1. 17. 691: “a few days before the setting of the Pleiades”).395