Diodorus of Sicily
2Οἱ δὲ τῶν Περσῶν σατράπαι καὶ στρατηγοὶ τοῦ
μὲν κωλῦσαι τῶν Μακεδόνων τὴν διάβασιν ὑστέρησαν,
ἀθροισθέντες δ᾿ ἐβουλεύοντο πῶς χρὴ διαπολεμεῖν
τοῖς περὶ Ἀλέξανδρον. Μέμνων μὲν οὖν ὁ
Ῥόδιος, διαβεβοημένος ἐπὶ συνέσει στρατηγικῇ,
συνεβούλευε κατὰ στόμα μὲν μὴ διακινδυνεύειν, τὴν
δὲ χώραν φθείρειν καὶ τῇ σπάνει τῶν ἀναγκαίων
εἴργειν τοὺς Μακεδόνας τῆς εἰς τοὔμπροσθεν
πορείας, διαβιβάζειν δὲ καὶ δυνάμεις εἰς τὴν Μακεδονίαν
ναυτικάς τε καὶ πεζικὰς καὶ τὸν ὅλον πόλεμον
3εἰς τὴν Εὐρώπην μεταγαγεῖν. ὁ δ᾿ ἀνὴρ οὗτος
ἄριστα μὲν συνεβούλευεν, ὡς ἐκ τῶν ἀποτελεσμάτων
ἐγενήθη φανερόν, οὐ μὴν ἔπεισε τοὺς ἄλλους
ἡγεμόνας, ὡς ἀνάξια συμβουλεύων τῆς Περσῶν
4μεγαλοψυχίας. διόπερ ἐπικρατούσης τῆς τοῦ διαγωνίζεσθαι
γνώμης οὗτοι μὲν τὰς πανταχόθεν
δυνάμεις μεταπεμψάμενοι καὶ πολλαπλάσιοι γενόμενοι
τῶν Μακεδόνων προῆγον ἐπὶ Φρυγίας τῆς
ἐφ᾿ Ἑλλησπόντου.1 κατεστρατοπέδευσαν δὲ παρὰ
τὸν Γρανικὸν ποταμόν, προβαλλόμενοι τὸ ῥεῖθρον
τοῦ προειρημένου ποταμοῦ.
19. Ὁ δὲ Ἀλέξανδρος πυθόμενος τὴν συνδρομὴν
τῶν βαρβαρικῶν δυνάμεων προῆγε καὶ σύντομον
τὴν πορείαν ποιησάμενος ἀντεστρατοπέδευσε τοῖς
πολεμίοις, ὥστε ἀνὰ μέσον ῥεῖν τῶν παρεμβολῶν
2τὸν Γρανικόν. οἱ μὲν οὖν βάρβαροι τὴν ὑπώρειαν
κατειλημμένοι τὴν ἡσυχίαν ἦγον, κεκρικότες τοῖς
πολεμίοις ἐπιθέσθαι κατὰ τὴν διάβασιν τοῦ ποταμοῦ·
καὶ διεσπασμένης τῆς τῶν Μακεδόνων φάλαγγος
ῥᾳδίως προτερήσειν ὑπελάμβανον ἐν τῇ μάχῃ·
1Ἑλλησπόντου Wesseling; Ἑλλήσποντον.168Book XVII
Meanwhile, the Persian satraps and generals had 334/3 b.c. not acted in time to prevent the crossing of the Macedonians,1 but they mustered their forces and took counsel how to oppose Alexander. Memnon, the Rhodian, famed for his military competence, advocated a policy of not fighting a pitched battle, but of stripping the countryside and through the shortage of supplies preventing the Macedonians from advancing further, while at the same time they sent naval and land forces across to Macedonia and transferred the impact of war to Europe.2 This was the best counsel, as after-events made clear, but, for all that, Memnon failed to win over the other commanders, since his advice seemed beneath the dignity of the Persians. So they decided to fight it out, and summoning forces from every quarter and heavily outnumbering the Macedonians, they advanced in the direction of Hellespontine Phrygia. They pitched camp by the river Granicus, using the bed of the river as a line of defence.
19. When Alexander learned of the concentration of the Persian forces, he advanced rapidly and encamped opposite the enemy, so that the Granicus flowed between the encampments. The Persians, resting on high ground, made no move, intending to fall upon the foe as he crossed the river, for they supposed they could easily carry the day when the Macedonian




1The battle of the Granicus is described by Justin (11. 6. 8–13), Plutarch (Alexander, 16), and Arrian (1. 12. 6–16. 7). A good analysis of this and Alexander’s other battles is given by Major General J. F. C. Fuller, The Generalship of Alexander the Great (1958).2Arrian, 1. 12. 9.169