Diodorus of Sicily

Λεοντίνους ἀφεστηκότας ἀπὸ Διονυσίου, νυκτὸς δὲ
παρεισπεσὼν ἐντὸς τοῦ τείχους κατελάβετο μέρος
τῆς πόλεως. γενομένης δὲ μάχης ἰσχυρᾶς καὶ τῶν
Συρακοσίων βοηθησάντων ἡττηθεὶς ἐξέπεσεν ἐκ
2τῶν Λεοντίνων. Ἡρακλείδης δ᾿ ὁ καταλελειμμένος
ὑπὸ Δίωνος ναύαρχος τῶν μακρῶν νεῶν ἐν
Πελοποννήσῳ διά τινας χειμῶνας ἐμποδισθεὶς ὑστέρησε
τῆς καθόδου τῶν περὶ τὸν Δίωνα καὶ τῆς
τῶν Συρακοσίων ἐλευθερώσεως· ἧκε δ᾿ ἄγων ναῦς
μὲν μακρὰς εἴκοσι, χιλίους δὲ στρατιώτας καὶ
πεντακοσίους. ὢν δ᾿ ἀνὴρ ἐπισημότατος καὶ δόξας
ἄξιος ὑπάρχειν ᾑρέθη ναύαρχος ὑπὸ τῶν Συρακοσίων
καὶ μετὰ Δίωνος τεταγμένος1 ἐπὶ τῆς ἡγεμονίας
3διεπολέμει πρὸς Διονύσιον. μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα
Φίλιστος ἀποδειχθεὶς στρατηγὸς καὶ καταρτίσας
τριήρεις ἑξήκοντα πρὸς Συρακοσίους ἐναυμάχησεν
ἔχοντας ναῦς παραπλησίους τὸν ἀριθμόν. γενομένου
δ᾿ ἀγῶνος καρτεροῦ καὶ τοῦ Φιλίστου τὸ μὲν
πρῶτον διὰ τῆς ἰδίας ἀνδραγαθίας προτεροῦντος,
ὕστερον δ᾿ ἀποληφθέντος ὑπὸ τῶν πολεμίων οἱ μὲν
Συρακόσιοι πανταχόθεν κυκλώσαντες τὰς ναῦς ἐφιλοτιμοῦντο
ζωγρίᾳ λαβεῖν τὸν στρατηγόν, ὁ δὲ
Φίλιστος εὐλαβηθεὶς τὴν ἐκ τῆς αἰχμαλωσίας αἰκίαν
ἑαυτὸν ἀπέσφαξε, πλείστας μὲν καὶ μεγίστας χρείας
παρεσχημένος τοῖς τυράννοις, πιστότατος δὲ τῶν
4φίλων τοῖς δυνάσταις γεγονώς. οἱ δὲ Συρακόσιοι
νικήσαντες τῇ ναυμαχίᾳ τὸ μὲν σῶμα τοῦ Φιλίστου
διαμερίσαντες καὶ δι᾿ ὅλης τῆς πόλεως ἑλκύσαντες
ἄταφον ἐξέρριψαν, Διονύσιος δὲ τὸν μὲν πρακτικώτατον
1After τεταγμένος Fischer adds ἐπὶ τῆς ἡγεμονίας (cp. Book 11. 15. 2, etc.).282Book XVI

Leontini, which had revolted from Dionysius, and 356/5 b.c. having succeeded in entering the walls by night captured a portion of the city. A sharp engagement ensued, and the Syracusans came to the aid of the Leontinians, so that he was defeated and was driven out of Leontini. Heracleides, who had been left behind by Dion as commander of his men-of-war, having been hindered by storms in the Peloponnese,1 was too late for Dion’s return and the liberation of the Syracusans, but he now came with twenty men-of-war and fifteen hundred soldiers. Being a man of very great distinction and considered worthy of the position, he was chosen admiral by the Syracusans, and, having been assigned to the supreme command of the armed forces along with Dion, he participated in the war against Dionysius. After this Philistus, who had been appointed general and had fitted out sixty triremes, fought a naval battle with the Syracusans, who had about the same number. As the fight became sharp Philistus at first was superior because of his own gallantry, but later on, when he was intercepted by the enemy, the Syracusans, encircling the ships from all sides, put forth strenuous efforts to capture the general alive, but Philistus, with apprehensions of torture after his capture, slew himself after having performed a great many very important services to the tyrants and having proved himself the most faithful of their friends to the men in power. The Syracusans, after they had won the naval battle, dismembered the body of Philistus, dragged it through the whole city, and cast it forth unburied; and Dionysius,



1See chap. 6. 5.283