Diodorus of Sicily
Οἱ δὲ μισθοφόροι παραχρῆμα κατὰ τὰς ὁμολογίας
ἐκ τῆς πόλεως ἀπελθόντες καὶ σταδίους ὀγδοήκοντα
προελθόντες ἀνεπικωλύτως κατεστρατοπέδευσαν,
2οὐδεμίαν ἔννοιαν λαμβάνοντες τοῦ μέλλοντος. ὁ δ᾿
Ἀλέξανδρος ἀμετάθετον ἔχων τὴν πρὸς τοὺς μισθοφόρους
ἀλλοτριότητα διεσκευασμένην ἔχων τὴν
δύναμιν ἐπηκολούθησε τοῖς βαρβάροις καὶ προσπεσὼν
αὐτοῖς ἄφνω πολὺν ἐποίει φόνον. οἱ δὲ
μισθοφόροι τὸ μὲν πρῶτον ἐβόων παρὰ τοὺς ὅρκους
αὐτοὺς πολεμεῖσθαι καὶ τοὺς ἀσεβουμένους ὑπ᾿
αὐτοῦ θεοὺς ἐπεκαλοῦντο· ὁ δ᾿ Ἀλέξανδρος μεγάλῃ
τῇ φωνῇ πρὸς αὐτοὺς ἀνεβόησεν ὅτι συνεχώρησεν
αὐτοῖς ἐκ τῆς πόλεως ἀπελθεῖν, οὐ φίλους εἶναι διὰ
παντὸς Μακεδόνων.
3Οἱ δὲ μισθοφόροι τὸ μέγεθος τῶν κινδύνων οὐ
καταπλαγέντες συνεφράξαντο καὶ τὴν ὅλην τάξιν
ποιήσαντες κυκλοτερῆ τά τε τέκνα καὶ τὰς γυναῖκας
εἰς μέσον ἀπέλαβον, ὥστε πανταχόθεν τοῖς προσμαχομένοις
ἀσφαλῶς ἀντιτάττεσθαι. ἀπονοηθέντων
δ᾿ αὐτῶν καὶ διὰ τὴν τόλμαν καὶ διὰ τὴν ἐν
τοῖς ἀγῶσιν ἀρετὴν ἰσχυρὰν μάχην συστησαμένων
καὶ τῶν Μακεδόνων φιλοτιμουμένων μὴ λειφθῆναι
τῆς τῶν βαρβάρων ἀνδραγαθίας μεγάλην κατάπληξιν
4εἶχεν ὁ κίνδυνος. ἐκ χειρὸς γὰρ τῆς μάχης
οὔσης καὶ συμπλεκομένων τῶν ἀγωνιζομένων ἀλλήλοις1
πολλαὶ καὶ παντοῖαι διαθέσεις θανάτων καὶ



1ἐν ἀλλήλοις F.362Book XVII
The mercenaries straightway under the terms of 327/6 b.c. the truce left the city and encamped without interference at a distance of eighty furlongs, without an inkling of what would happen.1 Alexander, nevertheless, nursed an implacable hostility toward them; he held his forces in readiness, followed them, and falling upon them suddenly wrought a great slaughter. At first they kept shouting that this attack was in contravention of the treaty and they called to witness the gods against whom he had transgressed. Alexander shouted back that he had granted them the right to leave the city but not that of being friends of the Macedonians forever.
Not daunted at the greatness of their danger, the mercenaries joined ranks and, forming a full circle, placed their children and women in the centre so that they might effectively face those who were attacking from all directions. Filled with desperate courage and fighting stoutly with native toughness and the experience of previous contests, they were opposed by Macedonians anxious not to show themselves inferior to barbarians in fighting ability, so that the battle was a scene of horror. They fought hand to hand, and as the contestants engaged each other every


1These mercenaries had been in the service of the Assacenians. Plutarch (Alexander, 59. 3–4) agrees with this rather discreditable account of Alexander’s treatment of them. Arrian, on the other hand (4. 27. 3–4), states that Alexander killed them because they were intending to desert. This presents historians with a nice dilemma: was Diodorus’s source blackening Alexander’s reputation, or was Arrian ’s whitening it?363