Diodorus of Sicily

ἀφ᾿ Ἡρακλέους συγγενείας καὶ λόγοις φιλανθρώποις,
ἔτι δὲ μεγάλαις ἐπαγγελίαις μετεωρίσας
ἔπεισε τὴν πατροπαράδοτον ἡγεμονίαν τῆς Ἑλλάδος
αὐτῷ συγχωρῆσαι κοινῷ τῆς Θετταλίας δόγματι.
2μετὰ δὲ τούτους τὰ συνορίζοντα1 τῶν ἐθνῶν εἰς
τὴν ὁμοίαν εὔνοιαν προσαγαγόμενος παρῆλθεν εἰς
Πύλας καὶ τὸ τῶν Ἀμφικτυόνων συνέδριον συναγαγὼν
ἔπεισεν ἑαυτῷ κοινῷ δόγματι δοθῆναι τὴν
3τῶν Ἑλλήνων ἡγεμονίαν. τοῖς δ᾿ Ἀμβρακιώταις
διαπρεσβευόμενος καὶ φιλανθρώπως ὁμιλήσας ἔπεισεν
αὐτοὺς βραχεῖ προειληφέναι τὴν μέλλουσαν ὑπ᾿
αὐτοῦ δίδοσθαι μετὰ προθυμίας αὐτονομίαν.
4Πρὸς δὲ τὴν κατάπληξιν τῶν ἀπειθούντων ἦγε
τὴν δύναμιν τῶν Μακεδόνων κεκοσμημένην καταπληκτικῶς.
ὀξείαις δὲ ταῖς ὁδοιπορίαις χρησάμενος
ἧκεν εἰς τὴν Βοιωτίαν καὶ πλησίον τῆς Καδμείας
καταστρατοπεδεύσας ἐπέστησε τὸν φόβον
5τῇ πόλει τῶν Θηβαίων. καθ᾿ ὃν δὴ χρόνον Ἀθηναῖοι
πυθόμενοι τὴν εἰς Βοιωτίαν πάροδον τοῦ
βασιλέως τῆς προϋπαρχούσης καταφρονήσεως ἀπέστησαν·
ἡ γὰρ ὀξύτης τοῦ νεανίσκου καὶ ἡ διὰ τῶν
πράξεων ἐνέργεια τοὺς ἀλλοτριοφρονοῦντας μεγάλως
6ἐξέπληττεν. διόπερ Ἀθηναῖοι τὰ μὲν ἀπὸ τῆς
χώρας ἐψηφίσαντο κατακομίζειν, τῶν δὲ τειχῶν
τὴν ἐνδεχομένην ἐπιμέλειαν ποιεῖσθαι πρὸς δὲ τὸν
Ἀλέξανδρον πρέσβεις ἐξαπέστειλαν, ἀξιοῦντες συγγνώμην
ἔχειν, εἰ τὴν ἡγεμονίαν μὴ ταχέως συγχωροῦσιν.
7Ἐν δὲ τοῖς πρέσβεσι καὶ Δημοσθένης ἐκπεμφθεὶς
οὐ συνῆλθε μετὰ τῶν ἄλλων πρὸς τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον,
ἀλλ᾿ ἐκ τοῦ Κιθαιρῶνος ἀνέκαμψεν εἰς τὰς Ἀθήνας,

1So Dindorf (cp. chaps. 76. 1, 96. 3): τοὺς συνορίζοντας.126Book XVII

them of his ancient relationship to them through 335/4 b.c. Heracles and raising their hopes by kindly words and by rich promises as well, and prevailed upon them by formal vote of the Thessalian League to recognize as his the leadership of Greece which he had inherited from his father.1 Next he won over the neighbouring tribes similarly, and so marched down to Pylae, where he convened the assembly of the Amphictyons and had them pass a resolution granting him the leadership of the Greeks. He gave audience to the envoys of the Ambraciots and, addressing them in friendly fashion, convinced them that they had been only a little premature in grasping the independence that he was on the point of giving them voluntarily.
In order to overawe those who refused to yield otherwise, he set out at the head of the army of the Macedonians in full battle array. With forced marches he arrived in Boeotia and encamping near the Cadmeia threw the city of the Thebans into a panic. As the Athenians immediately learned that the king had passed into Boeotia, they too abandoned their previous refusal to take him seriously. So much the rapid moves and energetic action of the young man shook the confidence of those who opposed him. The Athenians, accordingly, voted to bring into the city their property scattered throughout Attica and to look to the repair of their walls, but they also sent envoys to Alexander, asking forgiveness for tardy recognition of his leadership.
Even Demosthenes was included among the envoys; he did not, however, go with the others to Alexander, but turned back at Cithaeron and re-

1Justin, 11. 3. 1–2. Alexander had in Achilles a common ancestor with the Aleuadae of Larissa.127