Diodorus of Sicily

ἀντιτεταγμένους φυγεῖν ἠνάγκασαν, ὁ δὲ Κάσανδρος
πολλοὺς στρατιώτας ἀποβαλὼν καὶ δύναμιν μὲν οὐκ
ἔχων περὶ αὑτὸν ἀξιόχρεω τὴν δὲ χειμερινὴν ὥραν
3θεωρῶν ἐπανῆλθεν εἰς Μακεδονίαν. τούτου δὲ
χωρισθέντος Λευκάδιοι προσλαβόμενοι βοήθειαν
παρὰ Κορκυραίων ἐξέβαλον τὴν φρουρὰν τοῦ
Κασάνδρου. οἱ δ᾿ Ἠπειρῶται χρόνον μέν τινα
διέμενον ὑπ᾿ Ἀλκέτου βασιλευόμενοι, χρωμένου
δ᾿ αὐτοῦ χαλεπώτερον τοῖς πλήθεσιν αὐτόν τε
κατέσφαξαν καὶ δύο τῶν υἱῶν παῖδας ὄντας τὴν
ἡλικίαν Ἠσιονέα καὶ Νίσον.
90. Κατὰ δὲ τὴν Ἀσίαν Σέλευκος μετὰ τὴν γενομένην
ἧτταν Δημητρίῳ περὶ Γάζαν τῆς Συρίας
ἀναλαβὼν παρὰ Πτολεμαίου πεζοὺς μὲν οὐ πλείους
τῶν ὀκτακοσίων ἱππεῖς δὲ περὶ διακοσίους ἀνέζευξεν
ἐπὶ Βαβυλῶνος, ἐπὶ τοσοῦτον μεμετεωρισμένος
ταῖς ἐλπίσιν ὥστ᾿ εἰ καὶ μηδεμίαν εἶχε δύναμιν τὸ
παράπαν, μετὰ τῶν φίλων καὶ τῶν ἰδίων παίδων
τὴν εἰς τοὺς ἄνω τόπους ἀνάβασιν ποιεῖσθαι· ὑπελάμβανε
γὰρ τοὺς μὲν Βαβυλωνίους διὰ τὴν προϋπάρχουσαν
εὔνοιαν ἑτοίμως αὐτῷ προσθήσεσθαι,
τοὺς δὲ περὶ Ἀντίγονον μετὰ τῆς δυνάμεως μακρὰν
ἀπεσπασμένους παραδεδωκέναι καιρὸν οἰκεῖον ταῖς
2ἰδίαις ἐπιβολαῖς. τοιαύτης δ᾿ οὔσης τῆς περὶ αὐτὸν
ὁρμῆς οἱ συνόντες φίλοι θεωροῦντες ὅτι μετ᾿ αὐτῶν
μέν εἰσι παντελῶς ὀλίγοι συστρατεύοντες, τοῖς δὲ
πολεμίοις ἐφ᾿ οὓς προάγουσι καὶ δυνάμεις ὑπάρχουσιν
ἕτοιμοι μεγάλαι καὶ χορηγίαι λαμπραὶ καὶ
3συμμάχων πλῆθος, οὐ μετρίως ἠθύμουν. οὓς ὁρῶν
καταπεπληγμένους ὁ Σέλευκος παρεκάλει, διδάσκων
76Book XIX

to flee; and Cassander, who had lost many soldiers, 312 b.c. since he did not have an adequate army with him and saw that the winter was at hand,1 returned into Macedonia. After his departure, the Leucadians, receiving help from the Corcyraeans, drove out Cassander’s garrison. For some time the Epirotes continued to be ruled by Alcetas; but then, since he was treating the common people too harshly, they murdered him and two of his sons, Esioneus and Nisus, who were children.2
90. In Asia,3 after the defeat of Demetrius at Gaza in Syria, Seleucus, receiving from Ptolemy no more than eight hundred foot soldiers and about two hundred horse,4 set out for Babylon. He was so puffed up with great expectations that, even if he had had no army whatever, he would have made the expedition into the interior with his friends and his own slaves; for he assumed that the Babylonians, on account of the goodwill that had previously existed, would promptly join him, and that Antigonus, by withdrawing to a great distance with his army, had given him a suitable opportunity for his own enterprises. While such was his own enthusiasm, those of his friends who accompanied him were no little disheartened when they saw that the men who were making the campaign with them were very few and that the enemy against whom they were going possessed large armies ready for service, magnificent resources, and a host of allies. When Seleucus saw that they were terror-stricken, he encouraged




1The winter of 312/11 b.c.2But compare the note on chap. 88. 4. The narrative is continued in chap. 105.3Continued from chap. 86. 5.4Appian, Syrian Wars, 9. 54, says 1000 foot and 300 horse.77