Diodorus of Sicily
5καταφυγόντες εἰς πεντακοσίους ἀπώλοντο. πολλὰ
μὲν οὖν καὶ ἄλλα θεῖα περὶ τοὺς Φωκεῖς συνέβη
γενέσθαι περὶ τούτους τοὺς χρόνους, μάλιστα δὲ
τὸ μέλλον λέγεσθαι. οἱ γὰρ εἰς τὸν νεὼ καταφυγόντες
ὑπέλαβον διὰ τῆς τῶν θεῶν ἐπικουρίας
σωθήσεσθαι, τοὐναντίον δὲ θείᾳ τινὶ προνοίᾳ τῆς
6προσηκούσης τοῖς ἱεροσύλοις τιμωρίας ἔτυχον· πολλῆς
γὰρ οὔσης στιβάδος περὶ τὸν νεὼ1 καὶ πυρὸς
ἐν ταῖς σκηναῖς τῶν πεφευγότων ἀπολελειμμένου
συνέβη τῆς στιβάδος ἐκκαυθείσης τοσαύτην ἐξαφθῆναι
φλόγα παραδόξως ὥστε τὸν ναὸν καὶ τοὺς
καταπεφευγότας εἰς αὐτὸν Φωκεῖς ζῶντας καταφλεχθῆναι.
τοῖς γὰρ ἱεροσύλοις ἔδοξε τὸ θεῖον μὴ
διδόναι τὴν ἐκ τῆς ἱκεσίας συγχωρουμένην
ἀσφάλειαν.
59. Ἐπ᾿ ἄρχοντος δ᾿ Ἀθήνησιν Ἀρχίου Ῥωμαῖοι
κατέστησαν ὑπάτους Μάρκον Αἰμίλιον καὶ
Τίτον Κοΐνκτιον.2 ἐπὶ δὲ τούτων ὁ Φωκικὸς πόλεμος,
διαμείνας ἔτη δέκα, κατελύθη τόνδε τὸν τρόπον.
Βοιωτῶν καὶ Φωκέων τεταπεινωμένων διὰ τὸ
μῆκος τοῦ πολέμου Φωκεῖς μὲν πρέσβεις ἐξαπέστειλαν
εἰς Λακεδαίμονα περὶ βοηθείας, Σπαρτιᾶται
δὲ χιλίους ὁπλίτας ἐξέπεμψαν στρατηγὸν ἐπιστήσαντες
2Ἀρχίδαμον τὸν βασιλέα. Βοιωτῶν δὲ
παραπλησίως τούτοις διαπρεσβευσαμένων πρὸς Φίλιππον
περὶ συμμαχίας ὁ Φίλιππος παραλαβὼν τοὺς
Θετταλοὺς ἧκεν εἰς τὴν Λοκρίδα μετὰ πολλῆς δυνάμεως.




1So PRF: νεὼν cett.2Κοΐνκτιον PXR, Κόϊντον FO] Livy, 7. 24; Fasti Consulares
(see note 2 opposite).402Book XVI

temple of Apollo and perished to the number of five 347/6 b.c. hundred. Now many other divine visitations fell to the lot of the Phocians about this period, and in particular the one that I am about to relate. The men who had taken refuge in the temple supposed that their lives would be saved through the intervention of the gods, but on the contrary through some divine Providence1 they met with the punishment temple-robbers
well deserve. For there was a quantity of rushes about the temple, and a fire had been left behind in the tents of the men who had fled, with the result that the rushes caught fire and such a great conflagration was touched off so miraculously that the temple was consumed and the Phocians who had fled to it for refuge were burned alive. Indeed it became apparent that the gods do not extend to temple-robbers
the protection generally accorded to suppliants.
59. When Archias was archon at Athens, the 346/5 b.c. Romans elected Marcus Aemilius and Titus Quinctius consuls.2 During their term of office the Phocian War, after lasting for ten3 years, was terminated in the following manner. Since the Boeotians and the Phocians were utterly dejected by the length of the war, the Phocians dispatched envoys to Lacedaemon asking for reinforcements, and the Spartans sent a thousand hoplites in charge of whom as general they placed their king Archidamus. Similarly the Boeotians sent an embassy to Philip proposing an alliance, and Philip, after taking over the Thessalians, entered Locris



1What Diodorus attributes to chance and providence, Pausanias, 10. 35. 3, lays upon the Thebans: αὐτούς τε οἱ Θηβαῖοι τοὺς ἱκέτας καὶ τὸ ἱερὸν . . . ἔδοσαν πυρί.2Livy, 7. 24 gives L. Furius Camillus and Appius Claudius Crassus. The latter is named in the Fasti Consulares.3Cp. chaps. 14. 3 and 23. 1.403