Diodorus of Sicily

εἰς Συρακούσσας ὡς φίλον συλλαβὼν ἐθανάτωσεν.
ὑπεδέξατο δὲ καὶ τοὺς ὑπὸ Κορινθίων
ἐκπεμφθέντας οἰκήτορας φιλοφρόνως, ὄντας τὸν
ἀριθμὸν πεντακισχιλίους. μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα τῶν
Καρχηδονίων διαπρεσβευσαμένων καὶ πολλὰ δεηθέντων
συνεχώρησεν αὐτοῖς τὴν εἰρήνην ὥστε τὰς
μὲν Ἑλληνίδας πόλεις ἁπάσας ἐλευθέρας εἶναι, τὸν
δὲ Λύκον καλούμενον ποταμὸν ὅριον εἶναι τῆς ἑκατέρων
ἐπικρατείας· μὴ ἐξεῖναι δὲ Καρχηδονίοις
βοηθῆσαι τοῖς τυράννοις τοῖς πολεμοῦσι πρὸς Συρακοσίους.
4Μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα τὸν μὲν Ἱκέταν καταπολεμήσας
ἐθανάτωσε,1 τοὺς δ᾿ ἐν Αἴτνῃ Καμπανοὺς ἐκπολιορκήσας
διέφθειρε. καὶ Νικόδημον μὲν τὸν Κεντοριπίνων
τύραννον καταπληξάμενος ἐξέβαλεν ἐκ τῆς
πόλεως, Ἀπολλωνιάδην δὲ τὸν Ἀγυριναίων δυνάστην
παύσας τῆς τυραννίδος τοὺς ἐλευθερωθέντας
Συρακοσίους ἐποίησε. καθόλου δὲ πάντας τοὺς
κατὰ τὴν νῆσον τυράννους ῥιζοτομήσας2 καὶ τὰς
πόλεις ἐλευθερώσας εἰς τὴν συμμαχίαν προσεδέξατο.
5κηρύξαντος δ᾿ αὐτοῦ κατὰ τὴν Ἑλλάδα διότι Συρακόσιοι
διδόασι χώραν καὶ οἰκίας τοῖς βουλομένοις
μετέχειν τῆς ἐν Συρακούσσαις πολιτείας πολλοὶ
πρὸς τὴν κληρουχίαν Ἕλληνες ἀπήντησαν· τέλος δὲ
οἰκήτορες ἀπεδείχθησαν εἰς μὲν τὴν Συρακοσίαν





1ἐθανάτωσε Reiske: ἔθαψε.2So Herwerden: ῥιζολογήσας.66Book XVI

with twelve corsairs, and had put in at Syracuse as 339/8 b.c. a friendly city. He received the new settlers sent out by the Corinthians kindly, to the number of five thousand. Then, when the Carthaginians sent envoys and pleaded with him urgently, he granted them peace on the terms that all the Greek cities should be free,1 that the river Lycus2 should be the boundary of their respective territories, and that the Carthaginians might not give aid to the tyrants who were at war with Syracuse.
After this, he concluded his war with Hicetas and put him to death,3 and then attacked the Campanians in Aetna and wiped them out.4 Likewise he overbore Nicodemus, tyrant of Centuripae, and ousted him from that city; and putting an end to the tyranny of Apolloniades in Agyrium5 he gave Syracusan citizenship to its freed inhabitants. In a word, all of the tyrants throughout the island were uprooted and the cities were set free and taken into his alliance. He made proclamation in Greece that the Syracusans would give land and houses to those who wished to come and share in their state, and many Greeks came to receive their allotments.6 Ultimately forty thousand settlers were assigned to




1“Freedom” in Greek political terminology did not exclude
the possibility of an overlord, Carthage or Syracuse.
Plutarch, Timoleon, 34. 1, does not mention this feature of
the treaty.2Diodorus usually calls this river Halycus (Books 15. 17.
5; 23. 9. 5; 24. 1. 8).3Plutarch, Timoleon, 31. 2–32. 1. Since Timoleon had just accepted the aid of Hicetas against the Carthaginians (chap. 77. 5), this change of policy suggests some duplicity on his part (Westlake, Timoleon and his Relations with Tyrants, 15 f.).4This is not mentioned by Plutarch.5This was Diodorus’s own native city.6Plutarch, Timoleon, 22. 3–5; 23 (where the invitation was issued when Timoleon first became master of Syracuse); 35. According to the historian Athanis, quoted by Plutarch (Timoleon, 23. 4; Jacoby, Fragm. der gr. Hist. no. 562, F 2), there were 60,000 who came. Cp. further Book 19. 2. 8.67