Diodorus of Sicily
3πόλεις. τοῦ δὲ Τέννου διαβεβαιωσαμένου παραδώσειν
τὴν πόλιν ὁ βασιλεύς, φυλάττων τὴν ὀργὴν
ἀπαραίτητον, ἅπαντας τοὺς πεντακοσίους ἔχοντας
τὰς ἱκετηρίας κατηκόντισεν. εἶθ᾿ ὁ μὲν Τέννης
προσελθὼν τοῖς ἐξ Αἰγύπτου μισθοφόροις ἔπεισεν
αὐτοὺς ἐντὸς τῶν τειχῶν εἰσαγαγεῖν αὐτόν τε καὶ
4τὸν βασιλέα. ἡ μὲν οὖν Σιδὼν διὰ τοιαύτης προδοσίας
ὑποχείριος ἐγένετο τοῖς Πέρσαις. ὁ δὲ
βασιλεὺς ὑπολαβὼν τὸν Τέννην μηκέτι χρήσιμον
ὑπάρχειν ἀνεῖλεν. οἱ δὲ Σιδώνιοι πρὸ μὲν τῆς
παρουσίας τοῦ βασιλέως ἐνέπρησαν ἁπάσας τὰς ναῦς,
ὅπως μηδεὶς δύνηται τῶν κατὰ τὴν πόλιν ἐκπλεύσας
ἰδίᾳ1 σωτηρίαν πορίζεσθαι· ἐπειδὴ δὲ τὴν πόλιν
ἑώρων καὶ τὰ τείχη κατειλημμένα καὶ πολλαῖς
μυριάσι στρατιωτῶν περιεχόμενα, συγκλείσαντες
ἑαυτοὺς καὶ τὰ τέκνα καὶ γυναῖκας εἰς τὰς οἰκίας
5ἐνέπρησαν. φασὶ δὲ τοὺς ὑπὸ τοῦ πυρὸς τότε διαφθαρέντας
σὺν τοῖς οἰκετικοῖς σώμασι γεγονέναι
πλείους τῶν τετρακισμυρίων. τούτου δὲ τοῦ πάθους
περὶ τοὺς Σιδωνίους γενομένου καὶ τῆς πόλεως
ὅλης μετὰ τῶν ἐνοικούντων ὑπὸ τοῦ πυρὸς ἀφανισθείσης
τὴν πυρκαϊὰν ὁ βασιλεὺς ἀπέδοτο πολλῶν
6ταλάντων· διὰ γὰρ τὴν εὐδαιμονίαν τῶν ἐνῳκηκότων
εὑρέθη πολὺς ἄργυρός τε καὶ χρυσὸς ὑπὸ τοῦ
πυρὸς κεχωνευμένος. τὰ μὲν οὖν κατὰ Σιδῶνα
συμβάντα δυστυχήματα τοιαύτην ἔσχε τὴν καταστροφήν,



1So Wesseling: ἰδίαν.362Book XVI

other cities by their punishment. When Tennes assured 351/0 b.c. him that he would deliver up the city, the King, maintaining his merciless rage, had all five hundred shot down while still holding the supplicant branches. Thereupon Tennes, approaching the mercenaries from Egypt, prevailed upon them to lead him and the King inside the walls. So Sidon by this base betrayal was delivered into the power of the Persians; and the King, believing that Tennes was of no further use to him, put him to death.1 But the people of Sidon before the arrival of the King burned all their ships so that none of the townspeople should be able by sailing out secretly to gain safety for himself. But when they saw the city and the walls captured and swarming with many myriads of soldiers, they shut themselves, their children, and their women up in their houses and consumed them all in flames. They say that those who were then destroyed in the fire, including the domestics, amounted to more than forty thousand. After this disaster had befallen the Sidonians and the whole2 city together with its inhabitants had been obliterated by the fire, the King sold that funeral pyre for many talents, for as a result of the prosperity of the householders there was found a vast amount of silver and gold melted down by the fire. So the disasters which had overtaken Sidon had such an


1Cp. Hall, Cambridge Ancient History, 6. 153: “Tennes
was cynically executed by Ochus, and Mentor with equal
cynicism taken into his service,” with the doubts expressed by Beloch, Griechische Geschichte2, 3. 1. 535, note 2:
“Tennes’ Hinrichtung lässt es zweifelhaft erscheinen, ob er wirklich ein Verräter gewesen ist und nicht vielmehr bloss eine Kapitulation abgeschlossen hat, die dann nicht gehalten word en ist.”2Beloch doubts (Griechische Geschichte2, 3. 1, 535, note 2) if the catastrophe at Sidon could have been as complete as Diodorus reports, since Sidon twelve years later (at the time of Alexander) was a large powerful city. Cp. Arrian, Alexander, 2. 20 ff. and Curtius, 4. 1. 15.363