Diodorus of Sicily

τὸν μεταξὺ τόπον νεκρῶν πληρωθῆναι, πολλὰ
συμβαλλομένου καὶ τοῦ ποταμοῦ πρὸς τὴν τῶν
5Ἑλλήνων ἀπώλειαν· ὑπὸ κύνα γὰρ οὔσης τῆς ὥρας
καὶ τοῦ διωγμοῦ περὶ μέσον ἡμέρας γινομένου οἱ
πολλοὶ τῶν φευγόντων διά τε τὸ καῦμα καὶ τὴν ἐκ
τῆς φυγῆς κακοπάθειαν ἔκδιψοι γιγνόμενοι λάβρως
ἔπινον, καὶ ταῦθ᾿ ἁλυκοῦ τοῦ ῥεύματος ὄντος. διόπερ
οὐκ ἐλάττους τῶν ἐν τῷ διωγμῷ σφαγέντων
εὑρέθησαν παρὰ τὸν ποταμὸν τετελευτηκότες ἄτρωτοι.
ἔπεσον δ᾿ ἐν τῇ μάχῃ ταύτῃ τῶν μὲν βαρβάρων
περὶ πεντακοσίους, τῶν δ᾿ Ἑλλήνων οὐκ
ἐλάττους ἑπτακισχιλίων.
110. Ἀγαθοκλῆς δὲ τηλικαύτῃ συμφορᾷ περιπεσὼν
τοὺς ἐκ τῆς τροπῆς διασωθέντας ἀνέλαβεν καὶ
τὴν παρεμβολὴν ἐμπρήσας εἰς Γέλαν ἀπεχώρησε.
διαδόντος δ᾿ αὐτοῦ λόγον ὡς κατὰ σπουδὴν εἰς
Συρακούσσας ἀναζευγνύειν διέγνωκε, τριακόσιοι
τῶν ἐκ Λιβύης ἱππέων κατὰ τὴν χώραν περιέπεσόν
τισι τῶν Ἀγαθοκλέους στρατιωτῶν. ὧν εἰπόντων
ὡς Ἀγαθοκλῆς εἰς Συρακούσσας ἀποκεχώρηκεν,
εἰσῆλθον εἰς Γέλαν ὡς φίλοι καὶ διαψευσθέντες τῆς
2ἐλπίδος κατηκοντίσθησαν. ὁ δ᾿ Ἀγαθοκλῆς συνέκλεισεν
αὑτὸν εἰς τὴν Γέλαν, οὐκ ἀδυνατῶν εἰς
Συρακούσσας διασωθῆναι, βουλόμενος δὲ περισπάσαι
τοὺς Καρχηδονίους πρὸς τὴν πολιορκίαν τῆς
Γέλας, ἵν᾿ οἱ Συρακόσιοι πολλὴν ἄδειαν σχῶσι
συγκομίσαι τοὺς καρπούς, ἀναγκάζοντος τοῦ καιροῦ.
3ὁ δ᾿ Ἀμίλκας τὸ μὲν πρῶτον ἐπεχείρει πολιορκεῖν
τὴν Γέλαν, πυνθανόμενος δὲ ἐν ταύτῃ καὶ
δύναμιν εἶναι τὴν ἀμυνομένην καὶ πάντων εὐπορεῖν
τὸν Ἀγαθοκλέα ταύτης μὲν ἀπέστη τῆς ἐπιβολῆς,
τὰ δὲ φρούρια καὶ τὰς πόλεις ἐπιπορευόμενος
130Book XIX

As a result the space between was filled with dead; 311 b.c. and the river itself contributed greatly to the destruction of the Greeks. Since it was the season of the Dog Star and since the pursuit took place in the middle of the day, most of the fugitives became very thirsty because of the heat and the distress caused by the flight and drank greedily, and that too although the stream was salt.1 Therefore no fewer men than those killed in the pursuit itself were found dead beside the river without a wound. In this battle about five hundred of the barbarians fell, but of the Greeks no less than seven thousand.
110. Agathocles, having met with such a disaster, collected those who had survived the rout and after burning his camp withdrew into Gela. After he had given it out that he had decided to set out quickly for Syracuse, three hundred of the Libyan cavalry fell in with some of the soldiers of Agathocles in the open country. Since these said that Agathocles had departed for Syracuse, the Libyans entered Gela as friends, but they were cheated of their expectations and shot down. Agathocles, however, shut himself up in Gela, not because he was unable to go safely to Syracuse, but because he wished to divert the Carthaginians to the siege of Gela in order that the Syracusans might quite fearlessly gather in their crops as the season demanded. Hamilcar at first attempted to besiege Gela, but discovering that there were troops in the city defending it and that Agathocles had ample supplies of all kinds, he gave up the attempt; instead, by visiting the fortresses and cities, he won them over and treated all

1Cp. Vitruvius, 8. 3. 7. From its natural saltiness, the river gets its modern name, “Salso.”131