Diodorus of Sicily

Αὐτόμαλα1· ἐντεῦθεν δὲ πορευομένοις ὑπῆρχεν ὄρος ἐξ
ἀμφοτέρων τῶν μερῶν ἀπόκρημνον, ἐν μέσῳ δ᾿
ἔχον φάραγγα βαθεῖαν, ἐξ ἧς ἀνέτεινε λισσὴ πέτρα
3πρὸς ὀρθὸν ἀνατείνουσα σκόπελον· περὶ δὲ τὴν
ῥίζαν αὐτῆς ἄντρον ἦν εὐμέγεθες, κιττῷ καὶ σμίλακι
συνηρεφές, ἐν ᾧ μυθεύουσι γεγονέναι βασίλισσαν
Λάμιαν τῷ κάλλει διαφέρουσαν· διὰ δὲ τὴν τῆς
ψυχῆς ἀγριότητα διατυπῶσαί2 φασι τὴν ὄψιν αὐτῆς
τὸν μετὰ ταῦτα χρόνον θηριώδη. τῶν γὰρ γινομένων
αὐτῇ παίδων ἁπάντων τελευτώντων βαρυθυμοῦσαν
ἐπὶ τῷ πάθει καὶ φθονοῦσαν ταῖς τῶν
ἄλλων γυναικῶν εὐτεκνίαις κελεύειν ἐκ τῶν ἀγκαλῶν
ἐξαρπάζεσθαι τὰ βρέφη καὶ παραχρῆμα ἀποκτέννειν.
4διὸ καὶ καθ᾿ ἡμᾶς μέχρι τοῦ νῦν βίου
παρὰ τοῖς νηπίοις διαμένειν τὴν περὶ τῆς γυναικὸς
ταύτης φήμην καὶ φοβερωτάτην αὐτοῖς εἶναι τὴν
5ταύτης προσηγορίαν. ὅτε δὲ μεθύσκοιτο, τὴν
ἄδειαν διδόναι πᾶσιν ἃ βούλοιντο ποιεῖν ἀπαρατηρήτως.
μὴ πολυπραγμονούσης οὖν αὐτῆς κατ᾿
ἐκεῖνον τὸν χρόνον τὰ γινόμενα τοὺς3 κατὰ τὴν
χώραν ὑπολαμβάνειν μὴ βλέπειν αὐτήν· καὶ διὰ
τοῦτ᾿ ἐμυθολόγησάν τινες ὡς εἰς ἄρσιχον ἐμβάλοι
τοὺς ὀφθαλμούς, τὴν ἐν οἴνῳ συντελουμένην ὀλιγωρίαν
εἰς τὸ προειρημένον μέτρον μεταφέροντες,
6ὡς τούτου παρῃρημένου τὴν ὅρασιν. ὅτι δὲ κατὰ





1Αὐτόμαλα Wesseling: Αὐτομόλας.2διατετυπῶσθαί Madvig, Fischer.3τοὺς added by Wesseling.252Book XX

they advanced there was a mountain, precipitous on 308 b.c. both sides but with a deep ravine in the centre, from which extended a smooth rock that rose up to a lofty peak. At the base of this rock was a large cave thickly covered with ivy and bryony, in which according to myth had been born Lamia, a queen of surpassing beauty.1 But on account of the savagery of her heart they say that the time that has elapsed since has transformed her face to a bestial aspect. For when all the children born to her had died,2 weighed down in her misfortune and envying the happiness of all other women in their children, she ordered that the new-born babies be snatched from their mothers’ arms and straightway slain. Wherefore among us even down to the present generation, the story of this woman remains among the children and her name is most terrifying to them.3 But whenever she drank freely, she gave to all the opportunity to do what they pleased unobserved. Therefore, since she did not trouble herself about what was taking place at such times, the people of the land assumed that she could not see. And for that reason some tell in the myth that she threw her eyes into a flask,4 metaphorically turning the carelessness that is most complete amid wine into the aforesaid measure, since it was a measure of wine that took away her sight. One might also present Euripides




1The myth is also preserved in the scholia on Aristophanes,
Peace, 758, and Wasps, 1035. In the latter place credit is given to Duris (FGrH, 76. F 17), whom Diodorus is probably following here.2This was because of the jealous wrath of Hera, the father of the children being Zeus.3Strabo, 1. 2. 8, lists this myth among those used to frighten children. Cp. Horace, Art of Poetry, 340.4Plutarch, On Curiosity, 2 (p. 516), says that she took her eyes out of her head when she wished to rest at home and replaced them when she went abroad.253