Diodorus of Sicily

τοῖς Καρχηδονίοις πᾶν τὸ διακείμενον ἀλλοτρίως
κατὰ τὴν Σικελίαν ἐκ ποδῶν ἐποιεῖτο. οἱ δὲ
Μεσσήνιοι τῶν ξένων τοὺς εὐνουστάτους αὐτοῖς
καὶ δυναμένους ἀμύνασθαι τὸν τύραννον ἐκβεβληκότες
ἐκ τῆς πόλεως καὶ τῶν πολιτῶν τοὺς
ἀλλοτρίως ἔχοντας πρὸς τὸν δυνάστην ὁρῶντες
ἀνῃρημένους, ἔτι δὲ τοὺς ἐπὶ κακουργίᾳ καταδεδικασμένους
ἠναγκασμένοι καταδέξασθαι μετεμέλοντο
μὲν ἐπὶ τοῖς πεπραγμένοις, ἠναγκάζοντο
δὲ καρτερεῖν, καταπεπληγμένοι τὴν ὑπεροχὴν τῶν
8κρατούντων. ὁ δ᾿ Ἀγαθοκλῆς τὸ μὲν πρῶτον
ἀνέζευξεν ἐπ᾿ Ἀκράγαντος, διανοούμενος καὶ ταύτην
τὴν πόλιν συσκευάσασθαι· τῶν δὲ Καρχηδονίων
καταπλευσάντων ναυσὶν ἑξήκοντα ταύτης
μὲν τῆς προθέσεως ἀπέστη, τὴν δὲ χώραν τὴν ὑπὸ
Καρχηδονίους ἐπιὼν ἐλεηλάτει καὶ τῶν φρουρίων
ἃ μὲν ᾕρει κατὰ κράτος, ἃ δὲ δι᾿ ὁμολογίας 
προσήγετο.
103. Ἅμα δὲ τούτοις πρασσομένοις Δεινοκράτης
ὁ τῶν Συρακοσίων φυγάδων ἡγούμενος πρὸς μὲν
τοὺς Καρχηδονίους διεπέμπετο, βοηθεῖν ἀξιῶν πρὶν
ἢ τὸν Ἀγαθοκλέα πᾶσαν ὑφ᾿ ἑαυτὸν ποιήσασθαι
2Σικελίαν, αὐτὸς δὲ προσδεξάμενος τοὺς ἐκ Μεσσήνης
ἐκβεβλημένους φυγάδας, ἔχων ἁδρὰν δύναμιν,
ἀπέστειλέν τινα τῶν περὶ αὑτὸν Νυμφόδωρον, δοὺς
μέρος τῶν στρατιωτῶν, ἐπὶ τὴν Κεντοριπίνων
3πόλιν· ταύτην γὰρ φρουρουμένην ὑπ᾿ Ἀγαθοκλέους
τῶν πολιτικῶν τινες ἐπηγγείλαντο παραδώσειν, ἐφ᾿
ὅτῳ τὴν αὐτονομίαν δοθῆναι τῷ δήμῳ. παρεισπεσόντος
112Book XIX

and he was getting rid of all opposition throughout Sicily. When the Messenians had driven out of the city those non-citizens who were most favourably disposed to them and best able to protect them from the tyrant, and saw that those of their own citizens who were opposed to the dynast had been put to death, and when, moreover, they had been forced to receive back men who had been convicted of crime, they regretted what they had done; but they were forced to submit, since they were completely cowed by the superior power of those who had become their masters. Agathocles first set out for Acragas, intending to organize that city also in his own interest; when, however, the Carthaginians sailed in with sixty ships, he abandoned that purpose; but he entered the territory subject to the Carthaginians and plundered it, taking some of the fortified places by force and winning others by negotiation.
103. While this was taking place, Deinocrates,1 the leader of the Syracusan exiles, sent a message to the Carthaginians, asking them to send aid before Agathocles should bring all Sicily under his sway; and he himself, since he had a strong army after receiving those exiles who had been driven out of Messenê, dispatched one of his friends, Nymphodorus, with part of the soldiers to the city of the Centoripini.2 Although this city was garrisoned by Agathocles, some of its chief men had promised to betray it on condition that the people be given autonomy. But when Nymphodorus broke into the


1An old friend of Agathocles, he had been spared when the tyrant first established himself in power (chap. 8. 6); we do not hear of the occasion of his exile.2Centoripa is a city in the interior of Sicily, south-west of Aetna and north-west of Catana.113