Diodorus of Sicily

ναῦς πῦρ ἐνῆκαν καὶ τέσσαρας μὲν κατέκαυσαν,
παρ᾿ ὀλίγον δὲ καὶ πάσας διέφθειραν· τοῖς δ᾿
ἐλαττουμένοις παραγενομένης βοηθείας ἐξ Ἀθηνῶν
ἐπέπλευσαν οἱ περὶ Κάσανδρον καταφρονοῦσι τοῖς
πολεμίοις. συμβαλόντες δ᾿ αὐτοῖς μίαν μὲν κατέδυσαν,
τρεῖς δ᾿ αὐτάνδρους ἔλαβον.
Καὶ τὰ μὲν πραχθέντα περὶ τὴν Ἐλλάδα καὶ τὸν
Πόντον τοιαῦτ᾿ ἦν.
76. Κατὰ δὲ τὴν Ἰταλίαν Σαμνῖται μὲν μετὰ
πολλῆς δυνάμεως ἐπῄεσαν πορθοῦντες τῶν κατὰ
Καμπανίαν1 πόλεων ὅσαι τοῖς ἐναντίοις συνηγωνίζοντο,
οἱ δ᾿ ὕπατοι τῶν Ῥωμαίων μετὰ στρατοπέδου
παραγενόμενοι παραβοηθεῖν ἐπειρῶντο τοῖς
2κινδυνεύουσιν τῶν συμμάχων. ἀντεστρατοπεδεύσαντο
δὲ τοῖς πολεμίοις περὶ Ταρακίναν2 πόλιν καὶ
ταύτην μὲν εὐθὺς ἐρύσαντο τῶν ἐπικειμένων φόβων,
μετ᾿ ὀλίγας δ᾿ ἡμέρας ἐκταξάντων ἀμφοτέρων τὰς
δυνάμεις ἐγένετο μάχη καρτερὰ καὶ συχνοὶ παρ᾿
ἀμφοτέροις ἔπεσον. τὸ δὲ τέλος οἱ Ῥωμαῖοι βιασάμενοι
κατὰ κράτος περιεγένοντο τῶν πολεμίων,
ἐπὶ πολὺν δὲ χρόνον χρησάμενοι τῷ διωγμῷ πλείους
3τῶν μυρίων ἀνεῖλον. καὶ τῆς μάχης ἀγνοουμένης
ἔτι Καμπανοὶ μὲν καταφρονήσαντες τῶν Ῥωμαίων
ἀπέστησαν, ὁ δὲ δῆμος εὐθὺς δύναμίν τε τὴν ἱκανὴν
ἐξέπεμψεν ἐπ᾿ αὐτοὺς καὶ στρατηγὸν αὐτοκράτορα
Γάιον Μάνιον καὶ μετ᾿ αὐτοῦ κατὰ τὸ πάτριον ἔθος
4Μάνιον Φούλβιον ἵππαρχον.3 τούτων δὲ πλησίον
τῆς Καπύης καταστρατοπεδευσάντων οἱ Καμπανοὶ

1Καμπανίαν Binneboessel: Ἰταλίαν MSS., Fischer (who
calls the reading certe mendosum).2Ταρακίναν Burger: Κίνναν MSS., Fisher.3ἵππαρχον added by editors.42Book XIX

into them, burning four and almost destroying them 313 b.c. all; but when reinforcements for the defeated came from Athens, Cassander sailed out against the enemy, who were off their guard. When they met, he sank one ship and seized three with their crews.1
Such were the activities in Greece and the Pontus.2
76. In Italy,3 the Samnites were advancing with a large army, destroying whatever cities in Campania4 were supporting their enemies; and the Roman consuls, coming up with an army, were trying to aid those of their allies who were in danger. They took the field against the enemy near Tarracina5 and at once relieved that city from its immediate fears; then a few days later, when both sides had drawn up their armies, a hard-fought battle took place and very many fell on both sides. Finally the Romans, pressing on with all their strength, got the better of their enemies and, pushing the pursuit for a long time, slew more than ten thousand. While this battle was still unknown to them, the Campanians, scorning the Romans, rose in rebellion; but the people at once sent an adequate force against them with the dictator Gaius Manius as commander and accompanying him, according to the national custom, Manius Fulvius as master-of-horse. When these were in position near Capua, the Campanians at first endeavoured








1The fleet from Athens was commanded by Thymochares (IG2, 2. 1. 682).2The narrative is continued in chap. 77.3Continued from chap. 72. 9. Cp. Livy, 9. 26–27.4But cp. the critical note.5But cp. the critical note. No such battle as the one here described is recorded by Livy among the events of this year (Livy, 9. 26–27).43