Diodorus of Sicily

πολλὰ μετὰ δακρύων δεηθέντες μόγις ἔπεισαν τὸν
Ἀλέξανδρον αὐτοῖς διαλλαγῆναι.
110. Ἐπ᾿ ἄρχοντος δ᾿ Ἀθήνησιν Ἀντικλέους
Ῥωμαῖοι κατέστησαν ὑπάτους Λεύκιον Κορνήλιον
καὶ Κόιντον Ποπίλλιον. ἐπὶ δὲ τούτων Ἀλέξανδρος
εἰς1 τὸν τῶν ἀπολελυμένων ἀριθμὸν ἀνεπλήρωσεν
ἐκ τῶν Περσῶν καὶ χιλίους αὐτῶν εἰς τοὺς
περὶ τὴν αὐλὴν ἔταξεν ὑπασπιστὰς καὶ τὸ σύνολον
οὐχ ἥττους εἰς πίστιν τῶν Μακεδόνων ὑπέλαβεν.
2ἧκεν δὲ κατὰ τοῦτον τὸν καιρὸν καὶ Πευκέστης
ἄγων Πέρσας τοξότας καὶ σφενδονήτας δισμυρίους·
καταμίξας δὲ τούτους τοῖς προϋπάρχουσι στρατιώταις
τῇ καινότητι τῆς καινοτομίας κατεσκεύασε
τὴν ὅλην δύναμιν κεκραμένην καὶ ἁρμόζουσαν τῇ
ἰδίᾳ προαιρέσει.
3Τῶν δὲ Μακεδόνων ἐκ τῶν αἰχμαλωτίδων γεγεννηκότων
υἱοὺς τὸν ἀριθμὸν τῶν παίδων ἀκριβῶς
ἐσκέψατο, ὄντων δ᾿ αὐτῶν σχεδὸν μυρίων ἅπασι
τὰς ἁρμοζούσας πρὸς τροφὴν ἐλευθέριον συντάξεις
ἀπομερίσας τούτοις μὲν παιδευτὰς ἐπέστησε τοὺς
διδάξοντας τὴν ἁρμόζουσαν παιδείαν.
Αὐτὸς δὲ ἀναλαβὼν τὴν δύναμιν προῆγεν ἐκ τῶν



1The preposition has been deleted by editors, but cp.
SEG3, 364. 61/2; Alexander’s army was filled “to the
number of the losses.”440Book XVII

Weeping, they urgently petitioned Alexander 326/5 b.c. to forgive them, and with difficulty persuaded him to take them back into favour.
110. In the archonship of Anticles at Athens, the 325/4 b.c. Romans installed as consuls Lucius Cornelius and Quintus Popillius.1 In this year Alexander secured replacements from the Persians equal to the number of these soldiers whom he had released, and assigned a thousand of them to the bodyguards2 stationed at the court. In all respects he showed the same confidence in them as in the Macedonians. At this time Peucestes arrived with twenty thousand Persian bowmen and slingers. Alexander placed these in units with his other soldiers, and by the novelty of this innovation created a force blended and adjusted to his own idea.3
Since there were by now sons of the Macedonians born of captive women, he determined the exact number of these. There were about ten thousand, and he set aside for them revenues sufficient to provide them with an upbringing proper for freeborn children, and set over them teachers to give them their proper training.4
After this he marched with his army from Susa,




1Anticles was archon at Athens from July 325 to June
324 b.c. L. Cornelius Lentulus and Q. Publilius Philo were
consuls in 327 b.c. (Broughton, 1. 145). In his narrative,
Diodorus has reached, actually, the late summer of 324 b.c. The narrative of Curtius is lost down to the story of Alexander’s death.2Arrian (7. 6. 3) states that these thousand formed a fifth squadron of the Companion Cavalry.3Peucestes had been rewarded with the satrapy of Persia after saving Alexander’s life (chap. 99. 4). Of all Alexander’s generals he showed the greatest willingness to conciliate the Persians. Arrian has described these new units earlier (7. 11. 3–4) but places this event a year later (7. 23. 1).4Plutarch, Alexander, 71. 5; Arrian, 7. 12 (stating that these were the children of the veterans who returned to Macedonia); Justin, 12. 4. 6 (under 330 b.c.).441