Diodorus of Sicily

βασιλείαν εἰς ἑαυτοὺς μεθιστῶσιν, ἢ ἐπανέρχεσθαι.
4ὁ δ᾿ Εὐμενὴς πρὸς μὲν τὴν Ὀλυμπιάδα παραχρῆμα
ἀντέγραψε, συμβουλεύων κατὰ τὸ παρὸν μένειν ἐν
Ἠπείρῳ, μέχρι ἂν ὁ πόλεμος λάβῃ τινὰ κρίσιν.
αὐτὸς δ᾿ ἀεὶ τὴν εὔνοιαν βεβαιοτάτην πρὸς τοὺς
βασιλεῖς τετηρηκὼς ἔκρινεν Ἀντιγόνῳ μὲν μὴ
προσέχειν ἐξιδιαζομένῳ τὴν βασιλείαν, τοῦ δὲ
Ἀλεξάνδρου παιδὸς προσδεομένου βοηθείας διά
τε τὴν ὀρφανίαν καὶ διὰ τὴν τῶν ἡγεμόνων πλεονεξίαν
διέλαβεν ἁρμόζειν ἑαυτῷ πάντα κίνδυνον
ἀναδέχεσθαι τῆς τῶν βασιλέων σωτηρίας ἕνεκα.
59. Εὐθὺς οὖν παραγγείλας τοῖς περὶ αὐτὸν
ἀναζευγνύειν προῆγεν ἐκ Καππαδοκίας, ἔχων ἱππεῖς
μὲν περὶ πεντακοσίους, πεζοὺς δὲ πλείους τῶν
δισχιλίων· οὐ γὰρ ἔσχεν ἀναστροφὴν προσδέξασθαι
τοὺς ἀφυστεροῦντας τῶν ἐπηγγελμένων συστρατεύσεσθαι
διὰ τὸ προσάγειν παρ᾿ Ἀντιγόνου δύναμιν
ἀξιόλογον καὶ στρατηγοὺς τοὺς περὶ Μένανδρον,
κωλύσοντας αὐτὸν ἐνδιατρίβειν τῇ Καππαδοκίᾳ,
2πολέμιον γενόμενον1 τοῖς περὶ Ἀντίγονον. ἀλλὰ
γὰρ ἡ δύναμις αὕτη τρισὶν ὕστερον ἡμέραις παραγενομένη
καὶ τῶν καιρῶν ὑστεροῦσα ἐπεβάλετο μὲν
διώκειν τοὺς μετ᾿ Εὐμενοῦς προάγοντας, οὐ δυναμένη
δὲ καταλαβεῖν ἐπανῆλθεν εἰς Καππαδοκίαν.
3ὁ δ᾿ Εὐμενὴς συντόνους τὰς ὁδοιπορίας ποιησάμενος
καὶ ταχὺ τὸν Ταῦρον ὑπερβαλὼν ἧκεν εἰς
τὴν Κιλικίαν. οἱ δὲ τῶν ἀργυρασπίδων ἡγεμόνες
Ἀντιγένης καὶ Τεύταμος, πειθαρχοῦντες ταῖς παρὰ
τῶν βασιλέων ἐπιστολαῖς, ἀπάντησιν ἐποιήσαντο
τῷ Εὐμενεῖ μετὰ τῶν φιλων ἐκ πολλοῦ διαστήματος.
ἀσπασάμενοι δὲ φίλοφρόνως καὶ συγχαρέντες

1γενόμενον Dindorf: γινόμενον.172Book XVIII

themselves, or to return to Macedonia. Eumenes at 318 b.c. once replied to Olympias, advising her to remain in Epirus for the present until the Avar should come to some decision. As for himself, since he had always observed the most unwavering loyalty toward the kings, he decided not to take orders from Antigonus, who was trying to appropriate the kingship for himself; but since the son of Alexander was in need of help because of his orphaned state and the greediness of the commanders, he believed that it was incumbent upon himself to run every risk for the safety of the kings.
59. Immediately, therefore, Eumenes bade his men break camp and departed from Cappadocia with about five hundred horsemen and more than two thousand foot soldiers.1 Indeed, he did not have time to wait for the laggards among those who had promised to join him, for a considerable army was drawing near, sent from Antigonus under the general Menander to prevent Eumenes from staying in Cappadocia now that he had become an enemy of Antigonus. In fact, when this army arrived three days later, although it had missed its opportunity, it undertook to follow those who had gone with Eumenes; but since it was not able to come up with them, it returned to Cappadocia. Eumenes himself quickly passed over the Taurus by forced marches and entered Cilicia. Antigenes and Teutamus, the leaders of the Silver Shields, in obedience to the letters of the kings came from a considerable distance to meet Eumenes and his friends.2 After bidding him welcome and congratulating


1Cp. chap. 53. 7 and footnote.2For Eumenes’ reception by the Silver Shields and their commanders cp. Plutarch, Eumenes, 13. 2–3; Justin, 14. 2. 6–12.173