Diodorus of Sicily

εἰς τὴν τῆς πολεμίας γῆς καταφθορὰν τάς τε
ἐπαύλεις σχεδὸν ἁπάσας ἐπυρπόλησαν καὶ τὴν
χώραν ἐξηγρίωσαν, ἀφανίσαντες πᾶν τὸ δυνάμενον
ἐνεγκεῖν ἥμερον καρπόν. μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα τοῖς μὲν
Ἀναγνίταις1 ἀδικήματα ποιοῦσι πόλεμον κατήγγειλαν,
Φρουσίνωνα δὲ ἐκπολιορκήσαντες ἀπέδοντο τὴν
χώραν.
81. Τοῦ δ᾿ ἐνιαυσίου χρόνου διεληλυθότος Ἀθήνησι
μὲν ἦρχεν Εὐξένιππος, ἐν Ῥώμῃ δ᾿ ὑπῆρχον
ὕπατοι Λεύκιος Ποστούμιος καὶ Τιβέριος Μινούκιος.
ἐπὶ δὲ τούτων Ῥοδίοις ἐνέστη πόλεμος πρὸς
2Ἀντίγονον διὰ τοιαύτας τινὰς αἰτίας. ἡ πόλις ἡ
τῶν Ῥοδίων ἰσχύουσα ναυτικαῖς δυνάμεσι καὶ πολιτευομένη
κάλλιστα τῶν Ἑλλήνων περιμάχητος τοῖς
δυνάσταις καὶ βασιλεῦσιν ἦν, ἑκάστου σπεύδοντος
εἰς τὴν αὑτοῦ2 φιλίαν προσλαμβάνεσθαι. προορωμένη
δὲ πόρρωθεν τὸ συμφέρον καὶ πρὸς ἅπαντας
κατ᾿ ἰδίαν συντιθεμένη τὴν φιλίαν τῶν πρὸς ἀλλήλους
3τοῖς δυνάσταις πολέμων οὐ μετεῖχεν. διόπερ
συνέβαινεν αὐτὴν τιμᾶσθαι μὲν ὑφ᾿ ἑκάστου βασιλικαῖς
δωρεαῖς, ἄγουσαν δὲ πολὺν χρόνον εἰρήνην
μεγάλην ἐπίδοσιν λαβεῖν πρὸς αὔξησιν· ἐπὶ τοσοῦτον
γὰρ προεληλύθει δυνάμεως ὥσθ᾿ ὑπὲρ μὲν τῶν
Ἑλλήνων ἰδίᾳ τὸν πρὸς τοὺς πειρατὰς πόλεμον
ἐπαναιρεῖσθαι καὶ καθαρὰν παρέχεσθαι τῶν κακούργων
τὴν θάλατταν, τὸν δὲ πλεῖστον ἰσχύσαντα
τῶν μνημονευομένων Ἀλέξανδρον προτιμήσαντ᾿ αὐτὴν
μάλιστα τῶν πόλεων καὶ τὴν ὑπὲρ ὅλης τῆς


1Ἀναγνίταις Rhodoman, cp. Livy, 9. 43: Αἰγινήταις RX,
Αἰγινίταις F.2αὑτοῦ Post: αὐτοῦ.354Book XX

five months to the ruining of the enemy’s land; and 306 b.c. they burned nearly all the farm-buildings and laid waste the land, destroying everything that could produce cultivated fruit. Thereafter they declared war on the Anagnitae, who were acting unjustly, and taking Frusino they distributed the land.1
81. When this year had passed, Euxenippus became 305 b.c. archon in Athens, and in Rome Lucius Postumius and Tiberius Minucius were consuls.2 While these held office war arose between the Rhodians and Antigonus for some such reasons as these.3 The city of the Rhodians, which was strong in sea power and was the best governed city of the Greeks, was a prize eagerly sought after by the dynasts and kings, each of them striving to add her to his alliance. Seeing far in advance what was advantageous and establishing friendship with each of the dynasts separately, Rhodes took no part in their wars with each other. As a result she was honoured by each of them with regal gifts and, while enjoying peace for a long time, made great steps forward. In fact she advanced to such strength that in behalf of the Greeks she by herself undertook her war against the pirates and purged the seas of these evil-doers; and Alexander, the most powerful of men known to memory, honouring Rhodes above all cities, both deposited there the



1Anagnia was the chief city of the Hernici. Livy, 9. 43, places the victory over the Hernici in this year but the confiscation of the land of Frusino three years later (10. 1. 3). The narrative is continued in chap. 90. 3.2Euxenippus was archon in 305/4 b.c. Livy, 9. 44. 2, gives as the consuls of 305 b.c., L. Postumius and T. Minucius; but a fragment of the Fasti Capitolini supports Diodorus in the praenomen of the last-named.3The narrative is continued from chap. 76. For the Rhodian campaign cp. Plutarch, Demetrius, 21–22.355