Diodorus of Sicily

τριήρεις εἴκοσι καὶ πέντε ἐξέπεμψαν τοῖς Ζακυνθίοις
συμμαχίαν, δόντες τὴν ἡγεμονίαν Ἀριστοκράτει.
46. Ἅμα δὲ τούτοις πραττομένοις τῶν ἐκ Κορκύρας
τινὲς φίλοι Λακεδαιμονίων ἐπαναστάντες τῷ
δήμῳ, παρεκάλεσαν τοὺς Σπαρτιάτας ἀποστεῖλαι
ναυτικὴν δύναμιν, ὑπισχνούμενοι παραδώσειν αὐτοῖς
τὴν Κόρκυραν. οἱ δὲ Λακεδαιμόνιοι, τὴν Κόρκυραν
εἰδότες μεγάλην ῥοπὴν ἔχουσαν τοῖς ἀντεχομένοις
τῆς θαλάττης, ἔσπευσαν κύριοι γενέσθαι
2ταύτης τῆς πόλεως. εὐθὺς οὖν ἔπεμψαν εἰς τὴν
Κόρκυραν τριήρεις εἴκοσι καὶ δύο, τὴν ἡγεμονίαν
Ἀλκίδᾳ παραδόντες. τοῦτον δὲ τὸν στόλον προσεποιήθησαν
εἰς Σικελίαν ἀποστεῖλαι, ἵνα ὡς φίλοι
προσδεχθέντες ὑπὸ τῶν Κορκυραίων κατάσχωσι
3τὴν πόλιν μετὰ τῶν φυγάδων. οἱ δὲ Κορκυραῖοι
γνόντες τῶν Σπαρτιατῶν τὴν ἐπίνοιαν, τὴν μὲν
πόλιν ἐπιμελῶς ἐφύλαττον, εἰς δὲ τὰς Ἀθήνας
πρέσβεις ἐξέπεμψαν περὶ βοηθείας. οἱ δ᾿ Ἀθηναῖοι
ψηφισάμενοι βοηθεῖν τοῖς Κορκυραίοις καὶ
Ζακυνθίων τοῖς φυγάσιν,1 εἰς μὲν τὴν Ζάκυνθον
ἐξέπεμψαν Κτησικλέα στρατηγόν, ἡγούμενον τῶν
φυγάδων, εἰς δὲ τὴν Κόρκυραν παρεσκευάζοντο
ναυτικὴν δύναμιν ἐκπέμπειν.
4Ἅμα δὲ τούτοις πραττομένοις κατὰ τὴν Βοιωτίαν
Πλαταιεῖς ἀντεχόμενοι τῆς Ἀθηναίων συμμαχίας
μετεπέμποντο στρατιώτας, κεκρικότες τοῖς
Ἀθηναίοις παραδοῦναι τὴν πόλιν. ἐπὶ δὲ τούτοις
οἱ βοιωτάρχαι χαλεπῶς διατεθέντες πρὸς τοὺς
Πλαταιεῖς, καὶ σπεύδοντες φθάσαι τὴν παρὰ τῶν
Ἀθηναίων συμμαχίαν, εὐθὺς ἐπ᾿ αὐτοὺς δύναμιν

1Ζακυνθίων τοῖς φυγάσιν] Λακεδαιμονίων τοῖς συμμάχοις
AHJK.74Book XV

twenty-five triremes sent them to assist the Zacynthians, 374/3 b.c. placing Aristocrates in command.1
46. While these things were going on, some partisans of the Lacedaemonians in Corcyra revolted against the democracy and called upon the Spartans to dispatch a fleet, promising to betray Corcyra to them. The Lacedaemonians, aware of the great importance that Corcyra had for the aspirants to sea power, made haste to possess themselves of this city.2 So they immediately dispatched to Corcyra twenty-two triremes, having given the command to Alcidas. They pretended that this expedition was sent to Sicily, in order to be received as friends by the Corcyraeans and then with the assistance of the exiles to occupy the city. But the Corcyraeans, discovering the design of the Spartans, kept careful guard over the city and sent envoys to Athens to get help. The Athenians voted help for the Corcyraeans and the Zacynthian exiles, sent to Zacynthos Ctesicles as general in command of the exiles, and prepared to dispatch a naval force to Corcyra.
While these things were going on, the Plataeans in Boeotia, clinging to the alliance with the Athenians, sent to them for soldiers, having decided to hand their city over to the Athenians. At this the Boeotarchs3 became incensed with the Plataeans, and, being eager to forestall the allied force from Athens, immediately brought a considerable army against



1He must have been Spartan nauarch for 375/4 according to Beloch, Griechische Geschichte2, 2. 2. 281.2As to the Lacedaemonian aggression see Cary, Cambridge Ancient History, 6. 77 and Xenophon, Hell. 6. 2. 4. Note the intervention of Dionysius in chap. 47. 7.3Annual officials, eleven in number, of the Boeotian League. For reduction to seven see note on p. 91.75