Diodorus of Sicily

καταφορὰν τοῦ ποταμοῦ,1 ἐκ τῶν εὐωνύμων ἐπέστησεν,
καταπραϋνοῦντας τὸ ῥεῖθρον, τοὺς δ᾿ ἱππεῖς
ἐκ τοῦ δεξιοῦ μέρους ἔταξε, δι᾿ ὧν ἐξεδέχετο
τοὺς παραφερομένους ὑπὸ τοῦ ποταμοῦ καὶ διέσωζεν
2εἰς τὸ πέραν. ἴδιον δέ τι καὶ παράδοξον
συνέβη γενέσθαι κατὰ τὴν διάβασιν τῆς δυνάμεως
ταύτης. τῶν πρώτων γὰρ ἀσφαλῶς διαβάντων οἱ
μετὰ ταῦτα περαιούμενοι μεγάλοις περιέπιπτον
κινδύνοις· ὁ γὰρ ποταμὸς οὐδεμιᾶς οὔσης αἰτίας
φανερᾶς πολλῷ βαθύτερος ἐγίνετο καὶ τῶν σωμάτων
ὅλων καταδυομένων ἅπαντες εἰς πολλὴν
3ἀμηχανίαν ἐνέπιπτον.2 τῆς δὲ κατὰ τὴν πλήρωσιν
αἰτίας ἐπιζητουμένης τὸ μὲν ἀληθὲς ἀσυλλόγιστον
ἦν, ἔφασαν δ᾿ οἱ μὲν ἐν τοῖς ἄνω τόποις ἐγκεχωσμένην
διώρυγα πάλιν ἐκφραχθῆναι καὶ συμμιχθεῖσαν
τῷ ποταμῷ βαθύτερον πεποιηκέναι τὸν
πόρον, οἱ δ᾿ ὄμβρους ἐν τοῖς ἄνω τόποις γενομένους
4αὐξῆσαι τὸ μέγεθος τοῦ Νείλου. τούτων δ᾿
οὐδέτερον ἦν, ἀλλὰ τοῦ πόρου τὴν μὲν πρώτην διάβασιν
ἀσφαλεστέραν συνέβαινε γεγονέναι ἀκεραίου
τῆς κατὰ τὴν διάβασιν ἄμμου γεγενημένης, κατὰ δὲ
τὰς ἄλλας ὑπὸ τῶν προδιαβεβηκότων ἵππων τε καὶ
ἐλεφάντων ἔτι δὲ πεζῶν, τοῖς μὲν ποσὶ τὴν ἄμμον
πατουμένην καὶ κινουμένην ὑπὸ τοῦ ῥείθρου κατενεχθῆναι
καὶ διὰ τοῦτο κοιλωθέντος τοῦ πόρου
βαθυτέραν γενέσθαι τὴν διάβασιν κατὰ μέσον τὸν
ποταμόν.
5Διὰ δὲ ταύτην τὴν αἰτίαν ἀδυνατούσης τῆς
λοιπῆς δυνάμεως διαβῆναι τὸν ποταμὸν ὁ Περδίκκας

1The phrase ἐκδεχόμενος . . . τοῦ ποταμοῦ, which the MSS.
place after ἐπέστησεν, transposed to its present position by
Fischer.2ἐνέπιπτον Post, παρεγίνοντο Dindorf: περιέπιπτον MSS., Fischer.110Book XVIII

of the river, placed the elephants in line on the left, 321 b.c. thus mitigating the strength of the current, and placed on the right side the horsemen, through whose agency he kept catching the men who were being carried away by the river and bringing them safe to the other side. A peculiar and surprising thing took place during the crossing of this army, namely, that after the first men had crossed in safety, those who tried to cross afterwards fell into great danger. For although there was no visible cause, the river became much deeper, and, their bodies being totally submerged, they would one and all become completely helpless. When they sought the cause of this rise, the truth could not be found by reasoning. Some said that that somewhere upstream a canal that had been closed had been opened and, joining with the river, had made the ford deeper; others said that rain falling in the regions above had increased the volume of the Nile. It was, however, neither of these things, but what happened was that the first crossing of the ford had been freer from danger because the sand at the crossing had been undisturbed, but in the course of the other crossings by the horses and elephants which had gone over before and then by the infantry, the sand, trodden by their feet and set in motion by the current, was carried down stream, and the place of crossing being hollowed out in this way, the ford became deeper in the middle of the river.
Since the rest of his army was unable to cross the river for this reason, Perdiccas was in great difficulty;


111