Diodorus of Sicily

τῆς Ἀσίας πάσης, τοὺς δὲ Ἕλληνας αὐτονόμους
εἶναι. οὐ μὴν ἐνέμεινάν γε ταῖς ὁμολογίαις
ταύταις, ἀλλ᾿ ἕκαστος αὐτῶν προφάσεις εὐλόγους
2ποριζόμενος πλεονεκτεῖν ἐπειρᾶτο. Κάσανδρος δὲ
ὁρῶν Ἀλέξανδρον τὸν ἐκ Ῥωξάνης αὐξόμενον καὶ
κατὰ τὴν Μακεδονίαν λόγους ὑπό τινων διαδιδομένους
ὅτι καθήκει προάγειν ἐκ τῆς φυλακῆς τὸν
παῖδα καὶ τὴν πατρῴαν βασιλείαν παραδοῦναι,
φοβηθεὶς ὑπὲρ ἑαυτοῦ προσέταξε Γλαυκίᾳ τῷ προεστηκότι
τῆς τοῦ παιδὸς φυλακῆς τὴν μὲν Ῥωξάνην
καὶ τὸν βασιλέα κατασφάξαι καὶ κρύψαι τὰ σώματα,
τὸ δὲ γεγονὸς μηδενὶ τῶν ἄλλων ἀπαγγεῖλαι.
3ποιήσαντος δ᾿ αὐτοῦ τὸ προσταχθὲν οἱ περὶ Κάσανδρον
καὶ Λυσίμαχον καὶ Πτολεμαῖον, ἔτι δ᾿
Ἀντίγονον ἀπηλλάγησαν τῶν ἀπὸ τοῦ βασιλέως
4προσδοκωμένων φόβων· οὐκέτι γὰρ ὄντος οὐδενὸς
τοῦ διαδεξομένου τὴν ἀρχὴν τὸ λοιπὸν ἕκαστος
τῶν κρατούντων ἐθνῶν ἢ πόλεων βασιλικὰς εἶχεν
ἐλπίδας καὶ τὴν ὑφ᾿ ἑαυτὸν τεταγμένην χώραν
εἶχεν ὡσανεί τινα βασιλείαν δορίκτητον.
Τὰ μὲν οὖν κατὰ τὴν Ἀσίαν1 καὶ τὰ περὶ τὴν
Ἑλλάδα καὶ Μακεδονίαν ἐν τούτοις ἦν.
5Κατὰ δὲ τὴν Ἰταλίαν Ῥωμαῖοι δυνάμεσιν ἁδραῖς
πεζῶν τε καὶ ἱππέων ἐστράτευσαν ἐπὶ Πολλίτιον,
Μαρρουκίνων οὖσαν πόλιν. ἀπέστειλαν δὲ καὶ τῶν
πολιτῶν εἰς ἀποικίαν καὶ κατῴκισαν τὴν προσαγορευομένην
Ἰντέραμναν.
1καὶ τὴν Εὐρώπην after Ἀσίαν omitted by Geer.118Book XIX

and that the Greeks be autonomous. However, they 311 b.c. did not abide by these agreements but each of them, putting forward plausible excuses, kept seeking to increase his own power. Now Cassander perceived that Alexander, the son of Roxanê, was growing up and that word was being spread throughout Macedonia by certain men that it was fitting to release the boy from custody and give him his father’s kingdom; and, fearing for himself, he instructed Glaucias,1 who was in command of the guard over the child, to murder Roxanê and the king and conceal their bodies, but to disclose to no one else what had been done. When Glaucias had carried out the instructions, Cassander, Lysimachus, and Ptolemy, and Antigonus as well, were relieved of their anticipated danger from the king; for henceforth, there being no longer anyone to inherit the realm, each of those who had rule over nations or cities entertained hopes of royal power and held the territory that had been placed under his authority as if it were a kingdom won by the spear.
This was the situation in Asia and in Greece and Macedonia.2
In Italy3 the Romans with strong forces of foot and horse took the field against Pollitium, a city of the Marrucini. They also sent some of their citizens as a colony and settled the place called Interamna.
1This Glaucias, who is not to be identified with the Glaucias of chaps. 67. 6 and 70. 7, had been placed in charge of the guard by Cassander (chap. 52. 4). For the murder of Alexander and Roxanê cp. Justin, 15. 2. 5; Pausanias, 9. 7. 2.2Continued in Book 20. 19.3Continued from chap. 101. 3. Cp. Livy, 9. 28. 8. Diodorus
returns to Roman affairs in Book 20. 26. 3.119