Diodorus of Sicily
3ὁ δὲ Ἀλέξανδρος τεθαρρηκὼς ἅμ᾿ ἡμέρᾳ περαιώσας
τὴν δύναμιν ἔφθασε τοὺς πολεμίους ἐκτάξας τὴν
δύναμιν ἡρμοσμένως πρὸς τὸν ἀγῶνα. οἱ δὲ βάρβαροι
πρὸς ὅλην τὴν τάξιν τῶν Μακεδόνων ἔστησαν
τὸ πλῆθος τῶν ἱππέων καὶ διὰ τούτων προκινεῖν1
4τὴν μάχην διεγνώκεισαν. τὸ μὲν οὖν εὐώνυμον
μέρος εἶχε Μέμνων ὁ Ῥόδιος καὶ Ἀρσαμένης ὁ
σατράπης ἔχοντες τοὺς ἰδίους ἱππεῖς, μετὰ δὲ τούτους
Ἀρσίτης ἐτέτακτο τοὺς ἐκ Παφλαγονίας ἔχων
ἱππεῖς, ἔπειτα Σπιθροβάτης ὁ Ἰωνίας σατράπης
Ὑρκανῶν ἱππέων ἡγούμενος· τὸ δὲ δεξιὸν κέρας
ἐπεῖχον χίλιοι μὲν Μῆδοι, δισχίλιοι δὲ οἱ μετὰ
Ῥεομίθρους2 ἱππεῖς καὶ Βακτριανοὶ τούτοις ἴσοι·
τὸν δὲ μέσον τόπον ἐπεῖχον οἱ τῶν ἄλλων ἐθνῶν
ἱππεῖς, πολλοὶ μὲν τὸν ἀριθμὸν ὄντες, ἐπίλεκτοι δὲ
ταῖς ἀρεταῖς. οἱ δὲ πάντες ἱππεῖς ὑπῆρχον πλείους
5τῶν μυρίων. οἱ δὲ πεζοὶ τῶν Περσῶν ἦσαν μὲν
οὐκ ἐλάττους τῶν δέκα μυριάδων, ὄπισθεν δ᾿ ἐπιτεταγμένοι




1προκινεῖν] προκρίνειν Reiske, which is certainly possible.2So Freinsheim (cp. chap. 34. 5; Book 15. 92. 1; Arrian,
1. 12. 8): Ἀρρεομίθρους RX, Ἐρρεομίθρους F.170Book XVII

phalanx was divided. But Alexander at dawn boldly 334/3 b.c. brought his army across the river and deployed in good order before they could stop him.1 In return, they posted their mass of horsemen all along the front of the Macedonians since they had decided to press the battle with these.2 Memnon of Rhodes and the satrap Arsamenes held the left wing each with his own cavalry; Arsites was stationed next with the horsemen from Paphlagonia; then came Spithrobates satrap of Ionia at the head of the Hyrcanian cavalry. The right wing was held by a thousand Medes and two thousand horse with Rheomithres as well as Bactrians of like number.3 Other national contingents occupied the centre, numerous and picked for their valour. In all, the cavalry amounted to more than ten thousand. The Persian foot soldiers were not fewer than one hundred thousand,4 but they were posted behind the line and did




1This account of the battle differs from that of Arrian (1.
13) in two respects which cannot be reconciled. There, the
attack takes place in the late afternoon and in the lower
course of the Granicus, where the river flows through relativly
flat country but in a deep and muddy bed. He, as Plutarch
also (Alexander, 16), describes the action as taking
place between Macedonians trying to cross and Persians
holding the river bank. Diodorus, in contrast, places the
battle at dawn, and lets the Macedonians cross without difficulty
and engage the Persians on the far bank. Probably he located the battle further upstream, in the foothills. According to Plutarch (Alexander, 16. 2), the battle would have occurred in the Macedonian month Daesius, but as that was unlucky militarily, Alexander ordered the intercalation of a second Artemisius. See further above, p. 100, note 1.2The novelty of this arrangement consisted in the fact that each army placed its cavalry in front at the point of contact. This may not have been specifically planned. Alexander threw his cavalry across the river to gain a bridgehead, and the Persians naturally countered with their cavalry, so that a piecemeal engagement followed.3Arsites was the satrap of Hellespontine Phrygia and Spithridates of Lydia and Ionia (Arrian, I. 12. 8). Arrian names these Persians and adds Petines and Niphates, but does not give the Persian order of battle. He gives that of the Macedonians, which Diodorus omits, in 1.14. 1–3. Arsamenes (Arsames, Curtius, 3. 4. 3; Arrian, 2. 4. 5) was satrap of Cilicia.4Justin (11. 6. 11) gives the Persian strength as 600,000, Arrian (1. 14. 4) as 20,000 foot and 20,000 horse.171