Diodorus of Sicily

τὴν ἡσυχίαν ἦγον, ὡς τῶν ἱππέων ἱκανῶν
ὄντων καταπονῆσαι τοὺς Μακεδόνας.
6Τῶν δ᾿ ἱππέων παρ᾿ ἀμφοτέροις προθύμως εἰς
τὸν κίνδυνον συμπεσόντων τὸ μὲν εὐώνυμον μέρος
ἐπέχοντες οἱ τῶν Θετταλῶν ἱππεῖς Παρμενίωνος
ἡγουμένου τεθαρρηκότως ἐδέχοντο τὴν ἐπιφορὰν
τῶν καθ᾿ αὑτοὺς τεταγμένων, Ἀλέξανδρος δὲ τοὺς
ἀρίστους τῶν ἱππέων κατὰ τὸ δεξιὸν κέρας ἔχων
μεθ᾿ αὑτοῦ πρῶτος ἐφίππευσε τοῖς Πέρσαις καὶ
συμπλακεὶς τοῖς πολεμίοις πολὺν ἐποιεῖτο φόνον.
20. Τῶν δὲ βαρβάρων εὐρώστως ἀγωνιζομένων
καὶ τοὺς ἑαυτῶν θυμοὺς ταῖς τῶν Μακεδόνων
ἀρεταῖς ἀντιταττόντων ἡ τύχη συνήγαγεν εἰς ἕνα
τόπον τοὺς ἀρίστους εἰς τὴν ὑπὲρ τῆς νίκης κρίσιν.
2ὁ γὰρ τῆς Ἰωνίας σατράπης Σπιθροβάτης, γένει
μὲν ὢν Πέρσης, Δαρείου δὲ τοῦ βασιλέως γαμβρός,
ἀνδρείᾳ δὲ διαφέρων, μετὰ μεγάλης δυνάμεως ἱππέων
ἐπέρραξε τοῖς Μακεδόσιν, ἔχων δὲ συναγωνιστὰς
τεταγμένους τεσσαράκοντα συγγενεῖς ἀρεταῖς
διαφόρους ἐνέκειτο τοῖς ἀνθεστηκόσι καὶ θρασέως
ἀγωνιζόμενος οὓς μὲν ἀνῄρει τῶν ἀνθισταμένων,
3οὓς δὲ κατετραυμάτιζε. δυσυποστάτου δὲ τῆς περὶ
αὐτὸν οὔσης βίας ὁ Ἀλέξανδρος ἐπιστρέψας τὸν
ἵππον ἐπὶ τὸν σατράπην ἐφίππευσε τῷ βαρβάρῳ.
Ὁ δὲ Πέρσης νομίσας παρὰ τῶν θεῶν αὐτῷ
δεδόσθαι τὸν τῆς μονομαχίας καιρόν, εἰ συμβήσεται
διὰ τῆς ἰδίας ἀνδραγαθίας ἐλευθερωθῆναι τῶν μεγίστων


172Book XVII

not advance since the cavalry was thought to be 334/s b.c. sufficient to crush the Macedonians.1
As the horse of each side joined battle spiritedly, the Thessalian cavalry posted on the left wing under the command of Parmenion gallantly met the attack of the troops posted opposite them; and Alexander, who had the finest of the riders on the right wing with him, personally led the attack upon the Persians and closing with them, began to inflict substantial losses upon them.
20. But the Persians resisted bravely and opposed their spirit to the Macedonian valour, as Fortune brought together in one and the same place the finest fighters to dispute the victory. The satrap of Ionia Spithrobates, a Persian by birth and son-in-law of King Dareius, a man of superior courage, hurled himself at the Macedonian lines with a large body of cavalry, and with an array of forty companions, all Royal Relatives2 of outstanding valour, pressed hard on the opposite line and in a fierce attack slew some of his opponents and wounded others. As the force of this attack seemed dangerous, Alexander turned his horse toward the satrap and rode at him.3
To the Persian, it seemed as if this opportunity for a single combat was god-given. He hoped that by his individual gallantry Asia might be relieved of its


1This comment is a rationalization after the event. The
Persian infantry would not move up to meet the Macedonian
cavalry.2This was an honorary title of high nobility in the Persian Empire, as later in the Hellenistic kingdoms.3According to Arrian (1. 14. 6–7), Alexander opened the battle with a mixed force under Ptolemy the son of Philip, probably the one of the bodyguards who was killed at Halicarnassus. He had light troops including the Scouts under Amyntas the son of Arrhabaeus, a battalion of the phalanx, and a squadron of the Companions. His mission was to open a gap in the Persian line. Then Alexander, as usual, charged with the Companions obliquely towards the Persian centre.173