Diodorus of Sicily

γεννᾶσθαι, ἰχθῦς δὲ παντοδαποὺς πολὺ τῇ χροιᾷ
4τῶν παρ᾿ ἡμῖν διαλλάττοντας. διεξιὼν δὲ τὴν
Ὑρκανίαν κατήντησε πρὸς τὰς καλουμένας Εὐδαίμονας
καὶ πρὸς ἀλήθειαν οὔσας κώμας· πολὺ γὰρ
τοῖς καρποῖς ἡ χώρα τούτων ὑπεράγει τῶν παρὰ
5τοῖς ἄλλοις. τῶν μὲν γὰρ ἀμπέλων φασὶν ἑκάστην
μετρητὴν φέρειν οἴνου, τῶν δὲ συκίνων δένδρων
ἔνια καρποφορεῖν ἰσχάδων ξηρῶν μεδίμνους δέκα.
τὸν δ᾿ ἐν τῷ θερισμῷ παραλειφθέντα σῖτον ἐπὶ τὴν
γῆν πεσόντα βλαστάνειν ἄσπορον ὄντα καὶ πρὸς
6τὸ τέλος ἄγειν δαψιλῆ καρπόν. ἔστι δὲ καὶ δένδρον
παρὰ τοῖς ἐγχωρίοις παραπλήσιον δρυῒ κατὰ τὴν
ἐπιφάνειαν, ἀπὸ δὲ τῶν φύλλων ἀπολεῖβον μέλι·
καὶ τοῦτό τινες συνάγοντες δαψιλῆ τὴν ἀπόλαυσιν
7αὐτοῦ ποιοῦνται. ἔστι δὲ καὶ ζῷον κατὰ τὴν
χώραν ἐπτερωμένον, ὃ καλεῖται μὲν ἀνθρηδών,
λειπόμενον δὲ μεγέθει μελίττης μεγίστην ἔχει τὴν
ὠφέλειαν1· ἐπινεμόμενον γὰρ τὴν ὀρεινὴν ἄνθη παντοῖα
δρέπεται καὶ ταῖς κοιλάσι πέτραις καὶ τοῖς
κεραυνοβόλοις τῶν δένδρων ἐνδιατρῖβον κηροπλαστεῖ
καὶ κατασκευάζει χύμα διάφορον τῇ γλυκύτητι,
τοῦ παρ᾿ ἡμῖν μέλιτος οὐ πολὺ λειπόμενον.
76. Ἀλέξανδρος δὲ τὴν Ὑρκανίαν καὶ τὰ συνορίζοντα
τῶν ἐθνῶν ταύτῃ τῇ χώρᾳ προσηγάγετο·
καὶ πολλοὶ τῶν συμπεφευγότων ἡγεμόνων τῷ Δαρείῳ
παρέδωκαν αὑτούς· οἷς ἐπιεικῶς προσενεχθεὶς





1ὠφέλειαν Dindorf; ἐπιφάνειαν codd.334Book XVII

fish of all sorts quite different in colour from ours.1 329/8 b.c. He passed through Hyrcania and came to the Fortunate Villages, as they are called, and truly such they are, for their land produces crops far more generously than elsewhere. They say that each vine produces a metretes of wine, while there are some fig trees which produce ten medimni of dried figs.2 The grain which is overlooked at the harvest and falls to the ground germinates without being sown and brings to maturity an abundant harvest. There is a tree known to the natives like an oak in appearance, from the leaves of which honey drips; this some collect and take their pleasure from it abundantly.3 There is a winged animal in this country which they call anthredon, smaller than the bee but very useful. It roams the mountains gathering nectar from every kind of flower. Dwelling in hollow rocks and lightning-blasted trees it forms combs of wax and fashions a liquor of surpassing sweetness, not far inferior to our honey.4
76. Thus Alexander acquired Hyrcania and the tribes which were its neighbours, and many of the Iranian commanders who had fled with Dareius came to him and gave themselves up.5 He received them



1Curtius, 6. 4. 18.2Strabo, 11. 7. 2 (cp. 2. 1. 14), who savs sixty medimni.
A metretes was about four and one-half gallons, a medimnus
about one and one-half bushels.3This item comes from Onesicritus, and concerns a fig tree called “occhus.” Cp. Curtius, 6. 4. 22; Theophrastus, Historia Plantarum, 4. 4. 12; Pliny, Naturalis Historia, 12. 18. 33.4With some exaggeration, Cleitarchus said of this insect (Jacoby, Fragmente der griechischen Historiker, no. 137, F 14): “It lays waste the hill-country and dashes into the hollow oaks.” Tarn (Alexander the Great, 2. 90) may be right in preferring the manuscript reading which would make it “smaller than the bee but with a vast appearance,” although I do not see precisely what this would mean. Cp. Strabo, 2. 1. 14.5Individuals are named in Curtius, 6. 4. 8–14; 4. 23–5. 5; 5. 22–23; Arrian, 3. 23. 7–9.335