Diodorus of Sicily
106. Κατὰ δὲ τὴν Σικελίαν ἀεὶ μᾶλλον αὐξομένου
Ἀγαθοκλέους καὶ δυνάμεις ἁδροτέρας ἀθροίζοντος
Καρχηδόνιοι πυνθανόμενοι τὸν δυνάστην
συσκευαζόμενον τὰς ἐν τῇ νήσῳ πόλεις ταῖς δὲ
δυνάμεσιν ὑπερέχοντα τῶν σφετέρων στρατιωτῶν
2ἔδοξαν ἐνεργέστερον ἅψασθαι τοῦ πολέμου. εὐθὺς
οὖν τριήρεις μὲν κατήρτησαν τριάκοντα πρὸς ταῖς
ἑκατόν, στρατηγὸν δὲ προχειρισάμενοι τῶν παρ᾿
αὐτοῖς ἐπιφανεστάτων Ἀμίλκαν ἔδωκαν αὐτῷ τῶν
μὲν πολιτικῶν στρατιωτῶν δισχιλίους, ἐν οἷς ἦσαν
πολλοὶ καὶ τῶν ἐπιφανῶν, τῶν δ᾿ ἀπὸ τῆς Λιβύης
μυρίους, ἐκ δὲ τῆς Τυρρηνίας μισθοφόρους χιλίους
καὶ ζευγίππας1 διακοσίους, ἔτι δὲ Βαλιάρας
σφενδονήτας χιλίους, ὁμοίως δὲ χρημάτων πλῆθος
καὶ βελῶν καὶ σίτου καὶ τῶν ἄλλων τῶν εἰς πόλεμον
3χρησίμων τὴν καθήκουσαν παρασκευήν. ἀναχθέντος
δ᾿ ἐκ τῆς Καρχηδόνος τοῦ στόλου παντὸς καὶ
γενομένου πελαγίου χειμὼν ἐξαίφνης ἐπιπεσὼν
ἑξήκοντα μὲν τριήρεις ἠφάνισε, διακόσια δὲ τῶν
σιτηγῶν πλοίων διέφθειρεν· ὁ δὲ λοιπὸς στόλος
μεγάλοις περιπεσὼν χειμῶσι μόλις διεσώθη πρὸς
4τὴν Σικελίαν. ἀπώλοντο δὲ καὶ τῶν ἐπιφανῶν
Καρχηδονίων οὐκ ὀλίγοι, δι᾿ οὓς συνέβη τὴν πόλιν
δημόσιον ἄρασθαι πένθος· εἰώθασι γάρ, ἐπειδὰν
μείζων τις ἀτυχία γένηται περὶ τὴν πόλιν, μέλασι
5σακκίοις κατακαλύπτειν τὰ τείχη. Ἀμίλκας δ᾿ ὁ
στρατηγὸς ἀναλαβὼν τοὺς διασωθέντας ἐκ τοῦ
χειμῶνος μισθοφόρους συνῆγε καὶ τῶν κατὰ Σικελίαν
συμμάχων ἐστρατολόγει τοὺς εὐθέτους.



1ζευγίτας Reiske.120Book XIX
106. In Sicily,1 where Agathocles was constantly 311 b.c. increasing in power and collecting stronger forces, the Carthaginians, since they heard that the dynast was organizing the cities of the island for his own ends and that with his armed forces he surpassed their own soldiers, decided to wage the war with more energy. Accordingly they at once made ready one hundred and thirty triremes, chose as general Hamilcar,2 one of their most distinguished men, gave him two thousand citizen soldiers among whom Were many of the nobles, ten thousand men from Libya, a thousand mercenaries and two hundred zeugippae3 from Etruria, a thousand Baliaric slingers, and also a large sum of money and the proper provision of missiles, food, and the other things necessary for war. After the whole fleet had sailed from Carthage and was at sea, a storm fell suddenly upon it, sank sixty triremes, and completely destroyed two hundred of the ships that were carrying supplies. The rest of the fleet, after encountering severe storms, with difficulty reached Sicily in safety. Not a few of the Carthaginian nobles were lost, for whom the city instituted public mourning; for it is their custom whenever any major disaster has befallen the city, to cover the walls with black sackcloth. Hamilcar, the general, gathered together the men who had survived the storm, enrolled mercenaries, and enlisted those troops of the Sicilian allies



1Continued from chap. 104. 4. Cp. Justin, 22. 3. 9. Beloch, Griechische Geschichte, 42. 1. 189, places this campaign in the early summer of 310 b.c.2The son of Cisco, not to be confused with the Hamilcar of chaps. 71. 6, 72. 2, who was now dead.3If the text is sound, we must suppose the otherwise unknown zeugippae to be horsemen who had each an extra horse, like the ἄμφιπποι of chap. 29. 2; but perhaps we should read ζευγίτας heavy armed infantry.121