Diodorus of Sicily

ὡς Θεσσαλονίκην μὲν βιασάμενος ἔγημεν, φανερῶς
δὲ ἐξιδιάζεται τὴν Μακεδόνων βασιλείαν, ἔτι δὲ ὡς
Ὀλυνθίους ὄντας πολεμιωτάτους Μακεδόνων κατῴκισεν
εἰς τὴν ὁμώνυμον ἑαυτοῦ πόλιν καὶ Θήβας
ἀνέστησε τὰς ὑπὸ Μακεδόνων κατασκαφείσας.
3συναγανακτούντων δὲ τῶν ὄχλων ἔγραψε δόγμα
καθ᾿ ὃ τὸν Κάσανδρον ἐψηφίσατο πολέμιον εἶναι,
ἐὰν μὴ τάς τε πόλεις καθέλῃ καὶ τὸν βασιλέα καὶ
τὴν μητέρα τὴν Ῥωξάνην προαγαγὼν ἐκ τῆς
φυλακῆς ἀποδῷ τοῖς Μακεδόσι καὶ τὸ σύνολον ἐὰν
μὴ πειθαρχῇ τῷ καθεσταμένῳ στρατηγῷ καὶ τῆς
βασιλείας παρειληφότι τὴν ἐπιμέλειαν Ἀντιγόνῳ.
εἶναι δὲ καὶ τοὺς Ἕλληνας ἅπαντας ἐλευθέρους,
ἀφρουρητούς, αὐτονόμους. ἐπιψηφισαμένων δὲ τῶν
στρατιωτῶν τὰ ῥηθέντα διαπέστειλε πανταχῇ τοὺς
4κομιοῦντας τὸ δόγμα· τοὺς μὲν γὰρ Ἕλληνας ὑπελάμβανε
διὰ τὴν ἐλπίδα τῆς ἐλευθερίας προθύμους
ἕξειν συναγωνιστὰς εἰς τὸν πόλεμον, τοὺς δ᾿ ἐν
ταῖς ἄνω σατραπείαις στρατηγοὺς καὶ σατράπας,
ὑπόπτως ἔχοντας ὡς Ἀντιγόνου καταλῦσαι διεγνωκότος
τοὺς ἀπὸ Ἀλεξάνδρου βασιλεῖς, αὐτοῦ1
φανερῶς τὸν ὑπὲρ αὐτῶν πόλεμον ἀναδεχομένου
πάντας μεταπεσεῖσθαι ταῖς γνώμαις καὶ τοῖς παραγγελλομένοις
5ἑτοίμως ὑπακούσεσθαι. ἀπὸ δὲ τούτων
γενόμενος Ἀλεξάνδρῳ μὲν δοὺς πεντακόσια
τάλαντα καὶ περὶ τῶν μελλόντων εἰς μεγάλας
ἀγαγὼν ἐλπίδας ἐξαπέστειλεν εἰς Πελοπόννησον·
αὐτὸς δὲ παρὰ Ῥοδίων μεταπεμψάμενος ναῦς
καὶ τῶν ναυπηγηθεισῶν τὰς πλείστας καταρτίσας
ἐπέπλευσε τῇ Τύρῳ. θαλασσοκρατῶν δὲ καὶ διακωλύων

1αὐτοῦ Rhodoman: τοῦ.398Book XIX

married Thessalonicê by force,1 and was clearly trying 315 b.c. to establish his own claim to the Macedonian throne; and also that, although the Olynthians were very bitter enemies of the Macedonians, Cassander had re-established them in a city called by his own name and had rebuilt Thebes, which had been razed by the Macedonians.2 When the crowd showed that it shared his wrath, he introduced a decree according to the terms of which it was voted that Cassander was to be an enemy unless he destroyed these cities again, released the king and his mother Roxanê from imprisonment and restored them to the Macedonians, and, in general, yielded obedience to Antigonus the duly established general who had succeeded to the guardianship of the throne. It was also stated that all the Greeks were free, not subject to foreign garrisons, and autonomous. When the soldiers had voted in favour of these measures, Antigonus sent men in every direction to carry the decree, for he believed that through their hope of freedom he would gain the Greeks as eager participants with him in the war, and that the generals and satraps in the upper satrapies, who had suspected that he was determined to depose the kings who inherited from Alexander, would, if he publicly took upon himself the war in their behalf, all change their minds and promptly obey his orders. Having finished these matters, he gave Alexander five hundred talents and, after leading him to hope for great things to come, sent him back to the Peloponnesus. He himself, after summoning ships from Rhodes and equipping most of those that had been built, sailed against Tyre. Although he pressed the siege with vigour for a year and three months, controlling


11.Cp. chap. 52. 1.2Cp. chaps. 52. 2, 53. 2.399