Diodorus of Sicily

τῆς τιμωρίας λαβόντες, ἐστράτευσαν ἐπὶ τὸν
Ὀρχομενόν· κατασχόντες1 δὲ τὴν πόλιν τοὺς μὲν
ἄνδρας ἀπέκτειναν, τέκνα δὲ καὶ γυναῖκας ἐξηνδραποδίσαντο.
80. Περὶ δὲ τοὺς αὐτοὺς καιροὺς Θετταλοὶ πρὸς
Ἀλέξανδρον τὸν Φερῶν τύραννον διαπολεμοῦντες
καὶ πλείοσι μάχαις ἡττώμενοι,2 πολλοὺς δὲ τῶν
στρατιωτῶν ἀπολωλεκότες, πρέσβεις ἀπέστειλαν
πρὸς Θηβαίους, ἀξιοῦντες αὐτοῖς βοηθῆσαι καὶ
στρατηγὸν αὐτοῖς ἐξαποστεῖλαι Πελοπίδαν. ᾔδεισαν
γὰρ τοῦτον τὸν ἄνδρα διὰ τὴν ὑπ᾿ Ἀλεξάνδρου
σύλληψιν ἀλλοτριώτατα διακείμενον πρὸς τὸν δυνάστην,
ἅμα δὲ καὶ ἀνδρείᾳ διάφορον καὶ ἐπὶ
2στρατηγικῇ συνέσει διαβεβοημένον. συναχθείσης
δὲ τῆς κοινῆς συνόδου τῶν Βοιωτῶν καὶ τῶν πρέσβεων
διαλεχθέντων περὶ ὧν εἶχον ἐντολάς, οἱ μὲν
Βοιωτοὶ πάντα συνεχώρησαν τοῖς Θετταλοῖς, καὶ
δόντες εἰς ἑπτακισχιλίους στρατιώτας τῷ Πελοπίδᾳ
συντόμως ἐκέλευον βοηθεῖν αὐτὸν τοῖς δεομένοις·
τοῦ δὲ Πελοπίδου ταχέως μετὰ τῆς δυνάμεως
3ἐξιόντος συνέβη τὸν ἥλιον ἐκλιπεῖν. πολλῶν δὲ
τὸ γεγονὸς ὑποπτευσαμένων, τῶν μάντεών τινες
ἀπεφήναντο διὰ τὴν γενομένην ἔξοδον τῶν στρατιωτῶν
ἐκλιπεῖν τὸν τῆς πόλεως ἥλιον. καὶ διὰ
τούτων τῶν λόγων προλεγόντων τὸν τοῦ Πελοπίδου
θάνατον, οὐδὲν ἧττον ὁ Πελοπίδας ἀνέζευξεν ἐπὶ
4τὴν στρατείαν,3 ὑπὸ τοῦ χρεὼν ἀγόμενος. ὡς δὲ
κατήντησεν εἰς τὴν Θετταλίαν, καὶ τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον


1So Stephanus: κατέχοντες P, ἔχοντες cet.2ἡττώμενοι (ἡττόμένοι P)] ἡττημένοι Dindorf.3So Schäfer: στρατίαν P, στρατιάν Vulgate.172Book XV

plausible pretexts for punishing them, took the field 364/3 b.c. against Orchomenus, occupied the city, slew the male inhabitants and sold into slavery the women and children.
80. About this time the Thessalians, who continued the war upon Alexander, tyrant of Pherae, and, suffering defeat in most of the battles, had lost large numbers of their fighting men, sent ambassadors to the Thebans with a request to assist them and to dispatch to them Pelopidas as general.1 For they knew that on account of his arrest2 by Alexander he was on very bad terms with the ruler, and besides, that he was a man of superior courage and widely renowned for his shrewdness in the art of war. When the common council of the Boeotians convened and the envoys had explained the matters on which they had been instructed, the Boeotians concurred with the Thessalians in every matter, gave Pelopidas seven thousand men and ordered him speedily to assist as requested; but as Pelopidas was hastening to leave with his army,3 the sun, as it happened, was eclipsed.4 Many were superstitious about the phenomenon, and some of the soothsayers declared that because of the withdrawal of the soldiers, the city’s “sun” had been eclipsed. Although in this interpretation they were foretelling the death of Pelopidas, he notwithstanding set out for the campaign, drawn on by Fate. When he arrived in Thessaly, and found that Alexander had






1See Plutarch, Pelopidas, 31–35; Nepos, Pelopidas, 5.2See chaps. 71. 2, 75. 2.3According to Plutarch, Pelopidas left his army because of the eclipse and took command of the Thessalian League.413 July 364.173