Diodorus of Sicily

ἡττήθησαν. ἐπιφανέντων δὲ Βοιωτῶν μυρίοις καὶ
τρισχιλίοις στρατιώταις καὶ τῶν ἐκ Πελοποννήσου
Ἀχαιῶν χιλίοις καὶ πεντακοσίοις βοηθησάντων τοῖς
Φωκεῦσιν ἀντεστρατοπέδευσαν αἱ δυνάμεις, ἀμφοτέρων
ἀθροισθέντων εἰς ἕνα τόπον.
31. Μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα οἱ μὲν Βοιωτοὶ κατὰ τὰς προνομὰς
ζωγρήσαντες οὐκ ὀλίγους τῶν μισθοφόρων,
προαγαγόντες πρὸ τῆς πόλεως ἐκήρυξαν ὅτι τούσδε
τοὺς ἄνδρας οἱ Ἀμφικτύονες στρατευσαμένους μετὰ
τῶν ἱεροσύλων θανάτῳ κολάζουσιν· εὐθὺς δὲ καὶ
τῶν ἔργων τοῖς λόγοις ἀκολουθούντων ἅπαντας
2κατηκόντισαν. ἐπὶ δὲ τούτοις οἱ παρὰ τοῖς Φωκεῦσι
μισθοφόροι παροξυνθέντες ἠξίουν τὸν Φιλόμηλον
τῆς ὁμοίας τιμωρίας ἀξιῶσαι τοὺς πολεμίους,
μεγάλην δὲ φιλονεικίαν εἰσενεγκάμενοι καὶ πολλοὺς
τῶν κατὰ τὴν χώραν πλανωμένων παρὰ τοῖς πολεμίοις
ζωγρήσαντες ἀνήγαγον, οὓς ἅπαντας ὁ
Φιλόμηλος κατηκόντισε. διὰ δὲ ταύτης τῆς κολάσεως
τοὺς ἐναντίους ἐποίησαν μεθέσθαι1 τῆς ὑπερηφάνου
3καὶ δεινῆς τιμωρίας. μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα τῶν
δυνάμεων εἰς ἄλλην χώραν ἐμβαλουσῶν καὶ τὴν
ὁδοιπορίαν ποιουμένων διὰ τόπων καταδένδρων καὶ
τραχέων ἄφνω συνέμιξαν ἀλλήλοις οἱ προηγούμενοι
τῆς στρατιᾶς. γενομένης δὲ συμπλοκῆς εἶτα μάχης
ἰσχυρᾶς, οἱ Βοιωτοὶ τῷ πλήθει πολὺ προέχοντες
4ἐνίκησαν τοὺς Φωκεῖς. τῆς δὲ φυγῆς γινομένης
διὰ τόπου κρημνώδους καὶ δυσεξίτου πολλοὶ τῶν
τε Φωκέων καὶ μισθοφόρων κατεκόπησαν· ὁ δὲ
Φιλόμηλος ἐκθύμως ἀγωνισάμενος καὶ πολλοῖς



1So Cobet: μεταθέσθαι.322Book XVI

Argolas.1 When the Boeotians put in an appearance 354/3 b.c. with thirteen thousand men and the Achaeans from the Peloponnesus came to the support of the Phocians
with fifteen hundred, the armies encamped over against one another, both assembled in one place.
31. After this the Boeotians, who had taken captive on foraging parties a good many mercenaries, brought them out in front of the city and made an announcement by heralds that the Amphictyons were punishing with death these men present who had enlisted with the temple-robbers; and immediately, making the deed follow the word, shot them all down. But the mercenaries serving with the Phocians were so enraged by this that they demanded of Philomelus that he mete out the like punishment to the enemy, and then, when, bending every effort, they had taken captive many men who were straggling up and down the countryside where the enemy were, they brought them back and all these Philomelus shot. Through this punishment they forced the opposite side to give up their overweening and cruel vengeance. After this, as the armies were invading another district and were making a march through heavily wooded rough regions, both vanguards suddenly became intermingled. An engagement took place and then a sharp battle in which the Boeotians, who far outnumbered the Phocians, defeated them. As the flight took place through precipitous and almost impassable country2 many of the Phocians and their mercenaries were cut down. Philomelus, after he had fought courageously and had suffered many

1Unmentioned elsewhere.2The decisive battle was fought at Neon (see Pausanias, 10. 2. 4). A good description of the campaign is given by Beloch, Griechische Geschichte2, 3. 1. 250, note 1, and by Pickard-Cambridge, Cambridge Ancient History, 6. 215 ff.323