Diodorus of Sicily
2πλῆθος εἱστίασε τὴν δύναμιν. ἐπλήρωσε δὲ
τῆς τῶν πανηγυριζόντων παρουσίας1 κύκλους τέσσαρας
ἐντὸς ἀλλήλων ὄντας καὶ περιεχομένους ὑφ᾿
ἑνὸς τοῦ μεγίστου· εἶναι δὲ συνέβαινε τοῦ μὲν ἐκτὸς
τὴν περίμετρον δέκα σταδίων, ἣν ἀνεπλήρουν οἵ τε
μισθοφόροι καὶ συμμάχων τὸ πλῆθος, τοῦ δὲ
δευτέρου σταδίων ὀκτώ, καθ᾿ ὃν ὑπῆρχον οἵ τε
ἀργυράσπιδες Μακεδόνες καὶ τῶν ἑταίρων οἱ μετ᾿
Ἀλεξάνδρου στρατεύσαντες, τοῦ δ᾿ ἑξῆς τὴν μὲν
περιφέρειαν σταδίων τεσσάρων, τὸν δὲ τόπον ἀναπληροῦσθαι
κατακειμένων τῶν τε δευτέρων ἡγεμόνων
καὶ τῶν ἔξω τάξεως2 φίλων καὶ στρατηγῶν
καὶ τῶν ἱππέων· τοῦ δ᾿ ἐπὶ πᾶσιν, ὄντος δυεῖν
σταδίων, διειλήφεισαν τὰς κλισίας οἵ τε στρατηγοὶ
καὶ οἱ τὰς ἱππαρχίας ἔχοντες, ἔτι δὲ τῶν Περσῶν
3οἱ μάλιστα τιμώμενοι. ἐν μέσῳ δὲ τούτων ὑπῆρχον
βωμοὶ θεῶν καὶ Ἀλεξάνδρου καὶ Φιλίππου. καὶ
τὰς μὲν κλισίας συνέβαινεν ἐκ φυλλάδος κατεσκευάσθαι,
κεκαλυμμένας αὐλαίαις καὶ παντοδαποῖς
περιστρώμασι, χορηγούσης τῆς Περσίδος δαψιλῆ
πάντα τὰ πρὸς τρυφὴν καὶ ἀπόλαυσιν, διεστηκέναι
δὲ τοὺς κύκλους ἀπ᾿ ἀλλήλων ἐπὶ τοσοῦτον ὥστε
μηδὲν μὲν παρενοχλεῖσθαι τοὺς ἑστιωμένους, πλησίον
δ᾿ εἶναι πάσας τὰς παρασκευάς.
23. Πάντων δὲ κατὰ τρόπον ὑπηρετουμένων
ἐπεσημαίνετο τὸ πλῆθος τὴν τοῦ Πευκέστου προθυμίαν
καὶ φανερὸς ἦν ἐπιδεδωκὼς πολὺ πρὸς εὔνοιαν.
ἃ δὴ θεωρῶν Εὐμενὴς καὶ συλλογιζόμενος
τὸν Πευκέστην πολιτεύεσθαι πρὸς τὸ πλῆθος τῆς
στρατηγίας ὀρεγόμενον, ἐπλάσατο ψευδεῖς ἐπιστολάς,
διὰ δὲ τούτων τούς τε στρατιώτας εὐθαρσεῖς

1παρουσίας Post: θυσίας.2καὶ after τάξεως deleted by Madvig.290Book XIX

army.1 With the company of those participating he 317 b.c. filled four circles, one within the other, with the largest circle inclosing the others. The circuit of the outer ring was of ten stades and was filled with the mercenaries and the mass of the allies; the circuit of the second was of eight stades, and in it were the Macedonian Silver Shields and those of the Companions who had fought under Alexander; the circuit of the next was of four stades and its area was filled with reclining men—the commanders of lower rank, the friends and generals who were unassigned, and the cavalry; lastly in the inner circle with a perimeter of two stades2 each of the generals and hipparchs and also each of the Persians who was most highly honoured occupied his own couch. In the middle of these there were altars for the gods and for Alexander and Philip. The couches were formed of heaps of leaves covered by hangings and rugs of every kind, since Persia furnished in plenty everything needed for luxury and enjoyment; and the circles were sufficiently separated from each other so that the banqueters should not be crowded and that all the provisions should be near at hand.
23. While all were being duly served, the crowd applauded the generosity of Peucestes, and it was clear that he had made a great advance in popularity. But Eumenes, seeing this and reasoning that Peucestes was playing up to the crowd in furtherance of his desire for the chief command, had fabricated a false letter, through which he made the soldiers




1Cp. Plutarch, Eumenes, 14. 3.2The circles were about 6000, 4800, 2400, and 1200 feet in circumference respectively.291