Diodorus of Sicily

διαφορᾶς, καταπορευθῆναι δ᾿ εἰς τὰς πατρίδας·
εἰληφέναι γὰρ αὐτοὺς πεῖραν τοῦ μηδέποτ᾿ ἂν δύνασθαι
περιγενέσθαι τοὺς φυγάδας ἀγωνιζομένους
πρὸς αὐτόν, ὅτε καὶ νῦν πολλαπλασίους ὄντας
4αὐτοὺς ἡττῆσθαι. τῶν δὲ φυγάδων οἱ μὲν ἱππεῖς
ἅπαντες ἀπὸ τῆς φυγῆς διεσώθησαν εἰς Ἄμβικας
χωρίον, τῶν δὲ πεζῶν ἔνιοι μὲν νυκτὸς ἐπιγενομένης
διέδρασαν, οἱ δὲ πλείους καταλαβόμενοι
λόφον καὶ τὴν μὲν ἐκ τοῦ διαγωνίζεσθαι νίκην
ἀπελπίσαντες, ἐπιθυμοῦντες δὲ συγγενῶν καὶ
φίλων καὶ πατρίδος καὶ τῶν ἐν ταύτῃ καλῶν διελύσαντο
5πρὸς Ἀγαθοκλέα. λαβόντων οὖν αὐτῶν πίστεις
καὶ καταβάντων ἀπό τινος ἐρυμνοῦ λόφου τὰ
μὲν ὅπλα παρείλετο, τὴν δὲ δύναμιν περιστήσας
ἅπαντας κατηκόντισεν, ὄντας περὶ ἑπτακισχιλίους,
ὡς Τίμαιός φησιν, ὡς δ᾿ ἔνιοι γράφουσιν, εἰς τετρακισχιλίους·
ἀεὶ γὰρ ὁ τύραννος οὗτος πίστεως μὲν
καὶ τῶν ὅρκων κατεφρόνει, τὴν δ᾿ ἰδίαν ἰσχὺν οὐκ
ἐκ τῆς περὶ αὐτὸν δυνάμεως, ἀλλ᾿ ἐκ τῆς τῶν ὑποτεταγμένων
ἀσθενείας περιεποιεῖτο, πλεῖον δεδοικὼς
τοὺς συμμάχους ἢ τοὺς πολεμίους.
90. Τὴν δὲ ἀντιτεταγμένην δύναμιν οὕτω διαφθείρας
προσεδέξατο τοὺς ὑπολελειμμένους τῶν φυγάδων
καὶ πρὸς Δεινοκράτην διαλυθεὶς στρατηγὸν
αὐτὸν μέρους τῆς δυνάμεως ἀπέδειξε καὶ διετέλεσε
πιστεύων τὰ μέγιστα. θαυμάσειε δ᾿ ἄν τις ἐν τούτοις
τὸν Ἀγαθοκλέα, πῶς πρὸς ἅπαντας ὑπόπτως
ἔχων καὶ μηδέποτε μηδενὶ βεβαίως πιστεύσας πρὸς
μόνον Δεινοκράτην διετήρησε τὴν φιλίαν μέχρι τελευτῆς.
2ὁ δὲ Δεινοκράτης προδοὺς τοὺς συμμάχους
τὸν μὲν Πασίφιλον ἐν τῇ Γέλᾳ συναρπάσας ἀπέκτεινεν,
378Book XX

to their native cities; for, he said, they had found by 305 b.c. experience that the exiles would never be able to prevail in a battle with him, seeing that even on this occasion, although they were many times more numerous, they had been defeated. Of the exiles, all the horsemen survived the flight and came safe into Ambicae1; but as for the foot soldiers, although some escaped when night came on, most of them after occupying a hill made terms with Agathocles, for they had lost hope of victory by righting and longed for their relatives and friends and for their fatherland and its comforts. Now when they had received pledges of good faith and had come down from the hill-fort, such as it was, Agathocles took their arms; and then, stationing his army about them, he shot them all down, their number being about seven thousand, as Timaeus says, but as some have written, about four thousand. Indeed, this tyrant always scorned faith and his oaths; and he maintained his own power, not by the strength of his armed forces but by the weakness of his subjects, fearing his allies more than his enemies.
90. When he had destroyed in this manner the army that had been arrayed against him, Agathocles received any exiles who survived and, making terms with Deinocrates, appointed him general over part of his army and continued to entrust the most important matters to him. In this connection one might well wonder why Agathocles, who was suspicious of everyone and never completely trusted anybody, continued his friendship toward Deinocrates alone until death. But Deinocrates, after betraying his allies, seized and slew Pasiphilus in Gela and handed the

1Or Ambycae. The place is unknown.379