Diodorus of Sicily

προαγὼν ἐγεγόνει τῆς ὅλης νίκης. πάντων δὲ τῶν
βαρβάρων ταχὺ τραπέντων καὶ τοσούτων μυριάδων
ἐν στενοῖς τόποις τὴν φυγὴν ποιουμένων ταχὺ πᾶς
ὁ συνεχὴς τόπος νεκρῶν ἐπληρώθη.
35. Νυκτὸς δ᾿ ἐπιλαβούσης οἱ μὲν Πέρσαι ῥᾳδίως
διεσπάρησαν εἰς πολλοὺς τόπους, οἱ δὲ Μακεδόνες
παυσάμενοι τοῦ διωγμοῦ πρὸς ἁρπαγὴν
ὥρμησαν καὶ μάλιστα περὶ τὰς βασιλικὰς σκηνὰς
2διὰ τὸ πλῆθος τῆς πολυτελείας ἠσχολοῦντο. διόπερ
πολὺς μὲν ἄργυρος, οὐκ ὀλίγος δὲ χρυσός, παμπληθεῖς
δὲ καὶ πολυτελεῖς ἐσθῆτες ἐκ τῆς βασιλικῆς
γάζης διεφοροῦντο. ὁμοίως δὲ καὶ τῶν τοῦ βασιλέως
φίλων καὶ συγγενῶν καὶ τῶν ἄλλων ἡγεμόνων
3οὐκ ὀλίγος διηρπάγη πλοῦτος. οὐ μόνον γὰρ
αἱ τῆς βασιλικῆς οἰκίας, ἀλλὰ καὶ αἱ τῶν συγγενῶν
καὶ φίλων γυναῖκες ἐφ᾿ ἁρμάτων ὀχούμεναι καταχρύσων
συνηκολούθουν κατά τι πάτριον ἔθος τῶν
4Περσῶν· ἑκάστη δὲ τούτων διὰ τὴν ὑπερβολὴν τοῦ
πλούτου καὶ τῆς τρυφῆς περιήγετο πλῆθος πολυδαπάνου
κατασκευῆς καὶ γυναικείου κόσμου.
Πάθος δ᾿ ἦν δεινότατον περὶ τὰς αἰχμαλωτιζομένας
5γυναῖκας. αἱ γὰρ πρότερον διὰ τρυφὴν ἐπ᾿
ἀπήναις πολυτελέσι μόγις κατακομιζόμεναι καὶ
γυμνὸν μέρος τοῦ σώματος οὐδὲν φαίνουσαι, τότε
μονοχίτωνες καὶ τὰς ἐσθῆτας περιρρήττουσαι μετ᾿
ὀδυρμῶν ἐκ τῶν σκηνῶν ἐξεπήδων, ἐπιβοώμεναι
θεοὺς καὶ προσπίπτουσαι τοῖς τῶν κρατούντων
6γόνασι. περιαιρούμεναι δὲ ταῖς χερσὶ τρεμούσαις
τὸν τοῦ σώματος κόσμον καὶ τὰς κόμας ἀνειμέναι
διὰ τόπων τραχέων ἔθεον καὶ πρὸς ἀλλήλας συντρέχουσαι
216Book XVII

whole victory. Soon all of the Persians were in retreat 333/2 b.c. and as so many tens of thousands were making their escape through narrow passes the whole countryside was soon covered with bodies.
35. When night fell, the remainder of the Persian army easily succeeded in scattering in various directions while the Macedonians gave over the pursuit and turned to plunder, being particularly attracted by the royal pavilions because of the mass of wealth that was there.1 This included much silver, no little gold, and vast numbers of rich dresses from the royal treasure, which they took, and likewise a great store of wealth belonging to the King’s Friends, Relatives, and military commanders. Not only the ladies of the royal house but also those of the King’s Relatives and Friends, borne on gilded chariots, had accompanied the army according to an ancestral custom of the Persians, and each of them had brought with her a store of rich furniture and feminine adornment, in keeping with their vast wealth and luxury.
The lot of these captured women was pathetic in the extreme.2 They who previously from daintiness only with reluctance had been conveyed in luxurious carriages and had exposed no part of their bodies unveiled now burst wailing out of the tents clad only in a single chiton, rending their garments, calling on the gods, and falling at the knees of the conquerors. Flinging off their jewelry with trembling hands and with their hair flying, they fled for their lives over rugged ground and, collecting into groups, they


1This capture of the personal baggage and retinue of the king and his nobles was followed by that of the military train at Damascus (chap. 32. 3), which Diodorus does not mention (Arrian, 2. 11. 10).2The same picture is sketched by Curtius, 3. 11. 21–23.217