Diodorus of Sicily

ἑκατὸν δέκα. ἐπὶ δὲ τούτων Ἀλέξανδρος ἐστράτευσεν
2ἐπὶ τοὺς ὀνομαζομένους Παροπανισάδας. ἡ
δὲ τούτων χώρα κεῖται μὲν ὑπ᾿ αὐτὰς τὰς ἄρκτους,
χιονοβολεῖται δὲ πᾶσα καὶ τοῖς ἄλλοις ἔθνεσι δυσεπίβατός
ἐστι διὰ τὴν ὑπερβολὴν τοῦ ψύχους. ἡ
πλείστη δὲ πεδιὰς οὖσα καὶ ἄξυλος πολλαῖς κώμαις
3διείληπται. αὗται δὲ τὰς τῶν οἰκιῶν στέγας ἔχουσιν
ἐκ πλίνθων εἰς ὀξὺ συνηγμένων ἐχούσας καμάραν1·
κατὰ δὲ μέσην τὴν ὀροφὴν ἀπολελειμμένης
διαυγείας διὰ ταύτης ὁ καπνὸς ἐκφέρεται
καὶ πανταχόθεν τῆς οἰκοδομίας περιεχούσης οἱ
4κατοικοῦντες πολλῆς σκέπης τυγχάνουσιν. οἱ δ᾿
ἐγχώριοι διὰ τὸ πλῆθος τῆς χιόνος τὸ πλέον μέρος
τοῦ ἐνιαυτοῦ ταῖς οἰκίαις ἐνδιατρίβουσι, παρεσκευασμένας
ἔχοντες τὰς ἰδίας τροφάς· τὰς δ᾿ ἀμπέλους
καὶ τὰ καρποφόρα τῶν δένδρων περιχώσαντες καὶ
τὴν τοῦ χειμῶνος ὥραν ἐάσαντες πάλιν ἀναστέλλουσι
5τὴν γῆν κατὰ τὸν τοῦ βλαστοῦ καιρόν. ἅπασα
δ᾿ ἡ τῆς χώρας φύσις οὔτε χλωρὰν οὔθ᾿ ἥμερον
ἔχει πρόσοψιν, ἀλλὰ λευκὴν καὶ ἀνταυγῆ διὰ2 τὴν
χιόνα καὶ τὸν ἐν αὐτῇ πηγνύμενον κρύσταλλον.
διόπερ οὔτ᾿ ὀρνέου προσκαθίζοντος οὔτε θηρίου




1This is the reading of the manuscripts, except that F gives
ἐχουσῶν. The ἐχούσας seems superfluous, and συνηγμένων
may well be corrected into συνηγμένην, as Hertlein.2διὰ supplied by Fischer.354Book XVII

and thirteenth Olympic Games were held.1 In this 328/7 b.c. year Alexander marched against the so-called Paropanisadae, whose country lies in the extreme north; it is snow-covered and not easily approached by other tribes because of the extreme cold. The most of it is a plain and woodless, and divided up among many villages.2 These contain houses with roofs of tile drawn up at the top into a peaked vault.3 In the middle of each roof an aperture is left through which smoke escapes, and since the building is enclosed all around the people find ample protection against the weather. Because of the depth of the snow, they spend the most of the year indoors, having their own supplies at hand. They heap up soil about vines and fruit trees, and leave it so for the winter season, removing the earth again at the time of budding. The landscape nowhere shows any verdure or cultivation; all is white and dazzling because of the snow and the ice which form in it. No bird, therefore, alights there nor does any animal pass,



1Euthycritus was archon at Athens from July of 328 to June of 327 b.c. The Roman consuls of 330 b.c. were L. Papirius Crassus and L. Plautius Venno (Broughton, 1. 143). The Olympic Games were those of July 328. Diodorus neglected to name the winner of the foot race, who was Cliton of Macedonia, according to Eusebius, Chronikon. By now, Diodorus’s chronology is seriously off; it can have been no later than the autumn of 330 b.c. “at the setting of the Pleiades” (Strabo, 15. 2. 10).2Curtius, 7. 3. 5–18; Justin, 12. 5. 9; Arrian, 3. 28. 4–7. This country is the highland of Afghanistan, cold in the winter, but neither in the north nor a plain. According to Aristobulus (Arrian, 3. 28. 6), nothing grew there except terebinth and asafoetida.3Curtius’s description of these buildings (7. 3. 8–9) is clearer. He compares the roofs to the keels of ships. The houses were partly underground (Plutarch, De Fortuna aut Virtute Alexandri, 2. 9. 340 e).355