Diodorus of Sicily
7. Δαρεῖος γὰρ παραλαβὼν τὴν βασιλείαν πρὸ
μὲν τῆς Φιλίππου τελευτῆς ἐφιλοτιμεῖτο τὸν μέλλοντα
πόλεμον εἰς τὴν Μακεδονίαν ἀποστρέψαι·
ἐκείνου δὲ τελευτήσαντος ἀπελύθη τῆς ἀγωνίας,
2καταφρονήσας τῆς Ἀλεξάνδρου νεότητος. ἐπεὶ δ᾿
ἡ διὰ1 τῶν πράξεων ἐνέργεια καὶ ὀξύτης ἐποίησε
μὲν τὴν τῶν Ἑλλήνων ἡγεμονίαν πᾶσαν ἀναλαβεῖν
καὶ τὴν ἀρετὴν τοῦ νεανίσκου γενέσθαι περιβόητον,
τότε δὴ νουθετηθεὶς τοῖς ἔργοις ὁ Δαρεῖος ἐπιμέλειαν
μεγάλην ἐποιεῖτο τῶν δυνάμεων, τριήρεις τε
πολλὰς κατασκευαζόμενος καὶ πολλὰς δυνάμεις
ἀξιολόγους συνιστάμενος, ἡγεμόνας τε τοὺς ἀρίστους
προκρίνων, ἐν οἷς ὑπῆρχε καὶ Μέμνων ὁ
Ῥόδιος, διαφέρων ἀνδρείᾳ καὶ συνέσει στρατηγικῇ.
3τούτῳ δὲ δοὺς ὁ βασιλεὺς μισθοφόρους πεντακισχιλίους
προσέταξε παρελθεῖν ἐπὶ πόλιν Κύζικον καὶ
πειρᾶσθαι ταύτην χειρώσασθαι. οὗτος μὲν οὖν
μετὰ τοσούτων στρατιωτῶν προῆγε διὰ τῆς Ἴδης.
4Τὸ δ᾿ ὅρος τοῦτο μυθολογοῦσί τινες τυχεῖν ταύτης
τῆς προσηγορίας ἀπὸ τῆς Μελισσέως Ἴδης.
μέγιστον δ᾿ ὑπάρχον τῶν κατὰ τὸν Ἑλλήσποντον
ἔχει κατὰ τὸ μέσον ἄντρον θεοπρεπές, ἐν ᾧ φασι
5κριθῆναι τὰς θεὰς ὑπ᾿ Ἀλεξάνδρου. γενέσθαι δ᾿
ἐν τούτῳ λέγεται καὶ τοὺς Ἰδαίους Δακτύλους,
οὓς σίδηρον ἐργάσασθαι πρώτους, μαθόντας τὴν
ἐργασίαν παρὰ τῆς τῶν θεῶν μητρός. ἴδιον δέ τι
καὶ παράδοξον συμβαίνει γίνεσθαι περὶ τοῦτο τὸ

1δία added by Kallenberg (cp. chap. 4. 5).134Book XVII
7. Dareius became king before the death of Philip 335/4 b.c. and thought to turn the coming war back upon Macedonia, but when Philip died, Dareius was relieved of his anxiety and despised the youth of Alexander. Soon, however, when Alexander’s vigour and rapidity of action had secured for him the leadership of all Greece and made evident the ability of the young man, then Dareius took warning and began to pay serious attention to his forces. He fitted out a large number of ships of war and assembled numerous strong armies, choosing at the same time his best commanders, among whom was Memnon of Rhodes,1 outstanding in courage and in strategic grasp. The king gave him five thousand2 mercenaries and ordered him to march to Cyzicus and to try to get possession of it. With this force, accordingly, Memnon marched on across the range of Mt. Ida.
Some tell the story that this mountain got its name from Ida, the daughter of Melisseus.3 It is the highest mountain in the region of the Hellespont and there is in its midst a remarkable cave in which they say the goddesses were judged by Alexander.4 On this mountain are supposed to have lived the Idaean Dactyls who first worked iron, having learned their skill from the Mother of the Gods.5 An odd occurrence has been observed in connection with this mountain which is known nowhere else. About the





1See Book 16. 52. 4.2This number seems small for the task assigned Memnon, but it is hardly likely that it should be emended to 50,000, the total number of the King’s Greek mercenaries (Curtius, 5. 11. 5). Polyaenus refers to Memnon’s 4000 troops (5. 44. 4).3Melisseus, king of Crete, is reported to have been the father of Adrasteia and Ida, to whom the infant Zeus was given to nurse (Book 5. 70. 2). See Apollodorus, 1. 1.6.4The Judgement of Paris.5See Book 5. 64. 3–5.135