Diodorus of Sicily

πέλαγος ἐκβολὰς ποιουμένου, καθ᾿ ἕκαστον τῶν
στομάτων πόλις κατεσκεύαστο πύργους μεγάλους
ἔχουσα καθ᾿ ἑκάτερον τοῦ ῥείθρου1 καὶ ξυλίνην
γέφυραν τοῦ εἴσπλου κυριεύουσαν. μάλιστα δὲ τὸ
Πηλουσιακὸν στόμα κατεσκεύασε2 διὰ τὸ κεῖσθαι
μὲν αὐτὸ πρῶτον πρὸς τοὺς ἀπὸ Συρίας πορευομένους
καὶ δοκεῖν διὰ τούτου μάλιστ᾿ ἂν3 ποιεῖσθαι
3τὴν ἔφοδον τοὺς πολεμίους. τοῦτο γὰρ ἀπετάφρευσε,
καὶ διετείχισε τοὺς εἴσπλους κατὰ τοὺς
εὐκαιροτάτους τόπους, καὶ τῶν προσόδων τὰς μὲν
κατὰ γῆν πορευτὰς4 ἐποίησε λιμνάζειν, τὰς δὲ
πλωτὰς χώμασιν ἐνέφραττεν. διόπερ οὐκ ἦν
ῥᾳδίως οὔτε ταῖς ναυσὶν εἰσπλέειν οὔτε τοῖς ἱππεῦσι
4προσπελάσαι οὔτε τοῖς πεζοῖς προσελθεῖν. οἱ δὲ
περὶ τὸν Φαρνάβαζον στρατηγοί, καταλαβόντες τὸ
Πηλουσιακὸν στόμα θαυμαστῶς ὠχυρωμένον καὶ
στρατιωτῶν πλήθει φυλαττόμενον, τὸ μὲν διὰ τούτου
βιάζεσθαι παντελῶς ἀπεδοκίμασαν δι᾿ ἑτέρου
δὲ στόματος ἔγνωσαν ποιεῖσθαι τὸν εἴσπλουν. διὸ
πλεύσαντες πελάγιοι πρὸς τὸ μὴ καθορᾶσθαι τὰς
ναῦς ὑπὸ τῶν πολεμίων, κατέπλευσαν πρὸς τὸ5
στόμα τὸ καλούμενον Μενδήσιον, ἔχον ἠιόνα παρήκουσαν
ἐφ᾿ ἱκανὸν τόπον. εἰς ταύτην ἀποβάντες
μετὰ στρατιωτῶν τρισχιλίων ὅ τε Φαρνάβαζος καὶ
ὁ Ἰφικράτης προῆγον ἐπὶ τὸ τετειχισμένον ἐπὶ τοῦ
5στόματος πολισμάτιον. ἐκβοηθησάντων δὲ τῶν
Αἰγυπτίων ἱππεῦσί τε καὶ πεζοῖς τρισχιλίοις, γενομένης
τε μάχης ἰσχυρᾶς καὶ τοῖς Πέρσαις πολλῶν
ἐκ τῶν νεῶν προσγεγενημένων, κυκλωθέντες οἱ
Αἰγύπτιοι, πολλοὶ μὲν ἀπέθανον, οὐκ ὀλίγοι δ᾿


1τοῦ ῥείθρου Vulgate, ῥείθρου P, ῥεῖθρον Vogel.2κατεσκεύασε Wesseling: κατεσκεύασαν.3μάλιστ᾿ ἂν Post: μάλιστα.4πορευτὰς Reiske: πορείας.5τὸ] omitted by PFJ, Vogel.64Book XV

Sea by seven mouths,1 and at each mouth a city had 374/3 b.c. been established along with great towers on each bank of the stream and a wooden bridge commanding its entrance. He especially fortified the Pelusiac mouth because it is the first to be encountered by those approaching from Syria and seemed to be the most likely route of the enemy approach. He dug channels connecting with this, fortified the entrances for ships at the most suitable points, and inundated the approaches by land while blocking the sea approaches by embankments. Accordingly it was not easy either for the ships to sail in, or for the cavalry to draw near, or for the infantry to approach. Pharna-bazus’ staff, finding the Pelusiac mouth so remarkably fortified and guarded by a multitude of soldiers, rejected utterly the plan of forcing a way through it and decided to make the invasion by ship through another mouth. Accordingly they voyaged on the open sea so that the ships should not be sighted by the enemy, and sailed in by the mouth known as Mendesian, which had a beach stretching over a considerable space. Landing here with three thousand men, Pharnabazus and Iphicrates pushed forward to the walled stronghold at the mouth. The Egyptians rushed out with three thousand horse and infantry, and a sharp battle ensued, but many men from their ships came to increase the number of the Persians, until finally the Egyptians were surrounded, many slain, and not a few captured alive; and the rest 





1See Book 1. 33. 5 ff.65