Diodorus of Sicily

τῆς ἐπιβολῆς, καίπερ ἅπαντα τῇ στρατηγίᾳ προνοησάμενος,
ἀλλὰ τὴν τύχην λαβὼν ἀντιπράττουσαν
παραδόξως ἀπέβαλε τὴν νίκην. ἄρτι γὰρ αὐτοῦ
πλησιάζοντος ἐρήμῳ τῇ πόλει κατήντησαν ἐπὶ
θάτερα τῆς Μαντινείας οἱ πεμφθέντες ὑπὸ τῶν
Ἀθηναίων στρατιῶται πρὸς τὴν συμμαχίαν, ὄντες
ἑξακισχίλιοι, στρατηγὸν δ᾿ ἔχοντες Ἡγησίλεων,1
ἄνδρα τότε2 παρὰ τοῖς πολίταις ἐπαινούμενον. οὗτος
δὲ τοὺς ἱκανοὺς εἰς τὴν πόλιν παρεισαγαγών,
τὴν ἄλλην δύναμιν ἐξέταξεν ὡς μάχῃ διακριθησόμενος.3
3εὐθὺς δὲ καὶ Λακεδαιμόνιοι καὶ Μαντινεῖς
ἐπεφάνησαν, καὶ πρὸς τὴν τῶν ὅλων κρίσιν
ἅπαντες κατεσκευάζοντο4 καὶ τοὺς πανταχόθεν συμμάχους
4μετεπέμποντο. τοῖς μὲν οὖν Μαντινεῦσιν
ἐβοήθουν Ἠλεῖοι καὶ Λακεδαιμόνιοι καὶ Ἀθηναῖοι
καὶ ἄλλοι τινές, ὧν ὁ σύμπας ἀριθμὸς ἦν πεζοὶ μὲν
πλείους τῶν δισμυρίων ἱππεῖς δὲ περὶ δισχιλίους·
τοῖς δὲ Τεγεάταις συνεμάχουν οἱ πλεῖστοι καὶ
κράτιστοι τῶν Ἀρκάδων καὶ Ἀχαιοὶ5 καὶ Βοιωτοὶ
καὶ Ἀργεῖοι καί τινες ἕτεροι τῶν Πελοποννησίων
καὶ τῶν ἔξωθεν συμμάχων, οἱ δὲ πάντες ἠθροίσθησαν
πεζοὶ μὲν ὑπὲρ τοὺς τρισμυρίους, ἱππεῖς δ᾿
οὐκ ἐλάττους τῶν τρισχιλίων.
85. Ἀμφοτέρων δὲ προθύμως συγκαταβάντων6
εἰς τὸν ὑπὲρ τῶν ὅλων ἀγῶνα, καὶ διαταχθέντων






1See Kirchner, Pros. Att. no. 6339: Ἡγήλοχον.2So Capps, τῶν . . . ἐπαινουμένων Wesseling: τὸν . . .
ἐπαινούμενον.3So Wesseling: διακριθησομένους.4So PA, Vogel: παρεσκευάζοντο cet.5Wesseling places καὶ Ἀχαιοὶ after Ἠλεῖοι above (cp.
chap. 85. 2 and Xenophon, Hell. 7. 4. 17).6προθύμως συγκαταβάντων Hertlein: συντόμως προκαταβάντων.186Book XV

he did not succeed in his attempt, although by 363/2 b.c. his plan of campaign he had provided for every contingency, but, finding Fate opposed to him, contrary to his expectations he lost the victory. For just as he was approaching the unprotected city, on the opposite side of Mantineia there arrived the reinforcements sent by Athens,1 six thousand in number with Hegesileôs2 their general, a man at that time renowned amongst his fellow citizens. He introduced an adequate force into the city and arrayed the rest of the army in expectation of a decisive battle. And presently the Lacedaemonians and Mantineians made their appearance as well, whereat all got ready for the contest which was to decide the issue and summoned their allies from every direction. On the side of the Mantineians were the Eleians, Lacedaemonians, Athenians, and a few others, who numbered all told more than twenty thousand foot and about two thousand horse. On the side of the Tegeans the most numerous and bravest of the Arcadians were ranged as allies, also Achaeans,3 Boeotians, Argives, some other Pelopon-nesians, and allies from outside, and all in all there were assembled above thirty thousand foot and not less than three thousand horse.
85. Both sides eagerly drew together for the decisive conflict,4 their armies in battle formation, while




1See chap. 82. 4 and Xenophon, Hell. 7. 5. 15.2The name of the Athenian commander is given as Hegesileos by Ephorus (Diog. Laert. 2. 54) and by Xenophon (De Vectigalibus, 3. 7). Hegesileos was uncle of Eubulus and general again in the year 349/8. See critical note.3Probably from Thessaly, Ἀχαιοὶ Φθιῶται, if present text is retained. See chap. 85. 2 for Achaeans of Peloponnesus.4The fundamental account of the battle of Mantineia is found in Xenophon, Hell. 7. 5. 18–27. For references to maps and special problems see Glotz, Hist. gr. 3. 177, note 101.187