Diodorus of Sicily

πεπολεμηκὼς εἰώθει κατὰ τὰς νίκας ὑποφεύγειν
καὶ ἑκουσίως ἡττᾶσθαι, ἵνα μὴ δόξῃ τῶν ἰσχυροτέρων
4γεγονέναι1 κρείττων. οὐ μὴν ἠδυνήθη γε τῇ
πανουργίᾳ κατασοφίσασθαι τὴν ἐκ τῆς πεπρωμένης
ἀνάγκην, ἀλλὰ ποιητὴς ὢν κακὸς καὶ διακριθεὶς
ἐν Ἀθήναις ἐνίκησε τοὺς κρείττονας ποιητάς. εὐλόγως
οὖν κατὰ τὸν χρησμὸν διὰ τὸ περιγενέσθαι
τῶν κρειττόνων ἐπακολουθοῦσαν ἔσχε τὴν τοῦ βίου
τελευτήν.
5Ὁ δὲ Διονύσιος ὁ νεώτερος διαδεξάμενος τὴν
τυραννίδα πρῶτον τὰ πλήθη συναγαγὼν εἰς ἐκκλησίαν
παρεκάλεσε τοῖς οἰκείοις λόγοις τηρεῖν τὴν
πατροπαράδοτον πρὸς αὐτὸν εὔνοιαν, ἔπειτα τὸν
πατέρα μεγαλοπρεπῶς θάψας κατὰ τὴν ἀκρόπολιν
πρὸς ταῖς βασιλίσι καλουμέναις πύλαις, ἠσφαλίσατο
τὰ κατὰ τὴν ἀρχήν.
75. Ἐπ᾿ ἄρχοντος δ᾿ Ἀθήνησι Πολυζήλου κατὰ
μὲν τὴν Ῥώμην ἀναρχία διά τινας πολιτικὰς
στάσεις ἐγένετο, κατὰ δὲ τὴν Ἑλλάδα Ἀλέξανδρος
ὁ Φερῶν τύραννος ἐν τῇ Θετταλίᾳ περί τινων
ἐγκαλέσας τῇ πόλει τῶν Σκοτουσσαίων, ἐκάλεσεν
αὐτοὺς εἰς ἐκκλησίαν καὶ περιστήσας τοὺς μισθοφόρους
ἅπαντας ἀπέσφαξε, τὰ δὲ σώματα τῶν
τετελευτηκότων ῥίψας εἰς τὴν πρὸ τῶν τειχῶν
2τάφρον τὴν πόλιν διήρπασεν. Ἐπαμεινώνδας δ᾿ ὁ2
Θηβαῖος μετὰ δυνάμεως ἐμβαλὼν εἰς Πελοπόννησον




1γεγονέναι κρείττων] κρείττων εἶναι FJK.2δ᾿ ὁ P, δὲ Vulgate.158Book XV

waged against them he was accustomed to withdraw 368/7 b.c. in the hour of victory and accept defeat willingly, in order that he might not appear to have proved himself “better” than the stronger foe. For all that, however, he could not in the end by his chicanery outwit the destiny Fate had in store for him; on the contrary, though a wretched poet and though judged on this occasion in a competition at Athens,1 he defeated “better” poets than himself. So in verbal consistency with the decree of the oracle he met his death as a direct consequence of defeating “his betters.”
Dionysius the younger on his succession to the tyranny first gathered the populace in an assembly and urged them in appropriate words to maintain toward him the loyalty that passed to him with the heritage that he had received from his father; then, having buried his father with magnificent obsequies in the citadel by the gates called royal, he made secure for himself the administration of the government.
75. When Polyzelus was archon at Athens, anarchy 367/6 b.c. prevailed at Rome because of civil dissensions, and in Greece, Alexander, tyrant of Pherae in Thessaly, having lodged accusations about certain matters against the city of Scotussa,2 summoned its citizens to an assembly and, having surrounded them with mercenaries, slew them all, cast the bodies of the dead into the ditch in front of the walls, and plundered the city from end to end. Epameinondas, the Theban, entered the Peloponnese with an army, won over the

1Though Diodorus has just said above that Dionysius was
producing at Athens (§ 1), he seems by his repetition to wish
to stress the fact that the judgement was rendered by the
most critical and authoritative city of the time.2A Thessalian town between Pherae and Pharsalus. For this blood-bath see Plutarch, Pelopidas, 29. 4, 31. 1 and Pausanias, 6. 5. 2 f. (date given as 371/0, perhaps as a result of missing an Olympiad).159