Diodorus of Sicily

εἰς Συρακούσσας πανοίκιος· πένης δ᾿ ὢν
ἐδίδαξε τὸν Ἀγαθοκλέα τὴν κεραμευτικὴν τέχνην
ἔτι παῖδα τὴν ἡλικίαν ὄντα.
8Καθ᾿ ὃν δὴ χρόνον Τιμολέων μὲν ὁ Κορίνθιος
νικήσας τὴν ἐπὶ τῷ Κρημισσῷ2 μάχην τοὺς Καρχηδονίους
μετέδωκε τῆς ἐν Συρακούσσαις πολιτείας
πᾶσι τοῖς βουλομένοις. ὁ δὲ Καρκῖνος μετ᾿ Ἀγαθοκλέους
πολιτογραφηθεὶς καὶ μετὰ ταῦτα ὀλίγον
9βιώσας χρόνον ἐτελεύτησεν. ἡ δὲ μήτηρ ἀνέθηκεν
λιθίνην εἰκόνα τοῦ παιδὸς ἔν τινι τεμένει, πρὸς ἣν
μελισσῶν ἑσμὸς προσκαθίσας ἐκηροπλάστησεν ἐπὶ
τῶν ἰσχίων. τοῦ δὲ σημείου προσενεχθέντος τοῖς
περὶ ταῦτ᾿ ἀσχολουμένοις ἀπεφήναντο πάντες κατὰ
τὴν ἀκμὴν ἥξειν αὐτὸν εἰς μεγάλην ἐπιφάνειαν·
ὅπερ καὶ συνετελέσθη.
3. Δάμας γάρ τις τῶν ἐνδόξων ἀριθμούμενος ἐν
Συρακούσσαις ἐρωτικῶς διετέθη πρὸς τὸν Ἀγαθοκλέα
καὶ τὸ μὲν πρῶτον δαψιλῶς ἅπαντα χορηγῶν
αἴτιος ἐγένετο σύμμετρον αὐτὸν οὐσίαν συλλέξασθαι,
μετὰ ταῦτα αἱρεθεὶς ἐπ᾿ Ἀκράγαντα στρατηγός,
ἐπειδὴ τῶν χιλιάρχων τις ἀπέθανεν, τοῦτον
2εἰς τὸν ἐκείνου τόπον κατέστησεν. ὁ δὲ καὶ πρὸ
τῆς στρατείας μὲν ἦν πολύσεμνος διὰ τὸ μέγεθος
τῶν ὅλων· ἐπετήδευσε γὰρ ἐν ταῖς ἐξοπλισίαις3
φορεῖν πανοπλίαν τηλικαύτην τὸ μέγεθος ὥστε μηδένα
τῶν ἄλλων δύνασθαι ῥᾳδίως χρῆσθαι τῷ βάρει





1μετῴκησεν Wesseling: μετῴκισεν.2Κρημισσῷ RX, Κριμισσῷ F (Κρίμησος Plutarch, Timoleon, 25).3ἐξοπλισίαις F: ἐξοπλασίαις RX, Fischer.232Book XIX

his whole household. Since he was poor he taught 317 b.c. Agathocles the trade of pottery while he was still a boy.
At this time Timoleon the Corinthian, after having defeated the Carthagians in the battle at the Crimissus River, conferred Syracusan citizenship on all who wished.1 Carcinus was enrolled as a citizen together with Agathocles, and died after living only a short time longer. The mother dedicated a stone image of her son in a certain precinct, and a swarm of bees settled upon it and built their honeycomb about its hips. When this prodigy was reported to those who devoted themselves to such matters, all of them declared that at the prime of his life the boy would attain great fame; and this prophecy was fulfilled.
3. A certain Damas, who was counted among the notable men of Syracuse, fell in love with Agathocles and since in the beginning he supplied him lavishly with everything, was the cause of his accumulating a suitable property2; and thereafter, when Damas had been elected general against Acragas and one of his chiliarchs died, he appointed Agathocles in his place.3 Even before his military service Agathocles had been much respected on account of the great size of his armour, for in military reviews he was in the habit of wearing equipment so heavy that no one of the others was able to use it handily because of the



1This battle on the Crismissus (or Crimisus) River in
western Sicily was fought in 341. The general grant of
citizenship is placed after the battle by Diodorus (here and in Book 16. 82. 5), but some years before it by Plutarch (Timoleon, 23. 2). If Plutarch is correct, Polybius (see preceding note) may have confused the arrival in Syracuse and the grant of citizenship.2Cp. Polybius, 12. 15. 2. In Justin (22. 1. 12) the name of Agathocles’ benefactor is given as Damascon.3Here a “chiliarch” is a commander of a thousand, but cp. Book 18. 39. 7 and note. For the early military career of Agathocles cp. Justin, 22. 1. 7–16.233