Diodorus of Sicily

τῶν ὅπλων· πολὺ δ᾿ ἔτι μᾶλλον γενόμενος
χιλίαρχος περιεποιήσατο δόξαν, φιλοκίνδυνος μὲν
ὢν καὶ παράβολος ἐν ταῖς μάχαις, ἰταμὸς δὲ καὶ
πρόχειρος ἐν ταῖς δημηγορίαις. τοῦ δὲ Δάμαντος
νόσῳ τελευτήσαντος καὶ τὴν οὐσίαν καταλιπόντος
τῇ γυναικὶ ταύτην ἔγημε καὶ τῶν πλουσιωτάτων
εἷς ἠριθμεῖτο.
3Μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα Κροτωνιάταις πολιορκουμένοις
ὑπὸ Βρεττίων οἱ Συρακόσιοι δύναμιν ἁδρὰν ἔπεμψαν,
ἧς ἐστρατήγει μὲν μεθ᾿ ἑτέρων Ἄντανδρος
ὁ Ἀγαθοκλέους ἀδελφός, τῶν δ᾿ ὅλων εἶχε τὴν
ἡγεμονίαν Ἡρακλείδης καὶ Σώστρατος,1 ἄνδρες ἐν
ἐπιβουλαῖς καὶ φόνοις καῖ μεγάλοις ἀσεβήμασι
γεγονότες τὸν πλείω τοῦ βίου· περὶ ὧν τὰ κατὰ
4μέρος ἡ πρὸ ταύτης περιέχει βύβλος. συνεστρατεύετο
δ᾿ αὐτοῖς καὶ Ἀγαθοκλῆς, ἐγνωσμένος ὑπὸ
τοῦ δήμου καὶ τεταγμένος ἐπὶ χιλιαρχικῆς ἡγεμονίας,
ὃς μὲν πρῶτον ἐν ταῖς πρὸς τοὺς βαρβάρους
μάχαις γενόμενος κράτιστος ὑπὸ τῶν περὶ
Σώστρατον ἀφῃρέθη τὴν τῶν ἀριστείων τιμὴν διὰ
5τὸν φθόνον. ἐφ᾿ οἷς περιαλγὴς γενόμενος αὐτοὺς
διεγνωκότας2 ἐπιθέσθαι τυραννίδι κατηγόρησεν ἐν
τῷ δήμῳ. οὐ προσεχόντων δὲ τῶν Συρακοσίων
ταῖς διαβολαῖς οἱ μὲν περὶ Σώστρατον ἐδυνάστευσαν
τῆς πατρίδος μετὰ τὴν ἐκ Κρότωνος ἐπάνοδον.
4. Ὁ δ᾿ Ἀγαθοκλῆς ἀλλοτρίως ἔχων τὰ πρὸς





1Σώστρατος RX, Σωσίστρατος F (and so usually where the
name is found).2Kallenberg, followed by Fischer, adds ὡς before διεγνωκότας.234Book XIX

weight of the armour. When he became a chiliarch, 317 b.c. he gained even more fame since he was venturesome and daring in battle and bold and ready in haranguing the people. When Damas died of illness and left his property to his wife, Agathocles married her and was counted among the richest men.
Thereafter when the people of Croton were being besieged by the Bruttii, the Syracusans sent a strong force to their aid.1 Antandrus, the brother of Agathocles, was one of the generals of this army, but the commanders of the whole were Heracleides and Sostratus,2 men who had spent the greater part of their lives in plots, murders, and great impieties; their careers in detail are contained in the Book before this one.3 Agathocles also took part in that campaign with them, having been recognized for his ability by the people and assigned to the rank of chiliarch. Although he had distinguished himself at first in the battles with the barbarians, he was deprived of the award for his deeds of valour by Sostratus and his friends because of jealousy. Agathocles was deeply offended at them and denounced before the people their resolve to establish an autocratic government. As the people of Syracuse paid no attention to the charges, the cabal of Sostratus did gain control of their native city after the return from Croton.
4. Since Agathocles was hostile to them, he remained


1About 325.2It is disputed whether this Heracleides is the uncle of Agathocles mentioned above (chap. 2. 5). The identity is maintained by Lenschau (P.-W., Realencyclopädie, 8. 462, s.v. “Heracleides”), but tacitly denied by Niese (ibid. 1. 749, s.v. “Agathocles”) and by Cary (Cambridge Ancient History, 7. 618–619). The manuscripts of Diodorus support the spelling Sostratus for his colleague’s name; but many modern authors call him Sosistratus.3Book 18 in its present condition contains nothing at all about either Sicily or Italy (cp. chap. 10. 3).235