Diodorus of Sicily

βασιλεύων τῆς Μακεδονίας ἐτελεύτησεν ἄρξας ἔτη
εἴκοσι καὶ τέτταρα, υἱοὺς ἀπολιπὼν τρεῖς, Ἀλέξανδρον
καὶ Περδίκκαν καὶ Φίλιππον· διεδέξατο
δὲ τὴν βασιλείαν ὁ υἱὸς1 Ἀλέξανδρος καὶ ἦρξεν
4ἐνιαυτόν. ὁμοίως δὲ καὶ Ἀγησίπολις ὁ τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων
βασιλεὺς μετήλλαξεν ἄρξας ἐνιαυτόν, τὴν
δὲ ἀρχὴν διαδεξάμενος Κλεομένης ὁ ἀδελφὸς ἐβασίλευσεν
5ἔτη τριάκοντα καὶ τέτταρα.2 τρίτος δὲ
Ἰάσων ὁ Φεραῖος ἡγεμὼν ᾑρημένος τῆς Θετταλίας
καὶ δοκῶν ἐπιεικῶς ἄρχειν τῶν ὑποτεταγμένων,
ἐδολοφονήθη, ὡς μὲν Ἔφορος γέγραφεν, ὑπό τινων
ἑπτὰ νεανίσκων συνομοσαμένων δόξης ἕνεκα, ὡς
δ᾿ ἔνιοι γράφουσιν, ὑπὸ Πολυδώρου τἀδελφοῦ. οὗτος3
δὲ καὶ αὐτὸς διαδεξάμενος τὴν δυναστείαν
6ἦρξεν ἐνιαυτόν. Δοῦρις δ᾿ ὁ Σάμιος ὁ ἱστοριογράφος
τῆς τῶν Ἑλληνικῶν ἱστορίας ἐντεῦθεν
ἐποιήσατο τὴν ἀρχήν.
Ταῦτα μὲν οὖν ἐπράχθη κατὰ τοῦτον τὸν ἐνιαυτόν.
61. Ἐπ᾿ ἄρχοντος δ᾿ Ἀθήνησι Λυσιστράτου
παρὰ Ῥωμαίοις ἐγένετο στάσις, τῶν μὲν οἰομένων
δεῖν ὑπάτους, τῶν δὲ χιλιάρχους αἱρεῖσθαι. ἐπὶ
μὲν οὖν τινα χρόνον ἀναρχία τὴν στάσιν ὑπέλαβε,
μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα ἔδοξε χιλιάρχους αἱρεῖσθαι ἕξ· καὶ
κατεστάθησαν Λεύκιος Αἰμίλιος καὶ Γάιος Οὐεργίνιος4
καὶ Σερούιος5 Σουλπίκιος, πρὸς δὲ τούτοις
Λεύκιος Κοΐντιος καὶ Γάιος Κορνήλιος, ἔτι δὲ
2Γάιος Οὐαλέριος. ἐπὶ δὲ τούτων Πολύδωρος ὁ




1ὁ υἱὸς Dindorf: οὗτος AR, αὐτοῦ cet.2τριάκοντα καὶ τέτταρα] ἑξήκοντα Book 20. 29. 1.3οὗτος Wesseling: οὕτως PAL, οὕτω cet.4So MSS., except σουεργίνιος P, Οὐετούριος Rhodoman
(cp. Livy, 6. 32. 3).5Σερούοις P: Σερουίλιος Vulgate.118Book XV

died after a rule of twenty-four years, leaving 370/69 b.c. behind him three sons, Alexander, Perdiccas, and Philip. The son Alexander1 succeeded to the throne and ruled for one year. Likewise Agesipolis, king of the Lacedaemonians, died after ruling a year, the kingship going to Cleomenes his brother who succeeded to the throne and had a reign of thirty-four years.2 Thirdly, Jason of Pherae, who had been chosen ruler of Thessaly and was reputed to be governing his subjects with moderation, was assassinated,3 either, as Ephorus writes, by seven young men who conspired together for the repute it would bring, or, as some historians say, by his brother Polydorus. This Polydorus himself also, after succeeding to the position of leader, ruled for one year. Duris4 of Samos, the historian, began his History of the Greeks at this point.
These then were the events of this year.
61. When Lysistratus was archon at Athens, civil 369/8 b.c. strife arose among the Romans, one party thinking there should be consuls, others that military tribunes should be chosen. For a time then anarchy supervened on civil strife, later they decided to choose six military tribunes, and those elected were Lucius Aemilius, Gaius Verginius, Servius Sulpicius, Lucius Quintius, Gaius Cornelius, and Gaius Valerius. During their term of office Polydorus of Pherae the ruler






See chap. 67.4. The beginning of his reign is placed in the archonship of Phrasicleides 371/0 in the Marm. Par. 72.2This should be sixty years ten months. See note vol. x, p. 217 and Beloch, Griechische Geschichte2, 4, 2. 157.3See Xenophon, Hell. 6. 4. 31–32.4Duris carried his history at least to the death of Lysimachus
(FHG, 2. 468 and fr. 33).119