Diodorus of Sicily

δὲ τοὺς ταῖς εὑρησιλογίαις κατασοφιζομένους τὴν
δύναμιν τῆς πεπρωμένης ἐβλασφήμει.
5Μετ᾿ ὀλίγον δὲ ἄλλο σημεῖον αὐτῷ περὶ τῆς βασιλείας1
τὸ δαιμόνιον ἐπέστησε. βουλομένου γὰρ
αὐτοῦ θεάσασθαι τὴν περὶ τὴν Βαβυλῶνα2 λίμνην
καὶ πλέοντος μετὰ τῶν φίλων ἔν τισιν ἀκάτοις ἐφ᾿
ἡμέρας μέν τινας ἀποσχισθείσης τῆς νεὼς ἀπὸ τῶν
ἄλλων σκαφῶν ἐπλανήθη μόνος, ὥστε καὶ τὴν
6σωτηρίαν ἀπογνῶναι· ἔπειτα διά τινος αὐλῶνος
στενοῦ καὶ συμπεπυκασμένου δένδρεσι διαπλέοντος
καὶ τῶν μὲν ὑπερκειμένων, τοῦ δὲ διαδήματος ὑπὸ
τούτων ἀρθέντος καὶ πάλιν εἰς τὴν λίμνην πεσόντος
εἷς τῶν ἐρετῶν3 προσνηξάμενος καὶ βουλόμενος
ἀσφαλῶς σῶσαι τὸ διάδημα προσέθετο τῇ κεφαλῇ
7καὶ προσενήξατο τῷ πλοίῳ. τρεῖς δὲ ἡμέρας καὶ
τὰς ἴσας νύκτας διαπλανηθεὶς διεσώθη καὶ τὸ διάδημα
περιθέμενος ἀνελπίστως πάλιν τοῖς μάντεσι
προσανέφερε περὶ τῶν προσημαινομένων.
117. Τούτων δὲ παρακελευομένων4 θυσίας ἐπιτελεῖν
τοῖς θεοῖς μεγαλοπρεπεῖς μετὰ πάσης
σπουδῆς παρεκλήθη πρός τινα τῶν φίλων Μήδιον
τὸν Θετταλὸν ἐπὶ κῶμον ἐλθεῖν· κἀκεῖ πολὺν







1Possibly for τελευτῆς, as Fischer, or τοῦ βασιλέως τελευτῆς.2Βαβυλωνίαν R, perhaps rightly; the great swamp was
well to the south of Baoylon.3ὑπηρετῶν F.4πάλιν παρακελευομένων. X.464Book XVII

and generally railed at those who used specious 324/3 b.c. reasoning to argue away the power of Fate.
A little while later heaven sent him a second portent about his kingship.1 He had conceived the desire to see the great swamp of Babylonia and set sail with his friends in a number of skiffs.2 For some days his boat became separated from the others and he was lost and alone, fearing that he might never get out alive. As his craft was proceeding through a narrow channel where the reeds grew thickly and overhung the water, his diadem was caught and lifted from his head by one of them and then dropped into the swamp. One of the oarsmen swam after it and, wishing to return it safely, placed it on his head and so swam back to the boat. After three days and nights of wandering, Alexander found his way to safety just as he had again put on his diadem when this seemed beyond hope. Again he turned to the soothsayers for the meaning of all this.
117. They bade him sacrifice to the gods on a grand scale and with all speed, but he was then called away by Medius, the Thessalian, one of his Friends, to take part in a comus.3 There he drank much unmixed


1Or, perhaps, “about his death”; cp. note 1 above.2Arrian (7. 22) tells this story earlier than the one about
the throne, and gives various accounts about the incident of the lost diadem and its recovery; it was the other boats which became lost, but Alexander sent a pilot and rescued them.3Justin, 12. 13. 7. These events are described from the royal journal more circumstantially by Plutarch, Alexander, 75. 3, and Arrian, 7. 24. 4–25. 1. Medius belonged to a noble family of Larisa and had accompanied Alexander as a personal friend, not in a military capacity (Berve, Alexanderreich
2, no. 521). Aelian (Varia Historia, 3. 23) gives a day-by-day
account of Alexander’s drinking and resting during the last three weeks of his life, crediting this to Eumenes of Cardia, the keeper of the journal, but gives the month wrongly as Dius, See Addenda.465