Diodorus of Sicily
28. Ἐπ᾿ ἄρχοντος δ᾿ Ἀθήνησι Δι οτίμου Ῥωμαῖοι
κατέστησαν ὑπάτους Γάιον Μάρκιον καὶ
Γναῖον Μάλλιον. ἐπὶ δὲ τούτων Φιλόμηλος μὲν
προορώμενος τὸ μέγεθος τοῦ πολέμου μισθοφόρων
τε πλῆθος ἤθροιζε, τῶν τε Φωκέων τοὺς εὐθέτους
2κατέλεγεν εἰς τὴν στρατείαν. τοῦ δὲ πολέμου
προσδεομένου χρημάτων τῶν μὲν ἱερῶν ἀναθημάτων
ἀπείχετο, τοὺς δὲ Δελφοὺς εὐδαιμονίᾳ καὶ
πλούτῳ διαφέροντας ἐπράξατο πλῆθος χρημάτων
ἱκανὸν εἰς τοὺς τῶν ξένων μισθούς. κατασκευάσας
οὖν ἀξιόλογον δύναμιν προήγαγεν εἰς ὕπαιθρον καὶ
φανερὸς ἦν ἑτοίμως ἔχων διαγωνίζεσθαι πρὸς τοὺς
3ἀλλοτρίως διακειμένους τοῖς Φωκεῦσι. τῶν δὲ
Λοκρῶν στρατευσάντων ἐπ᾿ αὐτὸν ἐγένετο μάχη
περὶ τὰς Φαιδριάδας καλουμένας πέτρας, ἣν νικήσας
ὁ Φιλόμηλος πολλοὺς μὲν ἀνεῖλε τῶν πολεμίων
οὐκ ὀλίγους δ᾿ ἐζώγρησε, τινὰς δὲ κατὰ τῆς πέτρας
συνηνάγκασεν ἑαυτοὺς κατακρημνίσαι. μετὰ δὲ
τὴν μάχην ταύτην οἱ μὲν Φωκεῖς ἐπήρθησαν τοῖς
φρονήμασι διὰ τὴν εὐημερίαν, οἱ δὲ Λοκροὶ ταπεινωθέντες
πρέσβεις ἐξέπεμψαν εἰς τὰς Θήβας ἀξιοῦντες
τοὺς Βοιωτοὺς βοηθεῖν αὐτοῖς τε καὶ τῷ
4θεῷ. οἱ δὲ Βοιωτοὶ διά τε τὴν πρὸς τοὺς θεοὺς
εὐσέβειαν καὶ διὰ τὸ συμφέρειν αὐτοῖς τὰς τῶν
Ἀμφικτυόνων κρίσεις βεβαίας εἶναι πρός τε τοὺς
Θετταλοὺς ἐπρέσβευσαν καὶ τοὺς ἄλλους Ἀμφικτύονας
ἀξιοῦντες κοινῇ πολεμῆσαι τοῖς Φωκεῦσι.
ψηφισαμένων δὲ τῶν Ἀμφικτυόνων τὸν πρὸς
Φωκεῖς πόλεμον πολλὴ ταραχὴ καὶ διάστασις ἦν
καθ᾿ ὅλην τὴν Ἑλλάδα. οἱ μὲν γὰρ ἔκριναν
316Book XVI
28. When Diotimus was archon at Athens, the 354/3 b.c. Romans elected as consuls Gaius Marcius and Gnaeus Manlius. During their term of office Philomelus, foreseeing the magnitude of the war, began to gather a multitude of mercenaries and to select for active duty those of the Phocians who were fit. Although the war required additional funds, he kept his hands off the sacred dedications, but he did exact from the Delphians, who were exceptionally prosperous and wealthy, a sufficient sum of money to pay the mercenaries. Having accordingly prepared a large army, he led it into the open country and was obviously holding himself ready to join issue with any who were hostile to the Phocians. And when the Locrians took the field against him a battle was fought near the cliffs called Phaedriades,1 in which Philomelus won the victory, having slain many of the enemy and taken not a few alive, while some he forced to hurl themselves over the precipices. After this battle the Phocians were elated by their success, but the Locrians, being quite dejected, sent ambassadors to Thebes asking the Boeotians to come to their support and the god’s. The Boeotians because of their reverence for the gods and because of the advantage they gained if the decisions of the Amphictyons were enforced, sent embassies to the Thessalians and the other Amphictyons demanding that they make war in common against the Phocians. But when the Amphictyons voted the war against the Phocians much confusion and disagreement reigned throughout the length and breadth of Greece. For some decided to stand by the god and

1A semicircular range of rocks on Mt. Parnassus facing south, hence “Resplendent.” Aesop is said to have been precipitated from the eastern rock Hyampeia (see Suidas, s.v. Αἴσωπος).317