Diodorus of Sicily

συνηνάγκασε τοὺς Τυρρηνοὺς λῦσαι
τὴν τοῦ Σουτρίου πολιορκίαν.
36. Ἐν δὲ τῇ Ῥώμῃ κατὰ τοῦτον τὸν ἐνιαυτὸν
τιμητὰς εἴλοντο καὶ τούτων ὁ ἕτερος Ἄππιος
Κλαύδιος ὑπήκοον ἔχων τὸν συνάρχοντα Λεύκιον
Πλαύτιον1 πολλὰ τῶν πατρῴων νομίμων ἐκίνησε·
τῷ δήμῳ γὰρ τὸ κεχαρισμένον ποιῶν οὐδένα λόγον
ἐποιεῖτο τῆς συγκλήτου. καὶ πρῶτον μὲν τὸ καλούμενον
Ἄππιον ὕδωρ ἀπὸ σταδίων ὀγδοήκοντα κατήγαγεν
εἰς τὴν Ῥώμην καὶ πολλὰ τῶν δημοσίων
χρημάτων εἰς ταύτην τὴν κατασκευὴν ἀνήλωσεν
2ἄνευ δόγματος τῆς συγκλήτου· μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα τῆς
ἀφ᾿ ἑαυτοῦ κληθείσης Ἀππίας ὁδοῦ τὸ πλεῖον μέρος
λίθοις στερεοῖς κατέστρωσεν ἀπὸ Ῥώμης μέχρι
Καπύης, ὄντος τοῦ διαστήματος σταδίων πλειόνων
ἢ χιλίων, καὶ τῶν τόπων τοὺς μὲν ὑπερέχοντας
διασκάψας, τοὺς δὲ φαραγγώδεις ἢ κοίλους ἀναλήμμασιν
ἀξιολόγοις ἐξισώσας κατηνάλωσεν ἁπάσας
τὰς δημοσίας προσόδους, αὑτοῦ δὲ μνημεῖον
ἀθάνατον κατέλιπεν, εἰς κοινὴν εὐχρηστίαν φιλοτιμηθείς.
3κατέμιξε δὲ καὶ τὴν σύγκλητον, οὐ τοὺς
εὐγενεῖς καὶ προέχοντας τοῖς ἀξιώμασι προσγράφων
μόνον, ὡς ἦν ἔθος, ἀλλὰ πολλοὺς καὶ τῶν ἀπελευθέρων
υἱοὺς2 ἀνέμιξεν· ἐφ᾿ οἷς βαρέως ἔφερον οἱ
4καυχώμενοι ταῖς εὐγενείαις. ἔδωκε δὲ τοῖς πολίταις
καὶ τὴν ἐξουσίαν ἐν ὁποίᾳ τις βούλεται φυλῇ


1Πλαύτιον Rhodoman: Κλαύδιον.2υἱοὺς Oudendorp: ἐνίους. πολλοὺς <τῶν δυσγενῶν> καὶ τῶν
ἀπελευθέρων ἐνίους Wesseling. Reiske would add τῶν πολλῶν
or τοῦ πλήθους.236Book XX

Castola,1 he forced the Etruscans to raise the siege 309 b.c. of Sutrium.
36. In Rome in this year censors were elected,2 and one of them Appius Claudius, who had his colleague, Lucius Plautius, under his influence, changed many of the laws of the fathers; for since he was following a course of action pleasing to the people, he considered the Senate of no importance. In the first place he built the Appian Aqueduct, as it is called, from a distance of eighty stades3 to Rome, and spent a large sum of public money for this construction without a decree of the Senate. Next he paved with solid stone the greater part of the Appian Way, which was named for him, from Rome to Capua, the distance being more than a thousand stades.4 And since he dug through elevated places and levelled with noteworthy fills the ravines and valleys, he expended the entire revenue of the state but left behind a deathless monument to himself, having been ambitious in the public interest. He also mixed the Senate, enrolling not merely those who were of noble birth and superior rank as was the custom, but also including many sons of freedmen.5 For this reason those were incensed with him who boasted of their nobility. He also gave each citizen the right to be enrolled in whatever tribe





1Castola is unknown. Faesulae, Carsula, and Clusium have been suggested in its place.2Livy, 9. 29. 5, places the beginning of this censorship in the consulship of M. Valerius and P. Decius, i.e. 311 b.c. according to Diodorus, 312 b.c. according to the conventional Roman system; and in 9. 33–34 he has Appius retain the office contrary to law into the present year, 309 or 310 b.c.3About 9 miles.4About 115 miles.5Or, adding τοῦ πλήθους after πολλούς: “adding many of the plebeians and sons of freedmen.” Cp. Livy, 9. 46. 10–11.237