Diodorus of Sicily

ἀνήκεστον· ὡς δ᾿ οὐδεὶς αὐτοῖς προσεῖχεν, ἀπογνόντες
τὰς διαλύσεις ἐξέπεμψαν πρεσβευτὰς πρὸς
Πτολεμαῖον καὶ Λυσίμαχον καὶ Κάσανδρον, ἀξιοῦντες
βοηθεῖν, ὡς τῆς πόλεως προπολεμούσης1
2ὑπὲρ αὐτῶν. τῶν δ᾿ ἐν τῇ πόλει κατοικούντων
παροίκων καὶ ξένων δόντες ἐξουσίαν τοῖς βουλομένοις
συναγωνίζεσθαι, τοὺς λοιποὺς ἀχρήστους
ἐκ τῆς πόλεως ἐξέπεμψαν, ἅμα μὲν τῆς τῶν ἀναγκαίων
ἐνδείας προνοηθέντες, ἅμα δὲ καὶ τοῦ μηδένα
τῇ καταστάσει δυσχεραίνοντα γίνεσθαι τῆς πόλεως
προδότην. ἀριθμὸν δὲ ποιησάμενοι τῶν δυναμένων
ἀγωνίζεσθαι πολιτῶν μὲν εὗρον περὶ ἑξακισχιλίους,
3τῶν δὲ παροίκων καὶ ξένων εἰς χιλίους. ἐψηφίσαντο
δὲ καὶ τῶν δούλων τοὺς ἄνδρας ἀγαθοὺς
γενομένους ἐν τοῖς κινδύνοις ἀγοράσαντας παρὰ
τῶν δεσποτῶν ἐλευθέρους2 καὶ πολίτας εἶναι· ἔγραψαν
δὲ καὶ τῶν τελευτησάντων ἐν τῷ πολέμῳ τὰ
μὲν σώματα δημοσίᾳ θάπτεσθαι, τοὺς δὲ γονεῖς3
καὶ παῖδας τρέφεσθαι λαμβάνοντας τὴν χορηγίαν
ἀπὸ τοῦ κοινοῦ ταμιείου, καὶ τὰς μὲν παρθένους
δημοσίᾳ προικίζεσθαι, τοὺς δ᾿ υἱοὺς ἐν ἡλικίᾳ
γενομένους ἐν τῷ θεάτρῳ στεφανῶσαι τοῖς Διονυσίοις
4πανοπλίᾳ. διὰ δὲ τούτων ἐκκαλεσάμενοι τὰς
ἁπάντων προθυμίας εἰς τὸ τοὺς κινδύνους ὑπομένειν
εὐψύχως, ἐποιήσαντο καὶ τῶν ἄλλων τὴν ἐνδεχομένην
παρασκευήν. ὁμονοοῦντος γὰρ τοῦ πλήθους
οἱ μὲν εὔποροι χρήματ᾿ εἰσέφερον, οἱ δὲ τεχνῖται
τὰς αὑτῶν ἐπιστήμας παρείχοντο πρὸς τὴν τῶν

1προπολεμούσης Wesseling: προσπολεμούσης.2ἐλευθέρους Capps: ἐλευθεροῦν.3Fischer suggests the addition of καὶ γυναῖκας after γονεῖς, cp. Book 17. 11. 5.362Book XX

city; but as no one paid any heed to these, they gave 305 b.c. up hope of a truce and sent envoys to Ptolemy, Lysimachus, and Cassander, begging them to give aid and saying that the city was fighting the war on their behalf. As to the metics and aliens who dwelt in the city, to those who wished they gave permission to join them in the fighting, and the others who were of no service they sent forth from the city, partly as a precaution against scarcity of supplies, and partly that there might be no one to become dissatisfied with the situation and try to betray the city. When they made a count of those who were able to fight, they found that there were about six thousand citizens and as many as a thousand me tics and aliens. They voted also to buy from their masters any slaves who proved themselves brave men in the battle, and to emancipate and enfranchise them. And they also wrote another decree, that the bodies of those who fell in the war should be given public burial and, further, that their parents and children should be maintained, receiving their support from the public treasury, that their unmarried daughters should be given dowries at the public cost, and that their sons on reaching manhood should be crowned in the theatre at the Dionysia and given a full suit of armour. When by these measures they had roused the spirits of all to endure the battles with courage, they also made what preparation was possible in regard to other matters. Since the whole people was of one mind, the rich contributed money, the craftsmen gave their skilled services for the preparation of the arms, and



363