Diodorus of Sicily

τῆς παρανομίας ὕστερον ὑπ᾿ Ἀντιπάτρου καταπολεμηθεῖσαι
τὴν ἡγεμονίαν ἅμα καὶ τὴν ἐλευθερίαν
2ἀπέβαλον. αἱ δὲ τῶν ἐν Φωκεῦσιν ἡγεμόνων γυναῖκες
περιθέμεναι τοὺς χρυσοῦς ἐκ Δελφῶν ὅρμους
οἰκείας τῆς ἀσεβείας τιμωρίας ἔτυχον· ἡ μὲν γὰρ
τὸν τῆς Ἑλένης γεγενημένον φορέσασα εἰς ἑταιρικὴν
αἰσχύνην ἐνέπεσε καὶ τὸ κάλλος προέβαλε
τοῖς ἐξυβρίζειν προαιρουμένοις, ἡ δὲ τὸν τῆς Ἐριφύλης
περιθεμένη τῆς οἰκίας ὑπὸ τοῦ πρεσβυτάτου
τῶν υἱῶν ὑπὸ μανίας ἐμπυρισθείσης μετὰ ταύτης
ζῶσα κατεφλέχθη. οἱ μὲν οὖν τοῦ δαιμονίου καταφρονεῖν
τολμήσαντες τὸν εἰρημένον τρόπον ὑπὸ τῶν
3θεῶν τιμωρίας ἠξιώθησαν, ὁ δὲ τῷ1 μαντείῳ βοηθήσας
Φίλιππος ἀπὸ τούτων τῶν χρόνων ἀεὶ μᾶλλον
αὐξόμενος τὸ τελευταῖον διὰ τὴν εἰς τὸ θεῖον
εὐσέβειαν ἡγεμὼν ἀπεδείχθη τῆς Ἑλλάδος πάσης
καὶ μεγίστην βασιλείαν τῶν κατὰ τὴν Εὐρώπην
περιεποιήσατο.
Ἡμεῖς δὲ ἀρκούντως διεληλυθότες τὸν ἱερὸν
πόλεμον ἐπάνιμεν ἐπὶ τὰς ἑτερογενεῖς πράξεις.
65. Κατὰ γὰρ τὴν Σικελίαν Συρακόσιοι στασιάζοντες
πρὸς ἀλλήλους καὶ τυραννίσι πολλαῖς καὶ
ποικίλαις δουλεύειν ἀναγκαζόμενοι πρέσβεις ἐξέπεμψαν
εἰς Κόρινθον, ἀξιοῦντες αὐτοῖς ἀποστεῖλαι
στρατηγὸν τὸν ἐπιμελησόμενον τῆς πόλεως καὶ
καταλύσοντα τὴν τῶν τυραννεῖν ἐπιβαλομένων πλεονεξίαν.
2οἱ δὲ κρίνοντες δίκαιον εἶναι τοῖς ἀπογόνοις



1τούτῳ before τῷ deleted by Dindorf.416Book XVI

in the outrage were later defeated in war by Antipater,1 346/5 b.c. and lost at one and the same time their leadership and their freedom. The wives of the Phocian commanders who had worn the gold necklaces taken from Delphi met with punishment befitting their impiety. For one of them who had worn the chain which had belonged to Helen of Troy sank to the shameful life of a courtesan and flung her beauty before any who chose wantonly to abuse it, and another, who put on the necklace of Eriphylê,2 had her house set on fire by her eldest son in a fit of madness and was burned alive in it. Thus those who had the effrontery to flout the deity met just retribution in the manner I have described at the hands of the gods, while Philip who rallied to the support of the oracle added continually to his strength from that time on and finally because of his reverence for the gods was appointed commander of all Hellas and acquired for himself the largest kingdom in Europe.
Now that we have reported in sufficient detail the events of the Sacred War, we shall return to events of a different nature.
65. In Sicily3 the Syracusans, who were engaged in civil strife and were forced to live as slaves under many varied tyrannies, sent ambassadors to Corinth with the request that the Corinthians should dispatch to them as general a man who would administer their city and curb the ambitions of those who aimed to become tyrants. The Corinthians, concluding that it
 


1Presumably refers to Antipater’s invasion of the Peloponnese
and the defeat of Agis, cp. Book 17. 63. 1–3 and
73. 5–6, and also to the defeat of Athens after the Lamian
War, cp. Book 18. 18. 1–6.2Wife of Amphiaraüs. She was bribed by a necklace given her by Polyneices to induce her husband to take part in the expedition of the Seven against Thebes. Amphiaraüs met his death and she was slain in revenge by her son Alcmaeon.3Last mentioned chap. 45. 9.417