Diodorus of Sicily

στρατοπέδου διαβὰς ἐκ τῆς Εὐρώπης εἰς τὴν Ἀσίαν
Λαμψακηνοὺς μὲν καὶ Παριανοὺς ἑκουσίως προσθεμένους
ἀφῆκεν ἐλευθέρους, Σίγειον δὲ ἐκπολιορκήσας
φρουρὰν παρεισήγαγε. μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα
Πρεπελάῳ μὲν τῷ στρατηγῷ δοὺς πεζοὺς ἑξακισχιλίους,
ἱππεῖς δὲ χιλίους ἐξέπεμψε προσαξόμενον
τὰς πόλεις τάς τε κατὰ τὴν Αἰολίδα καὶ τὴν Ἰωνίαν,
αὐτὸς δὲ τὸ μὲν πρῶτον ἐπεχείρησε πολιορκεῖν τὴν
Ἄβυδον καὶ βέλη καὶ μηχανὰς καὶ τἄλλα παρεσκευάζετο·
3ἐπεὶ δὲ κατὰ θάλατταν ἦλθε τοῖς
πολιορκουμένοις στρατιωτῶν πλῆθος παρὰ Δημητρίου
τὸ δυνάμενον τὴν ἀσφάλειαν παρέχεσθαι τῇ
πόλει, ταύτης μὲν τῆς ἐπιβολῆς ἀπέστη, τὴν δ᾿ ἐφ᾿
Ἑλλησπόντῳ Φρυγίαν προσαγαγόμενος καὶ Σύνναδα1
πόλιν ἔχουσαν ἀποσκευὰς μεγάλας βασιλικὰς
4ἐπολιόρκησεν. ὅτε δὴ καὶ Δόκιμον τὸν Ἀντιγόνου
στρατηγὸν πείσας κοινοπραγεῖν τά τε Σύνναδα
παρέλαβε διὰ τούτου καὶ τῶν ὀχυρωμάτων ἔνια
τῶν ἐχόντων τὰ βασιλικὰ χρήματα. ὁ δ᾿ ἐπὶ τῆς
Αἰολίδος καὶ τῆς Ἰωνίας πεμφθεὶς ὑπὸ Λυσιμάχου
στρατηγὸς Πρεπέλαος Ἀδραμυττίου μὲν ἐκυρίευσεν
ἐν παρόδῳ, τὴν δ᾿ Ἔφεσον πολιορκήσας καὶ καταπληξάμενος
τοὺς ἔνδον παρέλαβε τὴν πόλιν. καὶ
τοὺς μὲν ἐγκαταληφθέντας τῶν Ῥοδίων ἑκατὸν
ὁμήρους ἀπέστειλεν εἰς τὴν πατρίδα, τοὺς δ᾿ Ἐφεσίους
ἀφῆκε,2 τὰς δὲ ναῦς τὰς ἐν τῷ λιμένι πάσας
ἐνέπρησε διὰ τὸ θαλασσοκρατεῖν τοὺς πολεμίους

1Fischer in apparatus suggests reading καὶ <ἐπὶ τὴν ἄνω
Φρυγίαν προάγων> Σύνναδα. . . . Cp. note on translation.2<ἐλευθέρους> ἀφῆκε Reiske; <ὑποσπόνδους> ἀφῆκε Hertlein. Fischer.426Book XX

Lysimachus with his army crossed from Europe to 302 b.c. Asia, and since the inhabitants of Lampsacus and Parium came over to him willingly, he left them free, but when he took Sigeum by force, he installed a garrison there. Next, giving his general Prepelaüs six thousand foot-soldiers and a thousand horse, he sent him to win over the cities throughout Aeolis and Ionia; as for himself, he first attempted to invest Abydus and set about preparing missiles and engines and the other equipment; but when there arrived by sea to assist the besieged a large body of soldiers sent by Demetrius, a force sufficient to secure the safety of the city, he gave up this attempt and won over Hellespontine Phrygia, and also laid siege to the city of Synnada,1 which possessed a great royal treasure. It was at this very time that he even persuaded Docimus, the general of Antigonus, to make common cause with him, and by his aid he took Synnada and also some of the strongholds that held the royal wealth. Prepelaüs, the general who had been sent by Lysimachus to Aeolis and Ionia, mastered Adramyttium as he passed by, and then, laying siege to Ephesus and frightening its inhabitants, he took the city. The hundred Rhodian hostages2 whom he found there he sent back to their native land; and he left the Ephesians free but burned all the ships in the harbour, since the enemy controlled the sea




1Since Synnada is not in Hellespontine Phrygia, we may suppose either an error on Diodorus’ part or the loss of some such words as those suggested by Fischer: “and then advancing into Upper Phrygia, he laid siege to Synnada.”2Cp. chap. 99. 3.427