Diodorus of Sicily

Σούσων καὶ διαβὰς τὸν Τίγριν ἐν ταῖς Κάραις
4καλουμέναις κώμαις κατεστρατοπέδευσεν. ἑξῆς δ᾿
ἐν ἡμέραις τέτταρσι τὴν Σιττακινὴν1 διανύσας ἧκεν
εἰς τὰ καλούμενα Σάμβανα. ἐνταῦθα δὲ μείνας
ἡμέρας ἑπτὰ καὶ προσαναλαβὼν τὴν δύναμιν τριταῖος
εἰς τοὺς Κέλωνας προσαγορευομένους ἧκεν,
ἐν ᾧ μέχρι νῦν διαμένει γένος Βοιώτιον, κατὰ μὲν
τὴν Ξέρξου στρατείαν ἀνάστατον γεγονός, μεμνημένον
5δ᾿ ἔτι τῶν πατρίων νόμων· ὄντες γὰρ οὗτοι
δίφωνοι τῇ μὲν ἑτέρᾳ διαλέκτῳ ἐξωμοιώθησαν
τοῖς ἐγχωρίοις, τῇ δ᾿ ἑτέρᾳ πλείστας τῶν Ἑλληνικῶν
λέξεων διετήρουν καὶ τῶν ἐπιτηδευμάτων
ἔνια διεφύλαττον.
Τέλος δὲ προσμείνας ἡμέρας . . .2 ἀνέζευξε καὶ
παρεγκλίνας τὴν ὑποκειμένην ὁδὸν θέας ἕνεκεν
ἦλθεν εἰς τὴν ὀνομαζομένην Βαγιστάνην, θεοπρεπεστάτην
τε χώραν οὖσαν καὶ πλήρη καρπίμων
δένδρων καὶ τῶν ἄλλων ἁπάντων τῶν πρὸς ἀπόλαυσιν
6ἀνηκόντων. μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα παρελθὼν εἴς
τινα χώραν δυναμένην ἐκτρέφειν ἀγέλας παμπληθεῖς
ἵππων, ἐν ᾗ τὸ παλαιὸν ἔφασαν ἑκκαίδεκα
μυριάδας ἵππων γεγονέναι φορβάδων, κατὰ δὲ τὴν
Ἀλεξάνδρου παρουσίαν ἓξ μόναι μυριάδες ἠριθμήθησαν,
ἐνταῦθα διαμείνας ἡμέρας τριάκοντα ἑβδομαῖος




1Σίτταν RX; Σίττα F, but cp. chap. 65. 2. The correction
was made by Wesseling.2A numeral has dropped out here.442Book XVII

crossed the Tigris, and encamped in the villages 325/4 b.c. called Carae. Thence for four days he marched through Sittacenê and came to the place called Sambana.1 There he remained seven days and, proceeding with the army, came on the third day to the Celones, as they are called. There dwells here down to our time a settlement of Boeotians who were moved in the time of Xerxes’s campaign, but still have not forgotten their ancestral customs. They are bilingual and speak like the natives in the one language, while in the other they preserve most of the Greek vocabulary, and they maintain some Greek practices.2
After a stay of some days he resumed his march at length and diverging from the main road3 for the purpose of sight-seeing he entered the region called Bagistanê, a magnificent country covered with fruit trees and rich in everything which makes for good living. Next he came to a land which could support enormous herds of horses, where of old they say that there were one hundred and sixty thousand horses grazing, but at the time of Alexander’s visit there were counted only sixty thousand.4 After a stay of thirty days he resumed the march and on the seventh




1Diodorus’s topography is confused. His tradition (shared
by Curtius) does not place the mutiny at Opis, as does Arrian;
hence Alexander is still at Susa. The “Carian” villages
were in Babylonia (Book 19. 12. 1) and so on the right bank
of the Tigris; Sittacenê was on the left bank (chap. 65. 2).
The location of Sambana is unknown. Perhaps Alexander crossed the Tigris twice. By “Tigris” in the text is not meant the Pasitigris (chap. 67. 1), which was south-east of Susa; the city was on the Choaspes and Eulaeus Rivers (Strabo, 15. 3. 4. 728).2These are probably the Eretrians whom Herodotus mentions (6. 119) as having been carried off by Xerxes, although he places them nearer to Susa. The place is mentioned again, Book 19. 19.2. In their tenacious Hellenism, they anticipated the settlers of the Hellenistic period (cp. F. Grosso, Rivista di Filologia Classica, 36 (1958), 350–375).3The age-old road from Baghdad to Hamadan, the main route from Mesopotamia to Iran.4This was Nysa. Arrian (7. 13. 1) gives slightly different figures: formerly 150,000 mares, now 50,000.443