Diodorus of Sicily

παρεκάλει τὸν Σέλευκον βοηθεῖν αὐτῷ
4καὶ κοινωνεῖν τῶν αὐτῶν ἐλπίδων. διὰ δὴ ταύτας
τὰς αἰτίας τῶν ἄνω σατραπῶν συνηθροικότων εἰς
τὸ αὐτὸ τὰ στρατόπεδα παρῆσαν οἱ παρ᾿ Εὐμενοῦς
βυβλιαφόροι πρὸς ἑτοίμας τὰς δυνάμεις. ἦν δὲ τῶν
ἡγεμόνων ἐπιφανέστατος μὲν καὶ κοινῷ δόγματι
πάντων τὴν στρατηγίαν παραλαβὼν Πευκέστης,
γεγενημένος Ἀλεξάνδρου σωματοφύλαξ καὶ προηγμένος
5ὑπὸ τοῦ βασιλέως δι᾿ ἀνδρείαν. σατραπείαν
δ᾿ εἶχεν ἔτη πλείονα τῆς Περσίδος καὶ μεγάλης
ἀποδοχῆς ἐτύγχανε παρὰ τοῖς ἐγχωρίοις. δι᾿ ἃς
αἰτίας φασὶ καὶ τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον αὐτῷ μόνῳ
Μακεδόνων συγχωρῆσαι Περσικὴν φορεῖν στολήν,
χαρίζεσθαι βουλόμενον τοῖς Πέρσαις καὶ διὰ τούτου
νομίζοντα κατὰ πάνθ᾿ ἕξειν τὸ ἔθνος ὑπήκοον.
εἶχε δὲ τότε Πέρσας τοξότας μὲν καὶ σφενδονήτας
μυρίους, τοὺς δὲ εἰς τὴν Μακεδονικὴν τάξιν
καθοπλισμένους παντοδαποὺς τρισχιλίους, ἱππεῖς
δ᾿ Ἕλληνας μὲν καὶ Θρᾷκας ἑξακοσίους, Πέρσας
6δὲ πλείους τῶν τετρακοσίων. Τληπόλεμος1 δ᾿ ὁ
Μακεδών, Καρμανίας σατράπης ἀποδεδειγμένος,
εἶχε πεζοὺς μὲν χιλίους πεντακοσίους, ἱππεῖς δ᾿
ἑπτακοσίους. καὶ Σιβύρτιος μὲν τῆς Ἀραχωσίας
ἡγούμενος παρείχετο πεζοὺς μὲν χιλίους, ἱππεῖς
δὲ δέκα πρὸς τοῖς ἑξακοσίοις,2 Ἀνδρόβαζος δ᾿ ἐκ
Παροπανισαδῶν, τοῦ Ὀξυάρτου κυριεύοντος τῆς
σατραπείας, ἀπέσταλτο μετὰ πεζῶν μὲν χιλίων καὶ




1Τληπόλεμος Wesseling, cp. Books 18. 39. 6; 19. 28. 3:
Πολέμων.2ἑξακοσίοις Reuss: ἑκατὸν ἕξ.266Book XIX

Seleucus to aid him and to share in his expectations. 317 b.c. So, since the upper satraps had for this reason concentrated their armies in a single place, the couriers from Eumenes found the forces ready. The most eminent of the commanders and the one who by common consent had assumed command of all the forces was Peucestes, who had been a Bodyguard of Alexander and had been promoted by the king because of his courage. He had held the satrapy of Persia for many years and had gained great favour with the inhabitants.1 They say that for this reason Alexander permitted him alone of the Macedonians to wear the Persian raiment, wishing to please the Persians and believing that through Peucestes he could keep the nation in all respects obedient. At this time Peucestes had ten thousand Persian archers and slingers,2 three thousand men of every origin equipped for service in the Macedonian array, six hundred Greek and Thracian cavalry, and more than four hundred Persian horsemen. Tlepolemus3 the Macedonian, who had been appointed satrap of Carmania, had one thousand five hundred foot soldiers and seven hundred mounted men. Sibyrtius, the commander of Arachosia,4 brought a thousand foot and six hundred and ten horse. Androbazus had been dispatched from Paropanisadae, of which satrapy Oxyartes was governor, with twelve hundred infantry and four hundred




1He was originally appointed to this satrapy by Alexander (Arrian, Anabasis, 6. 30. 2–3) and was continued in office by Perdiccas and by Antipater (Book 18. 3. 3, 39. 6).2Cp. Book 17. 110. 2.3Cp. the critical note.4He had originally been appointed by Alexander (Arrian, Anabasis, 6. 27. 1) and confirmed by Perdiccas (Book 18. 3. 3) and by Antipater (Arrian, FGrH, 156. 9. 36; but his name is omitted in Book 18. 39. 6).267