Diodorus of Sicily

Φεραῖος ὁ τῶν Θετταλῶν ἄρξας ὑπὸ Ἀλεξάνδρου
τοῦ ἀδελφιδοῦ1 ἀνῃρέθη φαρμάκῳ προκληθεὶς εἰς
μέθην· τὴν δὲ δυναστείαν διαδεξάμενος Ἀλέξανδρος
ὁ ἀδελφιδοῦς2 ἦρξεν ἔτη ἕνδεκα. οὗτος δὲ παρανόμως
καὶ βιαίως κτησάμενος τὴν δυναστείαν, ἀκολούθως
ταύτῃ τῇ προαιρέσει διῴκει τὰ κατὰ τὴν
ἀρχήν. τῶν γὰρ πρὸ αὐτοῦ δυναστῶν ἐπιεικῶς
προσφερομένων τοῖς πλήθεσι καὶ διὰ τοῦτ᾿ ἀγαπωμένων,
οὗτος βιαίως καὶ χαλεπῶς ἄρχων ἐμισεῖτο.
3διὸ καὶ τὴν παρανομίαν φοβηθέντες τῶν Λαρισσαίων
τινές, οἱ δι᾿ εὐγένειαν Ἀλευάδαι προσαγορευόμενοι,
συνέθεντο πρὸς ἀλλήλους καταλῦσαι
τὴν δυναστείαν. ἀπελθόντες δ᾿ ἐκ Λαρίσσης εἰς
Μακεδονίαν ἔπεισαν Ἀλέξανδρον τὸν βασιλέα συγκαταλῦσαι
4τὸν τύραννον. τούτων δὲ περὶ ταῦτα
διατριβόντων, ὁ Φεραῖος Ἀλέξανδρος πυθόμενος
τὴν καθ᾿ ἑαυτοῦ παρασκευήν, κατέλεγε τοὺς εἰς τὴν
στρατείαν εὐθέτους, διανοούμενος ἐν τῇ Μακεδονίᾳ
συστήσασθαι τὴν μάχην. ὁ δὲ τῶν Μακεδόνων
βασιλεύς, ἔχων μεθ᾿ ἑαυτοῦ τοὺς ἐκ Λαρίσσης
φυγάδας, φθάσας τοὺς πολεμίους ἧκε μετὰ τῆς
δυνάμεως εἰς τὴν Λάρισσαν· παρεισαχθεὶς δ᾿ ὑπὸ
τῶν Λαρισσαίων ἐντὸς τοῦ τείχους ἐκράτησε τῆς
5πόλεως πλὴν τῆς ἄκρας. μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα τήν τε
ἄκραν ἐξεπολιόρκησε3 καὶ Κραννῶνα πόλιν προσαγαγόμενος
ὡμολόγησε μὲν τοῖς Θετταλοῖς ἀποδώσειν
τὰς πόλεις, καταφρονήσας δὲ τῆς δόξης, καὶ





1ἀδελφίδου P: ἀδελφοῦ Vulgate.2ἀδελφιδοῦς Wesseling: ἀδελφὸς.3ἐξεπολιόρκησε Hertlein: ἐπολιόρκησε.120Book XV

of Thessaly was poisoned by Alexander1 his nephew, 369/8 b.c. who had challenged him to a drinking bout, and the nephew Alexander succeeded to the rule as overlord and held it for eleven years. Having acquired the rule illegally and by force, he administered it consistently with the policy he had chosen to follow. For while the rulers before him had treated the peoples with moderation and were therefore loved, he was hated for his violent and severe rule.2 Accordingly, in fear of his lawlessness, some Larissaeans, called Aleuadae3 because of their noble descent, conspired together to overthrow the overlordship. Journeying from Larissa to Macedonia, they prevailed upon the King Alexander to join them in overthrowing the tyrant. But while they were occupied with these matters, Alexander of Pherae, learning of the preparations against him, gathered such men as were conveniently situated for the campaign, intending to give battle in Macedonia. But the Macedonian king, accompanied by refugees from Larissa, anticipated the enemy by invading Larissa with the army, and having been secretly admitted by the Larissaeans within the fortifications, he mastered the city with the exception of the citadel. Later he took the citadel by siege, and, having also won the city of Crannon, at first covenanted to restore the cities to the Thessalians, but then, in contempt of public



1According to Xenophon (Hell. 6. 4. 33), Polydorus and
Polyphron, brothers of Jason, succeeded Jason; Polyphron slew Polydorus and was himself slain by Alexander, son of Polydorus, the next year (ibid. 34). For Alexander’s death see Book 16. 14. 1.2Xenophon attests the cruel character of his rule (l.c. 35 ff.).3Supposedly descended from Aleuas, a Heraclid, the Aleuadae formed two branches: the Aleuadae of Larissa and the Scopadae of Crannon. They were the great aristocrats of Thessalian society.121