Diodorus of Sicily

μὲν υἱόν, ψυχικοῖς δὲ πάθεσι συνεχόμενον
ἀνιάτοις προῆγεν ἐπὶ τὴν βασιλείαν· οἱ δὲ μέγιστον
ἔχοντες ἀξίωμα τῶν φίλων καὶ σωματοφυλάκων
συνεδρεύσαντες καὶ προσλαβόμενοι τὸ τῶν ἱππέων
τῶν ἑταίρων ὀνομαζομένων σύστημα τὸ μὲν πρῶτον
διαγωνίζεσθαι τοῖς ὅπλοις πρὸς τὴν φάλαγγα διέγνωσαν
καὶ πρέσβεις ἀπέστειλαν πρὸς τοὺς πεζοὺς
ἐκ τῶν ἀξίωμα ἐχόντων ἀνδρῶν, ὧν ἦν ἐπιφανέστατος
Μελέαγρος, ἀξιοῦντες πειθαρχεῖν αὐτοῖς.
3ὁ δὲ Μελέαγρος ὡς ἧκεν πρὸς τοὺς1 φαλαγγίτας,
τῆς μὲν πρεσβείας οὐδεμίαν ἐποιήσατο μνείαν,
τοὐναντίον δ᾿ ἐπαινέσας αὐτοὺς ἐπὶ τοῖς δεδογμένοις
παρώξυνε κατὰ τῶν ἐναντιουμένων. διόπερ
οἱ Μακεδόνες ἡγεμόνα καταστήσαντες ἑαυτῶν τὸν
Μελέαγρον προῆγον πρὸς τοὺς ἀντιλέγοντας μετὰ
4τῶν ὅπλων. τῶν δὲ σωματοφυλάκων ἀποχωρησάντων
ἐκ τῆς Βαβυλῶνος καὶ παρασκευαζομένων
εἰς πόλεμον οἱ χαριέστατοι τῶν ἀνδρῶν ἔπεισαν
αὐτοὺς ὁμονοῆσαι. εὐθὺ δὲ βασιλέα κατέστησαν
τὸν Φιλίππου υἱὸν Ἀρριδαῖον καὶ μετωνόμασαν
Φίλιππον, ἐπιμελητὴν δὲ τῆς βασιλείας Περδίκκαν,
ᾧ καὶ ὁ βασιλεὺς τὸν δακτύλιον τελευτῶν δεδώκει,
τοὺς δὲ ἀξιολογωτάτους τῶν φίλων καὶ σωματοφυλάκων
παραλαβεῖν τὰς σατραπείας καὶ ὑπακούειν
τῷ τε βασιλεῖ καὶ τῷ Περδίκκᾳ.
3. Οὗτος δὲ παραλαβὼν τὴν τῶν ὅλων ἡγεμονίαν



1πεζοὺς ἐκ τῶν ἀξίωμα ἐχόντων ἀνδρῶν ὧν ἦν ἐπιφανέστατος
after τοὺς deleted by Wesseling.14Book XVIII

son of Philip, for the kingship, although he was 323 b.c. afflicted with an incurable mental illness.1 The most influential of the Friends and of the Bodyguard, however, taking counsel together and joining to themselves the corps of horsemen known as the Companions, at first decided to take up arms against the phalanx and sent to the infantry envoys chosen from men of rank, of whom the most prominent was Meleager, demanding submission to their orders. Meleager, however, when he came to the men of the phalanx, made no mention of his mission but, on the contrary, praised them for the resolution that they had taken and sharpened their anger against their opponents. As a result the Macedonians made Meleager their leader and advanced under arms against those who disagreed with them; but when the Bodyguard had withdrawn from Babylon and was making ready for war, the men most inclined toward conciliation persuaded the parties to come to an agreement. Straightway they made Arrhidaeus, son of Philip, their king and changed his name to Philip; Perdiccas, to whom the king had given his ring as he died, they made regent of the kingdom2; and they decided that the most important of the Friends and of the Bodyguard should take over the satrapies and obey the king and Perdiccas.
3. After Perdiccas had assumed the supreme command

1According to Plutarch (Alexander, 77. 5), Arrhidaeus’
mother was an obscure woman named Philinna, and his own
mental deficiency was due to a drug given him by Olympais.2Perdiccas did in fact act as sole regent, but by the terms of the settlement the power was divided between him and Craterus, and Meleager was made Perdiccas’ lieutenant (Dexippus, FGrH, 100. 8. 4; Arrian, FGrH, 156. 1. 1–3: Justin, 13. 4. 5). Diodorus omits any reference to the expected son of Roxanê, who was to share the throne with Arrhidaeus, but beginning with chapter 18. 6 he regularly speaks of the kings rather than of the king.15