Diodorus of Sicily

μόγις1 ψαύειν τῆς γῆς μικρὸν ἀπολείποντας·
εὐθὺς οὖν ὁ μὲν ἵππος βουλόμενος στηρίζεσθαι τοῖς
ἐμπροσθίοις διεπονεῖτο τῷ τε σώματι παντὶ καὶ
τοῖς σκέλεσι, συμπασχόντων ἁπάντων τῶν κατὰ
τὸν ὄγκον μελῶν· τοιαύτης δὲ γινομένης κινήσεως
ἱδρώς τε πολὺς ἐκ τοῦ σώματος ἐξεχεῖτο καὶ τῇ
τῶν πόνων ὑπερβολῇ τὴν ἀκρότητα τῶν γυμνασίων
5τοῖς ζῴοις περιεποιεῖτο. τοῖς δὲ στρατιώταις
ἅπασι τὰς αὐτὰς τροφὰς παρείχετο, μετέχων αὐτὸς
τῆς λιτότητος, καὶ διὰ τῆς ὁμοίας συμπεριφορᾶς
πολλὴν εὔνοιαν ἑαυτῷ, τοῖς δὲ συμπεφευγόσι πᾶσιν
ὁμόνοιαν συγκατεσκεύασε. καὶ τὰ μὲν κατὰ τὸν
Εὐμενῆ καὶ τοὺς συμπεφευγότας εἰς τὴν πέτραν ἐν
τούτοις ἦν.
43. Κατὰ δὲ τὴν Αἴγυπτον Πτολεμαῖος παραδόξως
ἀποτετριμμένος τόν τε Περδίκκαν καὶ τὰς
βασιλικὰς δυνάμεις τὴν μὲν Αἴγυπτον ὡσανεί τινα2
δορίκτητον εἶχεν. ὁρῶν δὲ τήν τε Φοινίκην καὶ
τὴν Κοίλην ὀνομαζομένην Συρίαν εὐφυῶς κειμένας
κατὰ τῆς Αἰγύπτου πολλὴν εἰσεφέρετο σπουδὴν
2κυριεῦσαι τούτων τῶν τόπων.3 ἐξαπέστειλεν οὖν
τὴν ἱκανὴν δύναμιν καὶ στρατηγόν, ἕνα τῶν φίλων
προχειρισάμενος, Νικάνορα. οὗτος δὲ στρατεύσας
εἰς τὴν Συρίαν Λαομέδοντα μὲν τὸν σατράπην ἐζώγρησε,
τὴν δὲ Συρίαν ἅπασαν ἐχειρώσατο. ὁμοίως
δὲ καὶ τὰς κατὰ τὴν Φοινίκην πόλεις προσαγαγόμενος
καὶ ποιήσας ἐμφρούρους ἐπανῆλθεν εἰς τὴν
Αἴγυπτον, σύντομον τὴν στρατείαν καὶ πρακτικὴν
πεποιημένος.
44. Ἐπ᾿ ἄρχοντος δ᾿ Ἀθήνησιν Ἀπολλοδώρου


1μόγις Dindorf, μόνον Wurm: μόνοις.2Nitsche followed by Fischer adds βασιλείαν after τινα.3τόπων Dindorf, cp. Book 19. 44. 5: πόλεων.132Book XVIII

feet with their forefeet just clearing the ground. At 320 b.c. once each horse, in an effort to find footing for its forefeet, began to struggle with its whole body and with its legs, all its members sharing in the exertion. At such activity sweat poured freely from the body and thus kept the animals in top condition through their excessive labours. He gave the same rations to all the soldiers, sharing in their simple food himself; and by his unchanging affability he gained great goodwill for himself and secured harmony among all his fellow refugees. Such was the situation of Eumenes and of those who had fled to the rock with him.1
43. As for Egypt,2 Ptolemy, after he had unexpectedly rid himself of Perdiccas and the royal forces, was holding that land as if it were a prize of war. Seeing that Phoenicia and Coelê Syria, as it was called, were conveniently situated for an offensive against Egypt, he set about in earnest to become master of those regions.3 Accordingly he dispatched an adequate army with Nicanor as general, a man selected from among his friends. The latter marched into Syria, took the satrap Laomedon captive, and subdued the whole land. After he had likewise secured the allegiance of the cities of Phoenicia and placed garrisons in them, he returned to Egypt, having made a short and effective campaign.
44. When Apollodorus was archon at Athens, the 319 b.c.
1Continued in chap. 53. 1.2Continued from chap. 36. 7.3For Ptolemy’s campaign in Syria cp. Marmor Parium for 319/18; Appian, Syrian History, 52; and chap. 73. 2, below.133