Diodorus of Sicily
2ὄρος. τούτου δὲ περὶ ταῦτ᾿ ὄντος κατὰ μὲν τὴν
Πελοπόννησον Πτολεμαῖος ὁ στρατηγὸς Ἀντιγόνου
δυνάμεις πεπιστευμένος καὶ τῷ δυνάστῃ
προσκόψας ὡς οὐ κατὰ τὴν ἀξίαν τιμώμενος Ἀντιγόνου
μὲν ἀπέστη, πρὸς δὲ Κάσανδρον συμμαχίαν
ἐποιήσατο. καταλελοιπὼς δὲ τῆς ἐφ᾿ Ἑλλησπόντῳ
σατραπείας ἐπιστάτην Φοίνικα, ἕνα1 τῶν πιστοτάτων
φίλων, ἀπέστειλεν αὐτῷ στρατιώτας, ἀξιῶν
διαφυλάττειν τὰ φρούρια καὶ τὰς πόλεις καὶ μὴ
προσέχειν Ἀντιγόνῳ.
3Τῶν δὲ κοινῶν συνθηκῶν τοῖς ἡγεμόσι περιεχουσῶν
ἐλευθέρας ἀφεῖσθαι τὰς Ἑλληνίδας πόλεις,
οἱ περὶ Πτολεμαῖον τὸν Αἰγύπτου δυνάστην, ἐγκαλέσαντες
Ἀντιγόνῳ διότι φρουραῖς τινας διείληφε
4τῶν πόλεων, πολεμεῖν παρεσκευάζοντο. καὶ τὴν
μὲν δύναμιν ἐξαποστείλας Πτολεμαῖος καὶ στρατηγὸν
Λεωνίδην τὰς ἐν τῇ τραχείᾳ Κιλικίᾳ πόλεις
οὔσας ὑπ᾿ Ἀντίγονον ἐχειρώσατο, διεπέμπετο δὲ
καὶ εἰς2 τὰς ὑπὸ Κάσανδρον καὶ Λυσίμαχον πόλεις,
ἀξιῶν συμφρονεῖν ἑαυτῷ καὶ κωλύειν Ἀντίγονον
5ἰσχυρὸν γίνεσθαι. ὁ δ᾿ Ἀντίγονος τῶν υἱῶν Φίλιππον
μὲν τὸν νεώτερον ἐξέπεμψεν ἐφ᾿ Ἑλλήσποντον,
διαπολεμήσοντα Φοίνικι καὶ τοῖς ἀφεστηκόσι, Δημήτριον
δ᾿ ἐπὶ Κιλικίαν, ὃς ἐνεργὸν ποιησάμενος
τὴν στρατείαν ἐνίκησε τοὺς τοῦ Πτολεμαίου στρατηγοὺς
καὶ τὰς πόλεις ἀνεκτήσατο.
20. Ἅμα δὲ τούτοις πραττομένοις Πολυπέρχων





1ἕνα added by Fischer.2εἰς added by Fischer. πρὸς Rhodoman, κατὰ Dindorf.192Book XX

While he was thus engaged, in the Peloponnesus 310 b.c. Ptolemaeus,1 the general of Antigonus, who had been entrusted with an army but had taken offence at the prince because, as he said, he was not being honoured according to his deserts,2 revolted from Antigonus and made an alliance with Cassander. And having left as governor of the satrapy along the Hellespont one of his most faithful friends, Phoenix,3 Ptolemaeus sent soldiers to him, bidding him garrison the strongholds and the cities and not to obey Antigonus.
Since the agreements common to the leaders provided for the liberation of the Greek cities,4 Ptolemy, the ruler of Egypt, charged Antigonus with having occupied some of the cities with garrisons, and prepared to go to war. Sending his army and Leonides as its commander, Ptolemy subdued the cities in Cilicia Trachea which were subject to Antigonus; and he sent also to the cities that were controlled by Cassander and Lysimachus, asking them to cooperate with him and prevent Antigonus from becoming too powerful. But Antigonus sent Philip, the younger of his sons, to the Hellespont to fight it out with Phoenix and the rebels; and to Cilicia he sent Demetrius, who, carrying on the campaign with vigour, defeated the generals of Ptolemy and recovered the cities.
20. Meanwhile Polyperchon,5 who was biding his




1A nephew of Antigonus, cp. Book 19. 57. 4.2But we find that two years earlier another nephew, Telesphorus, had revolted because he thought that Ptolemaeus was being too highly honoured, Book 19. 87. 1.3Probably the former follower and friend of Eumenes, Book 18. 40. 2.4Cp. Book 19. 105. 1.5Polyperchon seems to have remained inactive in the Peloponnesus from 315 b.c. (Book 19. 64. 1; 74. 2) down to this time.193