Diodorus of Sicily

ἠθροικὼς στρατιώτας πλείους τῶν δέκα μυριάδων
ἧκεν ἐπὶ τὸν Ταχώ, καὶ προεκαλεῖτο περὶ τῆς
βασιλείας διαγωνίσασθαι. ὁ μὲν οὖν Ἀγησίλαος
ὁρῶν τὸν βασιλέα καταπεπληγμένον καὶ μὴ τολμῶντα
διακινδυνεύειν, παρεκάλει θαρρεῖν· τῆς γὰρ
νίκης τυγχάνειν οὐ τοὺς κατὰ τὸ πλῆθος προέχοντας,
ἀλλὰ τοὺς κατὰ τὰς ἀνδραγαθίας πρωτεύοντας·
οὐ προσέχοντος δ᾿ αὐτοῦ συνηναγκάσθη μετ᾿ αὐτοῦ
ποιήσασθαι τὴν ἀναχώρησιν εἴς τινα πόλιν εὐμεγέθη.
3οἱ δ᾿ Αἰγύπτιοι τὸ πρῶτον ἐπολιόρκουν
τοὺς συγκεκλεισμένους· ἐπεὶ δὲ πολλοὺς ἐν ταῖς
τειχομαχίαις ἀπέβαλον, τείχει καὶ τάφρῳ περιελάμβανον
τὴν πόλιν. ταχὺ δὲ τῶν ἔργων συντελουμένων
διὰ τὴν πολυχειρίαν,1 καὶ τῶν ἐπιτηδείων
ἐξαναλωθέντων, ὁ μὲν Ταχὼς ἀπέγνω τὴν σωτηρίαν,
ὁ δὲ Ἀγησίλαος παρακαλέσας τοὺς στρατιώτας
καὶ νυκτὸς ἐπιθέμενος τοῖς πολεμίοις, διέσωσεν
4ἅπαντας τοὺς στρατιώτας ἀνελπίστως. ἐπιδιωξάντων
δὲ τῶν Αἰγυπτίων καὶ τῶν τόπων ὄντων
πεδινῶν, οἱ μὲν Αἰγύπτιοι διέλαβον τῷ πλήθει
κεκυκλῶσθαι τοὺς πολεμίους καὶ πάντας ἄρδην
ἀναιρήσειν, ὁ δὲ Ἀγησίλαος καταλαβόμενος τόπον
ὃς εἶχεν ἐξ ἑκατέρου μέρους διώρυγα ποταμοῦ
χειροποίητον, ὑπέμενε τὴν τῶν πολεμίων ἔφοδον.
5ἐκτάξας δὲ τὴν δύναμιν οἰκείως τοῖς τόποις, καὶ
τοῖς τοῦ ποταμοῦ ῥείθροις ὀχυρώσας τὴν στρατιάν,
συνῆψε μάχην. τοῦ δὲ πλήθους τοῖς Αἰγυπτίοις
ἀχρήστου γενομένου, ταῖς ἀρεταῖς προέχοντες οἱ
Ἕλληνες πολλοὺς μὲν ἀπέκτειναν τῶν Αἰγυπτίων,
6τοὺς δὲ λοιποὺς φεύγειν ἠνάγκασαν. μετὰ δὲ
ταῦτα ὁ μὲν Ταχὼς ῥᾳδίως ἀνεκτήσατο τὴν κατ᾿
1διὰ τὴν πολυχειρίαν] the MSS. except P, which omits διὰ. Cp. chap. 68. 3 and Book 13. 86. 1. Vogel reads τῇ πολυχειρίᾳ. (cp. Book 14. 51. 1, 58. 3).214Book XV

Nectanebôs, who had collected more than a hundred 362/1 b.c. thousand men, came against Tachôs and challenged him to fight a battle for the kingship. Now Agesilaüs, observing that the king was terrified and lacked the courage to risk a battle, bade him take heart. “For” said he, “it is not those who have the advantage of numbers who win the victory, but those who excel in valour.” But since the king paid no heed to Agesilaüs, he was obliged to withdraw with him to a large city. The Egyptians at first started to assault them once they were shut in it, but when they had lost many men in their attacks on the walls, they then began to surround the city with a wall and a ditch. As the work was rapidly nearing completion by reason of the large number of workers, and the provisions in the city were exhausted, Tachos despaired of his safety, but Agesilüs, encouraging the men and attacking the enemy by night, unexpectedly succeeded in bringing all the men out safely. And since the Egyptians had pursued close on their heels and the district was now flat, the Egyptians supposed that they had the enemy surrounded by superior numbers, and would utterly destroy them, but Agesilaüs seized a position which had on each side a canal fed by the river and thus halted the enemy’s attack. Then having drawn up his force in conformity with the terrain and protected his army by the river channels, he joined battle. The superior numbers of the Egyptians had become useless, and the Greeks, who surpassed them in courage, slew many Egyptians and forced the rest to flee. Afterwards Tachos easily recovered the


215