Diodorus of Sicily

ἔχοντα πηχῶν ἑβδομήκοντα, τὸ δὲ πάχος μόγις ὑπὸ
τεσσάρων ἀνδρῶν περιλαμβανόμενα, τριῶν δὲ πλέθρων
σκιὰν ποιοῦντα.1
Εἶχε δὲ καὶ ἡ χώρα ὄφεων πλῆθος, μικρῶν μὲν
τοῖς μεγέθεσι, ταῖς δὲ ποικιλίαις ἐξηλλαγμένων·
6οἱ μὲν γὰρ χαλκοειδεῖς ῥάβδους ἐπέφαινον, οἱ δὲ
τὴν λόφην δασεῖαν εἶχον τριχώδη, διὰ δὲ τῶν δηγμάτων
ὀξεῖς θανάτους ἀπειργάζοντο. τὸν δὲ πληγέντα
πόνοι δεινοὶ συνεῖχον καὶ ῥύσις ἱδρῶτος αἱματοειδοῦς
7κατεῖχε. διόπερ οἱ Μακεδόνες δεινῶς ὑπὸ
τῶν δηγμάτων2 ἀπαλλάττοντες3 τὰς κλίνας ἀπὸ τῶν
δένδρων ἐξήρτων καὶ τὸ πλεῖστον τῆς νυκτὸς διηγρύπνουν.
μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα παρὰ τῶν ἐγχωρίων
μαθόντες τὴν ἀντιφάρμακον ῥίζαν ἀπελύθησαν τῶν
δεινῶν.
91. Προϊόντος δὲ αὐτοῦ μετὰ τῆς δυνάμεως ἧκόν
τινες ἀπαγγέλλοντες ὅτι Πῶρος ὁ βασιλεύς, ἀνεψιὸς
ὢν τοῦ καταπεπολεμημένου Πώρου, τὴν βασιλείαν
ἀπολιπὼν πέφευγεν εἰς τὸ τῶν Γανδαριδῶν ἔθνος.
2ὁ δὲ Ἀλέξανδρος παροξυνθεὶς Ἡφαιστίωνα μὲν
ἐξέπεμψεν εἰς τὴν τούτου χώραν μετὰ δυνάμεως
καὶ προσέταξε τὴν βασιλείαν παραδοῦναι τῷ μεθ᾿
αὑτοῦ Πώρῳ.
Αὐτὸς δ᾿ εἰς τὸ τῶν Ἀδρεστῶν4 καλουμένων
ἔθνος στρατεύσας καὶ τῶν πόλεων ἃς μὲν βίᾳ
χειρωσάμενος, ἃς δὲ πειθοῖ προσαγαγόμενος εἰς τὴν






1ποιούντων RX.2The prepositional phrase is omitted by RX.3πάσχοντες F, which is a simpler reading.4Ἀνδρεστῶν RX.382Book XVII

which reached a height of seventy cubits, were so 326/5 b.c. thick that they could scarcely be embraced by four men, and cast a shadow of three plethra,1
This country possessed a multitude of snakes, small and variously coloured,2 Some of them looked like bronze rods, others had thick, shaggy crests, and their bites brought sudden death. The person bitten suffered fearful pains and was covered with a bloody sweat. The Macedonians, who were much affected by the bites, slung their hammocks from trees3 and remained awake most of the night. Later, however, they learned from the natives the use of a medicinal root and were freed from these fears.4
91. As he continued his march, word came to Alexander that King Porus (a cousin of the Porus who had been defeated) had left his kingdom and fled to the people of Gandara. This annoyed Alexander, and he sent Hephaestion with an army into his country and ordered that the kingdom should be transferred to the friendly Porus.5
He campaigned against the people known as the Adrestians, and got possession of their cities, partly by force and partly by agreement.6 Then he came






1Perhaps three-quarters of an acre. The tree is presumably
the banyan. Cp. Strabo, 15. 1. 21, who quotes One- sicritus (Jacoby, op. cit. no. 134, F 22) to the effect that they could scarcely be embraced by five men, and could give shade to four hundred horsemen, but adds that Aristobulus (Jacoby, op. cit. no. 139, F 36) says that they could shade fifty horsemen.2Mentioned also by Nearchus (Jacoby, op. cit. no. 133, F 10; Arrian, Indica, 15. 10) and Cleitarchus (Jacoby, op. cit. no. 137, F 18; Aelian, De Natura Animalium, 18. 2).3According to Nearchus (loc. cit.), this is what the natives did.4Curtius, 9. 1. 12.5Arrian, 5. 20. 6; 21. 2–6.6Arrian, 5. 22. 3.383