Diodorus of Sicily

δίκαια καὶ τἄλλα πάντα ἀκριβῶς διέταξε,
6πλείστην φροντίδα τῆς ἰσότητος ποιούμενος. κατέστησε
δὲ καὶ τὴν κατ᾿ ἐνιαυτὸν ἐντιμοτάτην ἀρχήν,
ἣν ἀμφιπολίαν Διὸς Ὀλυμπίου καλοῦσιν Συρακόσιοι·
καὶ ᾑρέθη πρῶτος ἀμφίπολος Διὸς Ὀλυμπίου
Καλλιμένης Ἀλκάδα1 καὶ τὸ λοιπὸν διετέλεσαν οἱ
Συρακόσιοι τοὺς ἐνιαυτοὺς ἐπιγράφοντες τούτοις
τοῖς ἄρχουσι μέχρι τῶνδε τῶν ἱστοριῶν γραφομένων
καὶ τῆς κατὰ τὴν πολιτείαν ἀλλαγῆς· τῶν
γὰρ Ῥωμαίων μεταδόντων τοῖς Σικελιώταις τῆς
πολιτείας ἡ τῶν ἀμφιπόλων ἀρχὴ ἐταπεινώθη,
διαμείνασα ἔτη πλείω τῶν τριακοσίων.
Καὶ τὰ μὲν κατὰ τὴν Σικελίαν ἐν τούτοις ἦν.
71. Κατὰ δὲ τὴν Μακεδονίαν Φίλιππος τὰς ἐπὶ
Θρᾴκῃ πόλεις Ἑλληνίδας εἰς εὔνοιαν προσκαλεσόμενος2
ἐστράτευσεν ἐπὶ Θρᾴκην. Κερσοβλέπτης γὰρ
ὁ βασιλεὺς τῶν Θρᾳκῶν διετέλει τὰς ἐφ᾿ Ἑλλησπόντῳ3
πόλεις ὁμορούσας τῇ Θρᾴκῃ καταστρεφόμενος
2καὶ τὴν χώραν καταφθείρων. βουλόμενος
οὖν ἐμφράξαι τῶν βαρβάρων τὴν ὁρμὴν ἐστράτευσεν
ἐπ᾿ αὐτοὺς σὺν πολλῇ δυνάμει. νικήσας δὲ πλείοσι
μάχαις τοὺς Θρᾷκας τοῖς μὲν καταπολεμηθεῖσι
βαρβάροις προσέταξε δεκάτας τελεῖν τοῖς Μακεδόσιν,
αὐτὸς δ᾿ ἐν τοῖς ἐπικαίροις τόποις κτίσας





1Fischer corrects to the common name Alcidas, perhaps
rightly; Alcadas seems to be otherwise unknown.2Dindorf corrected to προκαλεσόμενος, which is the usual
expression, but cp. SIG3, 748. 47.3Ἑλισπόντου PX.38Book XVI

in exact detail the law of contracts and all such 343/2 b.c. matters, paying special attention to equality.1 He instituted also the annual office that is held in highest honour, which the Syracusans call the “amphipoly” of Zeus Olympius.2 To this, the first priest elected was Callimenes, the son of Alcadas, and henceforth the Syracusans continued to designate the years by these officials down to the time of my writing this history and of the change in their form of government. For when the Romans shared their citizenship with the Greeks of Sicily, the office of these priests became insignificant, after having been important for over three hundred years.3
Such was the condition of affairs in Sicily.
71. In Macedonia, Philip conceived a plan to win over the Greek cities in Thrace to his side, and marched into that region.4 Cersobleptes, who was the king of the Thracians, had been following a policy of reducing the Hellespontine cities bordering on his territory and of ravaging their territories. With the aim of putting a stop to the barbarian attacks Philip moved against them with a large force. He overcame the Thracians in several battles and imposed on the conquered barbarians the payment of a tithe to the Macedonians, and by founding strong cities at key



1Plutarch, Timoleon, 22. 1–2; Nepos, Timoleon, 3. 3.2This priesthood is not mentioned by Plutarch, and may be a personal observation of Diodorus himself.3This humbling of the amphipolate probably consisted in making it no longer eponymous; instead of a local priesthood, the Syracusans thereafter dated by the Roman consuls. The reference may be to the grant of jus Latii to the Sicilians by Caesar (by 44 b.c.: Cicero, Ad Atticum, 14. 12. 1), or to later grants by Augustus (A. N. Sherwin-White, The Roman Citizenship (1939), 175).4Continued from chap. 69. Justin’s account (9. 1. 1) of these operations is drawn from a source hostile to Philip.39