Diodorus of Sicily

Ὀρεστίδος καλουμένης, τοῦ δὲ βασιλέως σωματοφύλαξ
καὶ διὰ τὸ κάλλος φίλος γεγονὼς τοῦ Φιλίππου.
4οὗτος ὁρῶν ὑπὸ τοῦ βασιλέως ἀγαπώμενον
ἕτερον Παυσανίαν ὁμώνυμον ἑαυτῷ ὀνειδιστικοῖς
πρὸς αὐτὸν ἐχρήσατο λόγοις, φήσας ἀνδρόγυνον
εἶναι καὶ τοὺς τῶν βουλομένων ἔρωτας ἑτοίμως
5προσδέχεσθαι. ὁ δὲ τὴν ἐκ τῆς λοιδορίας ὕβριν
οὐκ ἐνέγκας τὸ μὲν παρὸν κατεσιώπησεν, Ἀττάλῳ
δέ τινι τῶν φίλων ἐπικοινωσάμενος περὶ τῶν μελλόντων
πράττεσθαι ἑκουσίως καὶ παραδόξως ἑαυτὸν
6ἐκ τοῦ ζῆν μετέστησεν. μετ᾿ ὀλίγας γὰρ ἡμέρας
τοῦ Φιλίππου πρὸς Πλευρίαν1 τὸν τῶν Ἰλλυριῶν
βασιλέα διαγωνιζομένου πρὸ τοῦ βασιλέως στὰς
ἁπάσας τὰς φερομένας ἐπ᾿ αὐτὸν πληγὰς ἀνεδέξατο
τῷ ἰδίῳ σώματι καὶ μετήλλαξεν.
7Διαβοηθείσης δὲ τῆς πράξεως ὁ μὲν Ἄτταλος,
εἷς ὢν τῶν ἐξ αὐλῆς καὶ πολὺ δυναμένων παρὰ τῷ
βασιλεῖ, ἐκάλεσεν ἐπὶ δεῖπνον τὸν Παυσανίαν καὶ
πολὺν ἐμφορήσας ἄκρατον παρέδωκεν αὐτοῦ τὸ
σῶμα τοῖς ὀρεωκόμοις εἰς ὕβριν καὶ παροινίαν
8ἑταιρικήν. ὁ δὲ ἀνανήψας ἐκ τῆς μέθης καὶ τῇ τοῦ
σώματος ὕβρει περιαλγὴς γενόμενος τοῦ Ἀττάλου
κατηγόρησεν ἐπὶ τοῦ βασιλέως. ὁ δὲ Φίλιππος
παρωξύνθη μὲν ἐπὶ τῇ παρανομίᾳ τῆς πράξεως, διὰ
δὲ τὴν πρὸς Ἄτταλον οἰκειότητα καὶ τὴν εἰς τὸ
παρὸν αὐτοῦ χρείαν οὐκ ἐβούλετο μισοπονηρεῖν·
9ἦν γὰρ ὁ Ἄτταλος τῆς μὲν ἐπιγαμηθείσης γυναικὸς



1This is perhaps shortened form for the usual Πλευρᾶτον.96Book XVI

family from the district Orestis.1 He a was bodyguard 336/5 b.c. of the king and was beloved by him because of his beauty. When he saw that the king was becoming enamoured of another Pausanias (a man of the same name as himself), he addressed him with abusive language, accusing him of being a hermaphrodite and prompt to accept the amorous advances of any who wished. Unable to endure such an insult, the other kept silent for the time, but, after confiding to Attalus, one of his friends, what he proposed to do, he brought about his own death voluntarily and in a spectacular fashion. For a few days after this, as Philip was engaged in battle with Pleurias, king of the Illyrians,2 Pausanias stepped in front of him and, receiving on his body all the blows directed at the king, so met his death.
The incident was widely discussed and Attalus, who was a member of the court circle and influential with the king, invited the first Pausanias to dinner and when he had plied him till drunk with unmixed wine, handed his unconscious body over to the muleteers to abuse in drunken licentiousness. So he presently recovered from his drunken stupor and, deeply resenting the outrage to his person, charged Attalus before the king with the outrage. Philip shared his anger at the barbarity of the act but did not wish to punish Attalus at that time because of their relationship, and because Attalus’s services were needed urgently. He was the nephew3 of the Cleopatra


1Justin, 9. 6. 4–8. The Orestis was a district in western
Macedonia bordering on Illyria.2This battle can hardly be identified, in view of the many wars fought by Philip against the Illyrians. The last one mentioned by Diodorus was in chap, 69. 7.3This is the usually stated relationship. In Book 17. 2. 3, Attalus is called Cleopatra’s brother, but otherwise, with more probability, her uncle.97