Diodorus of Sicily

εἰς τόπον τελματώδη, τοῖς ὅλοις1 ἠλαττοῦτο,
πολλοῖς δὲ τραύμασι περιπεσὼν καὶ τελευτήσας
ὑπὸ τῶν ἰδίων ἤρθη καὶ πρὸς τὴν ἀποσκευὴν ἀπηνέχθη
4τετελευτηκώς· τῇ δ᾿ ἱππομαχίᾳ λαμπρῶς
τῶν Ἑλλήνων νενικηκότων Μένωνος ἱππαρχοῦντος
τοῦ Θετταλοῦ, εὐθὺς ἡ τῶν Μακεδόνων φάλαγξ
φοβουμένη τοὺς ἱππεῖς ἀπεχώρησεν ἐκ τοῦ πεδίου
πρὸς τὰς ὑπερκειμένας δυσχωρίας καὶ τῇ τῶν
τόπων ὀχυρότητι τὴν ἀσφάλειαν περιεποιήσατο.
τῶν δὲ Θετταλῶν ἱππέων προσμαχομένων καὶ διὰ
τὴν δυσχωρίαν ἀπράκτων γινομένων οἱ μὲν Ἕλληνες
τρόπαιον στήσαντες καὶ τῶν νεκρῶν κυριεύσαντες
ἀπηλλάγησαν ἐκ τῆς μάχης.
5Τῇ δ᾿ ὑστεραίᾳ παραγενηθέντος Ἀντιπάτρου
μετὰ τῆς δυνάμεως καὶ συμμίξαντος τοῖς ἡττημένοις
μίαν οἱ πάντες Μακεδόνες ἐποιήσαντο τὴν
στρατοπεδείαν καὶ τὴν τῶν ὅλων στρατηγίαν
6παρέλαβεν Ἀντίπατρος. οὗτος δὲ κρίνας ἐπὶ τοῦ
παρόντος ἡσυχίαν ἔχειν καὶ θεωρῶν τοὺς πολεμίους
ἱπποκρατοῦντας τὴν μὲν διὰ τῶν ὁμαλῶν2 ἀποχώρησιν
ἀπέγνω, διὰ δὲ τῆς δυσχωρίας προάγων
καὶ τοὺς ὑπερδεξίους τόπους προκαταλαμβανόμενος
7ἀπεχώρησεν ἐκ τούτων τῶν τόπων. Ἀντίφιλος δὲ
ὁ τῶν Ἑλλήνων στρατηγὸς ἐπιφανεῖ μάχῃ νικήσας
τοὺς Μακεδόνας ἐφήδρευε περὶ Θετταλίαν διατρίβων
καὶ καραδοκῶν τὴν τῶν πολεμίων ὁρμήν.
Καὶ τὰ μὲν κατὰ τοὺς Ἕλληνας ἐν τοιαύταις
8εὐημερίαις ὑπῆρχε. τῶν δὲ Μακεδόνων θαλασσοκρατούντων
οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι πρὸς ταῖς ὑπαρχούσαις
ναυσὶν ἄλλας κατεσκεύασαν, ὥστε γενέσθαι τὰς


1ὅλοις Wesseling: ὅπλοις.2ὁμαλῶν Dindorf: ὅπλων.54Book XVIII

brilliantly even when cut off in a swampy place, was 322 b.c. worsted at every point. Stricken with many wounds and at the point of death, he was taken up by his followers and carried, already dead, to the baggage train.1 The cavalry battle having been gloriously won by the Greeks under the command of Menon the Thessalian, the Macedonian phalanx, for fear of the cavalry, at once withdrew from the plain to the difficult terrain above and gained safety for themselves by the strength of the position. When the Thessalian cavalry, which continued to attack, was unable to accomplish anything because of the rough ground, the Greeks, who had set up a trophy and gained control of the dead, left the field of battle.
On the next day, however, when Antipater came up with his troops and joined the defeated, all the Macedonians united in a single camp, and Antipater took command of the whole. He decided to avoid fighting for the present and, in view of the fact that the enemy were superior in cavalry, determined not to retreat through the plain. Instead, by going through the rough country and seizing in advance any points of vantage, he made good his retreat from the region. Antiphilus, the Greek commander, having defeated the Macedonians in a glorious battle, played a waiting game, remaining in Thessaly and watching for the enemy to move.
The affairs of the Greeks were thus in thriving condition, but since the Macedonians had command of the sea, the Athenians made ready other ships in addition to those which they already had, so that

1Cp. Arrian, FGrH, 156. 1. 9; Justin, 13. 5. 14–16.55