Diodorus of Sicily

τοὺς κατὰ τὴν νῆσον τυράννους τὴν διαφορὰν καταλύσαντες
φιλίαν συνέθεντο, μάλιστα δὲ πρὸς Ἱκέταν
τὸν τῶν Συρακοσίων δυναστεύοντα διὰ τὸ τοῦτον
2πλεῖον1 ἰσχύειν, αὐτοὶ δὲ πολλὴν δύναμιν ναυτικήν
τε καὶ πεζικὴν παρασκευασάμενοι διεβίβασαν εἰς
Σικελίαν, Ἄννωνα στρατηγὸν ἐπιστήσαντες. εἶχον
δὲ μακρὰς ναῦς ἑκατὸν καὶ πεντήκοντα, στρατιώτας
δὲ πεζοὺς μὲν πεντακισμυρίους,2 ἅρματα δὲ τριακόσια,
συνωρίδας δὲ ὑπὲρ τὰς δισχιλίας, χωρὶς δὲ
τούτων ὅπλα καὶ βέλη παντοδαπὰ καὶ μηχανὰς
πολιορκητικὰς παμπληθεῖς καὶ σίτου καὶ τῶν ἄλλων
ἐπιτηδείων πλῆθος ἀνυπέρβλητον.
3Ἐπὶ πρώτην δὲ τὴν τῶν Ἐντελλίνων πόλιν
ἐλθόντες τήν τε χώραν ἐδῄωσαν καὶ τοὺς ἐγχωρίους
εἰς πολιορκίαν συνέκλεισαν. οἱ δὲ τὴν πόλιν κατοικοῦντες
Καμπανοὶ καταπλαγέντες τὸ μέγεθος τῆς
δυνάμεως ἐξέπεμψαν εἰς τὰς ἄλλας πόλεις τὰς
ἀλλοτρίως διακειμένας πρὸς Καρχηδονίους περὶ
βοηθείας. τῶν μὲν οὖν ἄλλων οὐδεὶς ὑπήκουσεν, οἱ
δὲ τὴν Γαλερίαν3 πόλιν οἰκοῦντες ἐξέπεμψαν αὐτοῖς
στρατιώτας ὁπλίτας χιλίους. τούτοις δ᾿ ὑπαντήσαντες
οἱ Φοίνικες καὶ περιχυθέντες τῷ πλήθει
4πάντας κατέκοψαν. οἱ δὲ τὴν Αἴτνην κατοικοῦντες
Καμπανοὶ τὸ μὲν πρῶτον παρεσκευάζοντο συμμαχίαν
ἐκπέμπειν εἰς τὴν Ἔντελλαν διὰ τὴν συγγένειαν,
μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα τὴν τῶν Γαλερίνων συμφορὰν
ἀκούσαντες ἔκριναν ἡσυχίαν ἄγειν.
68. Τοῦ δὲ Διονυσίου κυριεύοντος τῶν Συρακουσσῶν



1Hertlein suggested πλεῖστον, but Hicetas controlled only
part of Syracuse.2The loss, e.g., of ἱππεῖς δὲ . . . χιλίους was suggested by
Madvig.3So PRF: Γαλέρειαν X.26Book XVI

throughout the island, they established friendship 345/4 b.c. with them, and particularly they addressed themselves to Hicetas, the most powerful of these, because he had the Syracusans under his control.1 They prepared and transported to Sicily a large sea and land force of their own, and appointed Hanno to the command as general. They had one hundred and fifty battleships, fifty thousand infantry, three hundred war chariots, over two thousand extra teams of horses,2 and besides all this, armour and missiles of every description, numerous siege engines, and an enormous supply of food and other materials of war.
Advancing first on Entella, they devastated the countryside and blockaded the country people inside the city. The Campanians who occupied the city were alarmed at the odds against them and appealed for help to the other cities that were hostile to the Carthaginians. Of these, none responded except the city of Galeria. These people sent them a thousand hoplites, but the Phoenicians intercepted them, overwhelmed them with a large force, and cut them all down. The Campanians who dwelt in Aetna were at first also ready to send reinforcements to Entella because of kinship, but when they heard of the disaster to the troops from Galeria, they decided to make no move.
68. Now at the time when Dionysius was still master


1This anticipates the action described in chap. 68, but according to Plutarch’s account (Timoleon, 7. 3; 9. 2) Hicetas had become an ally of the Carthaginians even before Timoleon left Corinth.2The charioteer receipts of P. Petrie, 2. 25, dated in the 21st year of Ptolemy Philadelphus (265/4 b.c.), show that it was customary for chariots to be accompanied by spare horses, trained to work in pairs. This account of Carthaginian operations is not given by Plutarch.27