Diodorus of Sicily
20. Οὕτω δὲ τῶν πραγμάτων τῷ Θίβρωνι προχωρούντων
ἡ τύχη ταχὺ μεταβαλοῦσα ἐταπείνωσεν
αὐτὸν διὰ τοιαύτας αἰτίας. τῶν ἡγεμόνων τῶν
παρ᾿ αὐτῷ τις Κρὴς μὲν τὸ γένος, ὄνομα δὲ Μνασικλῆς,
ἐμπειρίαν δ᾿ ἔχων τῶν πολεμικῶν πράξεων
διηνέχθη πρὸς αὐτόν, ἐγκαλέσας μὲν1 περὶ τοῦ
μερισμοῦ τῶν λαφύρων, καὶ φύσει ταραχώδης ὢν
καὶ θρασὺς ηὐτομόλησε πρὸς τοὺς Κυρηναίους.
2κατηγορήσας δὲ πολλὰ τοῦ Θίβρωνος εἰς ὠμότητα
καὶ ἀπιστίαν ἔπεισε λῦσαι τὰς ὁμολογίας καὶ τῆς
ἐλευθερίας ἀντέχεσθαι. διὸ καὶ ταλάντων ἑξήκοντα
μόνον2 ἀποδεδομένων, τῶν δὲ λοιπῶν χρημάτων οὐ
διδομένων ὁ μὲν Θίβρων ἐγκαλέσας τοῖς ἀφεστηκόσι
συνέλαβε τῶν Κυρηναίων τοὺς παρόντας ἐν τῷ
λιμένι, ὄντας περὶ ὀγδοήκοντα, εὐθὺ δὲ τὴν δύναμιν
ἐπαγαγὼν ἐπὶ τὴν πόλιν ἐπολιόρκει τὴν Κυρήνην·
οὐδὲν δὲ δυνάμενος πρᾶξαι πάλιν πρὸς τὸν λιμένα
3ἐπανῆλθε. τῶν δὲ Βαρκαίων καὶ τῶν Ἑσπεριτῶν
συμμαχούντων τῷ Θίβρωνι Κυρηναῖοι μέρος μὲν
τῆς δυνάμεως ἀπέλιπον ἐν τῇ Κυρήνῃ, τῷ3 μέρει
δὲ στρατεύσαντες ἐπόρθουν τὴν τῶν ἀστυγειτόνων
4χώραν. τούτων δ᾿ ἐπικαλεσαμένων βοηθεῖν τὸν
Θίβρωνα ἅπαντας τοὺς στρατιώτας ἐξήγαγεν4 ἐπὶ
τὴν συμμαχίαν. καθ᾿ ὃν δὴ χρόνον ὁ Κρὴς συλλογισάμενος
τὴν ἐρημίαν τοῦ λιμένος ἔπεισε τοὺς
ἐν Κυρήνῃ καταλειφθέντας ἐπιθέσθαι τῷ λιμένι.
5ὑπακουσάντων δ᾿ εὐθὺς αὐτὸς καθηγούμενος ἐπέθετο
τῷ λιμένι καὶ διὰ τὴν ἀπουσίαν τοῦ Θίβρωνος






1μὲν deleted by Bekker, Dindorf, Fischer.2μόνον Fischer: μόνων.3Fischer brackets τῷ.4ἐξήγαγεν Rhodoman: ἐξήγαγον.70Book XVIII
20. Although the affairs of Thibron were thus 322 b.c. prospering, Fortune by a sudden shift humbled him through the following circumstances. One of his leaders, a Cretan by birth, whose name was Mnasicles, a man of experience in warfare, quarrelled with him, having complained about the distribution of the booty; and being contentious by nature and bold, he deserted to the Cyrenians. Moreover, he made many complaints against Thibron, charging him with cruelty and faithlessness, and persuaded the Cyrenians to break the treaty and make a bid for liberty. And so when sixty talents only had been paid, and the rest of the money was not being given, Thibron denounced the rebels, seized any Cyrenians who were in the port, some eighty in number, and then, leading his forces directly against the city, laid siege to it. As he was unable to accomplish anything, he returned to the port. Since the people of Barca and of Hesperis1
were allied with Thibron, the Cyrenians, leaving part of their forces in Cyrenê, took the field with part and plundered the land of their neighbours. When these called on Thibron to give them aid, he led all his soldiers against the alliance.2 At this the Cretan, concluding that the harbour was deserted, persuaded those who were left in Cyrenê to attack it. When they obeyed him, he at once made an attack on the port, leading the way himself; and, easily gaining control of it thanks to the absence of Thibron,


1Also called Hesperides, Euhesperides, and Berenicê (modern Benghazi), the westernmost city of Cyrenê. Barca lies a short distance north-east.2i.e. against the Cyrenians and their Libyan and Carthaginian allies, who are not mentioned until chap. 21. 4.71