Diodorus of Sicily
35. Τῶν γὰρ Τυρρηνῶν στρατευσάντων ἐπὶ πόλιν
Σούτριον ἄποικον Ῥωμαίων οἱ μὲν ὕπατοι δυνάμεσιν
ἁδραῖς ἐκβοηθήσαντες ἐνίκησαν μάχῃ τοὺς
2Τυρρηνοὺς καὶ συνεδίωξαν εἰς τὴν παρεμβολήν, οἱ
δὲ Σαυνῖται κατὰ τοῦτον τὸν χρόνον μακρὰν ἀπηρτημένης
τῆς Ῥωμαίων δυνάμεως ἀδεῶς ἐπόρθουν
τῶν Ἰαπύγων τοὺς τὰ Ῥωμαίων φρονοῦντας.
διόπερ ἠναγκάσθησαν οἱ ὕπατοι διαιρεῖν τὰς δυνάμεις
καὶ Φάβιος μὲν ἐν τῇ Τυρρηνίᾳ κατέμεινεν,
Μάρκιος δὲ ἐπὶ τοὺς Σαυνίτας ἀναζεύξας Ἀλλίφας
μὲν πόλιν εἷλεν κατὰ κράτος, τοὺς δὲ πολιορκουμένους
τῶν συμμάχων ἐκ τῶν κινδύνων ἐρρύσατο.
3ὁ δὲ Φάβιος Τυρρηνῶν πολλοῖς πλήθεσιν ἐπὶ τὸ
Σούτριον συνδραμόντων ἔλαθε τοὺς πολεμίους διὰ
τῆς τῶν ὁμόρων1 χώρας ἐμβαλὼν2 εἰς τὴν ἀνωτέρω
Τυρρηνίαν, ἀπόρθητον γενομένην πολλῶν χρόνων·
4ἐπιπεσὼν δὲ ἀνελπίστως τῆς τε χώρας πολλὴν
ἐδῄωσε καὶ τοὺς ἐπελθόντας τῶν ἐγχωρίων νικήσας
πολλοὺς μὲν ἀνεῖλεν, οὐκ ὀλίγους δὲ καὶ ζῶντας
ὑποχειρίους ἔλαβεν. μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα περὶ τὴν καλουμένην
Περυσίαν δευτέρᾳ μάχῃ τῶν Τυρρηνῶν
κρατήσας, πολλοὺς ἀνελὼν κατεπλήξατο τὸ ἔθνος,
πρῶτος Ῥωμαίων μετὰ δυνάμεως ἐμβεβληκὼς εἰς
5τοὺς τόπους τούτους. καὶ πρὸς μὲν Ἀρρητινοὺς
καὶ Κροτωνιάτας, ἔτι δὲ Περυσίνους ἀνοχὰς ἐποιήσατο·
πόλιν δὲ τὴν ὀνομαζομένην Καστόλαν ἐκπολιορκήσας

1Ὀμβρικῶν Dindorf.2ἐμβαλὼν Dindorf: συνεμβαλὼν.234Book XX
35. When the Etruscans1 had taken the field 309 b.c. against the city Sutrium, a Roman colony, the consuls, coming out to its aid with a strong army, defeated them in battle and drove them into their camp; but the Samnites at this time, when the Roman army was far distant, were plundering with impunity those Iapyges who supported the Romans. The consuls, therefore, were forced to divide their armies; Fabius remained in Etruria, but Marcius, setting out against the Samnites, took the city Allifae by storm and freed from danger those of the allies who were being besieged. Fabius, however, while the Etruscans in great numbers were gathering against Sutrium, marched without the knowledge of the enemy through the country of their neighbours2 into upper Etruria, which had not been plundered for a long time. Falling upon it unexpectedly, he ravaged a large part of the country; and in a victory over those of the inhabitants who came against him, he slew many of them and took no small number of them alive as prisoners. Thereafter, defeating the Etruscans in a second battle near the place called Perusia and destroying many of them, he overawed the nation since he was the first of the Romans to have invaded that region with an army. He also made truces with the peoples of Arretium and Crotona,3 likewise with those of Perusia; and, taking by siege the city called





1Continued from chap. 26. 4. For this campaign cp. Livy, 9. 35–40.2Or, reading Ὀμβρικῶν: “through the country of the Umbrians.”3The Etruscan city, called Cortona by Livy, 9. 37. 12, and by Latin writers generally, but Κρότων by the Greeks except Polybius, 3. 82. 9, who has Κυρτώνιον.235