Diodorus of Sicily

ἔπειτα δὲ καὶ φεύγειν συναναγκάσας αἴτιος ἐγένετο
5τῆς νίκης. τῶν δ᾿ Ἀθηναίων ἔπεσον μὲν ἐν τῇ
μάχῃ πλείους τῶν χιλίων, ἥλωσαν δ᾿ οὐκ ἐλάττους
6τῶν δισχιλίων. ὁμοίως δὲ καὶ τῶν Βοιωτῶν πολλοὶ
μὲν ἀνῃρέθησαν, οὐκ ὀλίγοι δ᾿ ἐζωγρήθησαν. μετὰ
δὲ τὴν μάχην ὁ Φίλιππος τρόπαιον στήσας καὶ
τοὺς νεκροὺς εἰς ταφὴν συγχωρήσας ἐπινίκια τοῖς
θεοῖς ἔθυσε καὶ τοὺς ἀνδραγαθήσαντας κατὰ τὴν
ἀξίαν ἐτίμησεν.
87. Λέγουσι δέ τινες ὅτι καὶ παρὰ τὸν πότον
πολὺν ἐμφορησάμενος ἄκρατον καὶ μετὰ τῶν φίλων
τὸν ἐπινίκιον ἄγων κῶμον διὰ μέσων τῶν αἰχμαλώτων
ἐβάδιζεν ὑβρίζων διὰ λόγων τὰς τῶν ἀκληρούντων
δυστυχίας. Δημάδην δὲ τὸν ῥήτορα κατ᾿
ἐκεῖνον τὸν καιρὸν ἐν τοῖς αἰχμαλώτοις ὄντα χρήσασθαι
παρρησίᾳ καὶ λόγον ἀποφθέγξασθαι δυνάμενον
ἀναστεῖλαι τὴν τοῦ βασιλέως ἀσέλγειαν.
2φασὶ γὰρ εἰπεῖν αὐτόν, Βασιλεῦ, τῆς τύχης σοι
περιθείσης πρόσωπον Ἀγαμέμνονος αὐτὸς οὐκ
αἰσχύνῃ πράττων ἔργα Θερσίτου; τὸν δὲ Φίλιππον
τῇ τῆς ἐπιπλήξεως εὐστοχίᾳ κινηθέντα τοσοῦτο
μεταβαλεῖν τὴν ὅλην διάθεσιν ὥστε τοὺς μὲν στεφάνους
ἀπορρῖψαι, τὰ δὲ συνακολουθοῦντα κατὰ
τὸν κῶμον σύμβολα τῆς ὕβρεως ἀποτρίψασθαι, τὸν
δ᾿ ἄνδρα τὸν χρησάμενον τῇ παρρησίᾳ θαυμάσαι


80Book XVI

before him and then by compelling them to flee became 338/7 b.c. the man responsible for the victory. More than a thousand Athenians fell in the battle and no less than two thousand were captured. Likewise, many of the Boeotians were killed and not a few taken prisoners. After the battle Philip raised a trophy of victory, yielded the dead for burial, gave sacrifices to the gods for victory, and rewarded according to their deserts those of his men who had distinguished themselves.
87. The story is told that in the drinking after dinner Philip downed a large amount of unmixed wine and forming with his friends a comus in celebration of the victory paraded through the midst of his captives, jeering all the time at the misfortunes of the luckless men.1 Now Demades, the orator, who was then one of the captives, spoke out boldly2 and made a remark able to curb the king’s disgusting exhibition. He is said to have remarked: “O King, when Fortune has cast you in the role of Agamemnon, are you not ashamed to act the part of Thersites?” Stung by this well-aimed shaft of rebuke, Philip altered his whole demeanour completely. He cast off his garland, brushed aside the symbols of pride that marked the comus, expressed admiration for the man who dared to speak so plainly, freed him from


1Plutarch, Demosthenes, 20. 3, tells of Philip’s revelling
and reciting the beginning of the decree introduced by his rival as if it were verse:

“Demosthenes, the son of Demosthenes,
Paeanian, thus proposeth.”
Justin (9. 5. 1), in constrast, speaks of Philip as bearing his victory modestly. Cp. also Plutarch, Moralia, 715 c. See Addenda.2Philostratus (Vita Apollonii Tyanensis, 7. 2) names Diogenes of Sinopê as the hero of this anecdote. Demades (Duod. Ann. 9–10) gives his own report of these events.81