Diodorus of Sicily

μὲν πεντακισχιλίους, ἱππεῖς δὲ τετρακοσίους, ὧν
ἦν στρατηγὸς Ναυσικλῆς. οἱ δὲ τῶν Φεραίων
τύραννοι Λυκόφρων καὶ Πειθόλαος μετὰ τὴν Ὀνομάρχου
τελευτὴν ἔρημοι συμμάχων ὄντες τὰς μὲν
Φερὰς παρέδοσαν τῷ Φιλίππῳ, αὐτοὶ δ᾿ ὑπόσπονδοι
γενόμενοι συνήγαγον τοὺς μισθοφόρους
ὄντας δισχιλίους καὶ μετὰ τούτων φυγόντες πρὸς
4Φάυλλον συνεμάχουν τοῖς Φωκεῦσιν. ἐβοήθησαν
δὲ καὶ τῶν ἐλαττόνων πόλεων οὐκ ὀλίγαι τοῖς
Φωκεῦσι διὰ τὸ πλῆθος τῶν διαδιδομένων χρημάτων·
ὁ γὰρ χρυσὸς τὰς πλεονεξίας τῶν ἀνθρώπων
ἐκκαλούμενος ἠνάγκασεν αὐτομολεῖν πρὸς τὴν
5ἐκ τοῦ κέρδους λυσιτέλειαν. ὁ δ᾿ οὖν Φάυλλος μετὰ
τῆς δυνάμεως ἐστράτευσεν εἰς τὴν Βοιωτίαν καὶ
περὶ πόλιν Ὀρχομενὸν ἡττηθεὶς μάχῃ πολλοὺς τῶν
στρατιωτῶν ἀπέβαλεν. μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα ἄλλης γενομένης
μάχης παρὰ τὸν Κηφισὸν ποταμὸν ἐνίκησαν
πάλιν Βοιωτοὶ καὶ ἀνεῖλον τῶν πολεμίων ὑπὲρ τοὺς
πεντακοσίους,1 ἐζώγρησαν δὲ οὐκ ἐλάττους τῶν
6τετρακοσίων.2 ὀλίγαις δ᾿ ὕστερον ἡμέραις γενομένης
μάχης περὶ Κορώνειαν ἐνίκησαν οἱ Βοιωτοὶ
καὶ πεντήκοντα μὲν ἀνεῖλον τῶν Φωκέων, ἑκατὸν
δὲ καὶ τριάκοντα ἐζώγρησαν.
Ἡμεῖς δὲ τὰ περὶ Βοιωτοὺς καὶ Φωκεῖς διεληλυθότες
ἐπάνιμεν ἐπὶ τὸν Φίλιππον.
38. Οὗτος γὰρ νικήσας τὸν Ὀνόμαρχον ἐπιφανεῖ
παρατάξει τήν τ᾿ ἐν Φεραῖς τυραννίδα καθεῖλε καὶ
τῇ πόλει τὴν ἐλευθερίαν ἀποδοὺς καὶ τἄλλα τὰ
κατὰ τὴν Θετταλίαν καταστήσας προῆγεν ἐπὶ τὰς
2Πύλας πολεμήσων τοῖς Φωκεῦσι. κωλυσάντων δὲ
τῶν Ἀθηναίων διελθεῖν τὰς παρόδους ἐπανῆλθεν


1τετρακοσίους RF.2ἐζώγρησαν δ᾿ εἰς πεντακοσίους RF.340Book XVI

four hundred horse with Nausicles as their general. 352/1 b.c. The tyrants of Pherae, Lycophron and Peitholaüs,1 who were destitute of allies after the death of Onomarehus,
gave Pherae over to Philip, while they themselves, being protected by terms of truce, brought together their mercenaries to the number of two thousand, and, having fled with these to Phaÿllus, joined the Phocians as allies. Not a few of the lesser cities as well actively supported the Phocians because of the abundance of money that had been distributed; for gold that incites man’s covetousness compelled them to desert to the side which would enable them to profit from their gains. Phaÿllus accordingly with his army carried the campaign into Boeotia, and, suffering defeat near the city of Orchomenus, lost a great number of men. Later in another battle that took place by the Cephisus River the Boeotians won again and slew over five hundred of the enemy and took no fewer than four hundred prisoners. A few days later, in a battle that took place near Coroneia, the Boeotians were victorious and slew fifty of the Phocians, and took one hundred thirty prisoners.
Now that we have recounted the affairs of the Boeotians and Phocians we shall return to Philip.
38. Philip, after his defeat of Onomarchus2 in a noteworthy battle, put an end to the tyranny in Pherae,3 and, after restoring its freedom to the city and settling all other matters in Thessaly, advanced to Thermopylae, intending to make war on the Phocians. But since the Athenians prevented him from penetrating the pass,4 he returned to Macedonia, having




1So chap. 39. 3, but Pytholaüs in Plutarch, Pelopidas, 35. 3.2See chap. 35. 4–6.3See chap. 37. 3.4See Justin, 8. 2. 8–12 and Demosthenes, 19. 84.341