Diodorus of Sicily

τῶν γὰρ φίλων τις τοῦ βασιλέως ὄνομα
Δίμνος, μεμψιμοιρήσας τῷ βασιλεῖ περί τινων καὶ
τῷ θυμῷ προπεσών, ἐπιβουλὴν συνεστήσατο κατ᾿
2αὐτοῦ. ἔχων δ᾿ ἐρώμενον Νικόμαχον τοῦτον ἔπεισε
κοινωῆσαι τῆς ἐπιβουλῆς. οὗτος δὲ νέος ὢν παντελῶς
ἀνεκοινώσατο τὴν πρᾶξιν τῷ ἀδελφῷ Κεβαλίνῳ.
ὁ δὲ φοβηθεὶς μὴ φθάσῃ τις τῶν συνειδότων
καὶ δηλώσῃ τὴν ἐπιβουλὴν τῷ βασιλεῖ, αὐτὸς
ἔκρινε μηνῦσαι.
3Παρελθὼν οὖν ἐπὶ τὴν αὐλὴν καὶ συντυχὼν
Φιλώτᾳ καὶ διαλεχθεὶς παρεκελεύετο τὴν ταχίστην
ἀπαγγεῖλαι τῷ βασιλεῖ τὴν πρᾶξιν. ὁ δὲ Φιλώτας
εἴτε καὶ διὰ τὸ κοινωνεῖν τῆς ἐπιβουλῆς εἴτε καὶ
διὰ ῥᾳθυμίαν τὸν ῥηθέντα λόγον ἀργῶς ἐδέξατο καὶ
παρελθὼν πρὸς τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον καὶ πολλῆς καὶ
παντοδαπῆς κοινολογίας μετασχὼν οὐδὲν τῶν ὑπὸ
4Κεβαλίνου ῥηθέντων ἀπήγγειλεν. ἐξελθὼν δὲ πρὸς
τὸν Κεβαλῖνον εἶπεν ὅτι καιρὸν ἐπιτήδειον οὐκ ἔσχε
διασαφῆσαι, ἐπηγγέλλετο δὲ τῇ ὑστεραίᾳ συντεύξεσθαι
μόνῳ τῷ βασιλεῖ καὶ πάντα δηλώσειν τὰ
ῥηθέντα. τὸ δὲ αὐτὸ πράξαντος τοῦ Φιλώτου καὶ
τῇ ὑστεραίᾳ ὁ Κεβαλῖνος, εὐλαβηθεὶς μὴ δι᾿ ἑτέρου
μηνύσεως γενομένης αὐτὸς κινδυνεύσῃ, τὸν μὲν
Φιλώταν παρέπεμψε, τῶν τε βασιλικῶν τινι παίδων
προσελθὼν καὶ τὰ κατὰ μέρος ἀπαγγείλας ἠξίωσε
τὴν ταχίστην ἀπαγγεῖλαι τῷ βασιλεῖ.
346Book XVII

of nature.1 One of the king’s Friends named Dimnus2 329/8 b.c. found fault with him for some reason, and in a rash fit of anger formed a plot against him. He had a beloved named Nicomachus and persuaded him to take part in it. Being very young, the boy disclosed the plan to his brother Cebalinus,3 who, however, was terrified lest one of the conspirators should get ahead of the rest in revealing the plot to the king, and decided himself to be the informer.
He went to the court, met Philotas and talked with him, and urged him to tell the whole story to the king as quickly as he could. It may be that Philotas was actually a party to the plot4; he may merely have been slow to act. At all events, he heard Cebalinus with indifference, and although he visited Alexander and took part in a long conversation on a variety of subjects, said no word about what had just been told him. When he returned to Cebalinus, he said that he had not found a suitable occasion to mention it, but would surely see the king alone the next day and tell him everything. Philotas did the same thing on the next day also, and Cebalinus, co insure himself against someone else betraying the plot and putting him in danger, dropped Philotas and accosted one of the royal pages, telling him all that had happened and begging him to report it to the king immediately.
1For the story of the conspiracy and its consequences cp. Curtius, 6. 7–7. 2. 34; Justin, 12. 5. 1–3; Plutarch, Alexander, 48–49. 7; Arrian, 3. 26.2The name is given by Curtius as Dymnus, by Plutarch as Limnus.3In Curtius and Plutarch, Nicomachus did not approve of the plot and assisted in exposing it. Here also, both Cebalinus and Nicomachus seem not to have been punished.4Plutarch also; cp. also De Fortuna aut Virtute Alexandri, 2. 7. 339 e-f.347