Diodorus of Sicily

καὶ ξύλων καὶ ἁλῶν1 ὥστ᾿ εἰς ἔτη πολλὰ δύνασθαι
χορηγῆσαι πάντα τοῖς εἰς αὐτὴν καταφυγοῦσι. συνέφυγον
δὲ μετ᾿ αὐτοῦ τῶν φίλων οἱ ταῖς εὐνοίαις
διαφέροντες καὶ κεκρικότες συναποθνήσκειν αὐτῷ
κατὰ τοὺς ἐσχάτους κινδύνους· οἱ δὲ πάντες ὑπῆρχον
ἱππεῖς τε καὶ πεζοὶ περὶ ἑξακοσίους.
4Ἀντίγονος δὲ παραλαβὼν τὴν μετ᾿ Εὐμενοῦς
δύναμιν καὶ τῶν σατραπειῶν καὶ τῶν ἐν ταύταις
προσόδων κύριος γενόμενος, ἔτι δὲ παραλαβὼν
πλῆθος χρημάτων μειζόνων πραγμάτων ὠρέγετο·
οὐκέτι γὰρ οὐδεὶς τῶν κατὰ τὴν Ἀσίαν ἡγεμόνων
ἀξιόμαχον εἶχε δύναμιν διαγωνίσασθαι πρὸς
5αὐτὸν περὶ τῶν πρωτείων. διὸ καὶ πρὸς Ἀντίπατρον
κατὰ μὲν τὸ παρὸν προσεποιεῖτο φιλικῶς
διακεῖσθαι, διεγνώκει δὲ τὰ καθ᾿ αὑτὸν ἀσφαλισάμενος
μηκέτι προσέχειν μήτε τοῖς βασιλεῦσι
6μήτε Ἀντιπάτρῳ. τὸ μὲν οὖν πρῶτον περιέλαβε
τοὺς καταπεφευγότας εἰς τὸ φρούριον διπλοῖς τοῖς
τείχεσι καὶ τάφροις καὶ χαρακώμασι θαυμαστοῖς·
μετὰ ταῦτα δ᾿ εἰς σύλλογον ἐλθὼν Εὐμενεῖ καὶ
τὴν προϋπάρχουσαν φιλίαν ἀνανεωσάμενος ἔπειθεν
αὐτὸν κοινοπραγεῖν. ὁ δὲ εἰδὼς τὴν τύχην ὀξέως
μεταβάλλουσαν μείζονας ᾔτει φιλανθρωπίας τῆς
7περὶ αὐτὸν οὔσης περιστάσεως· ᾤετο γὰρ δεῖν αὐτῷ
συγχωρηθῆναι τὰς ἐξ ἀρχῆς δεδομένας σατραπείας
καὶ τῶν ἐγκλημάτων ἁπάντων ἀπόλυσιν. ὁ δὲ
Ἀντίγονος περὶ μὲν τούτων ἐπὶ τὸν Ἀντίπατρον
τὴν ἀναφορὰν ἐποιήσατο, τοῦ δὲ χωρίου τὴν ἱκανὴν
φυλακὴν ἀπολιπὼν ὥρμησεν ἐπὶ τοὺς περιγενομένους1
1ἁλῶν Fischer, cp. Plutarch, Eumenes, 11. 1, τῶν ἄλλων
Wesseling, Dindorf: ἄλλων.128Book XVIII

firewood, and salt, ample to supply for many years all 320 b.c. the needs of those who took refuge there. Eumenes was accompanied in his flight by those of his friends who were exceptionally loyal and had determined to die along with him if it came to the worst straits. In all, counting both cavalry and infantry, there were about six hundred souls.1
Now that Antigonus had taken over the army that had been with Eumenes, had become master of Eumenes’ satrapies together with their revenues, and had seized a great sum of money besides, he aspired to greater things; for there was no longer any commander in all Asia who had an army strong enough to compete with him for supremacy. Therefore, although maintaining for the time being a pretence of being well disposed toward Antipater, he had decided that, as soon as he had made his own position secure, he would no longer take orders either from the kings or from Antipater. Accordingly he first surrounded those who had fled to the stronghold with double walls, ditches, and amazing palisades; but then he parleyed with Eumenes, renewed the former friendship, and tried to persuade him to cast his lot with him. Eumenes, however, being well aware that Fortune changes quickly, insisted upon greater concessions than his existing circumstances justified; in fact, he thought that he ought to be given back the satrapies that had been originally assigned to him and be cleared of all the charges. But Antigonus referred these matters to Antipater, and then, after placing a sufficient guard about the fortress, he set out to meet those commanders of the enemy who

1In chap. 53. 7 the number who survived the siege is given as five hundred.129