Diodorus of Sicily

τύχης καινοτομίαν. ὁρῶν γὰρ ἑαυτὸν μὲν ξένον
ὄντα καὶ μηδὲν προσήκοντα βασιλικαῖς ἐξουσίαις,
τοὺς δ᾿ ὑποταττομένους Μακεδόνας θάνατον αὐτοῦ
προκατεγνωκότας, τοὺς δ᾿ ἐν ταῖς στρατιωτικαῖς
ἡγεμονίαις διατρίβοντας φρονήματος πλήρεις ὑπάρχοντας
καὶ μεγάλων πραγμάτων ὀρεγομένους,
ὑπέλαβεν ἔσεσθαι περὶ αὐτὸν συντόμως καταφρόνησιν
ἅμα καὶ φθόνον καὶ τὸ τελευταῖον τὸν περὶ
τοῦ ζῆν κίνδυνον· μηδένα γὰρ ποιήσειν ἑκουσίως
τὸ προσταττόμενον ὑπὸ τῶν ἡττόνων εἶναι δοκούντων
μηδὲ καρτερήσειν δεσποζόμενον ὑπὸ τῶν
2ὀφειλόντων ἑτέροις ὑποτάττεσθαι. δοὺς δὲ αὑτῷ
περὶ τούτων λόγον πρῶτον μὲν διδομένων αὐτῷ
τῶν πεντακοσίων ταλάντων κατὰ τὰς τῶν βασιλέων
ἐπιστολὰς εἰς ἀνάληψιν καὶ κατασκευὴν1 οὐκ
ἔφησε λήψεσθαι· μὴ γὰρ προσδεῖσθαι τηλικαύτης
δωρεᾶς, ὡς ἂν μηδεμιᾶς αὐτοῦ σπεύδοντος τυχεῖν
3ἡγεμονίας. καὶ γὰρ νῦν οὐχ ἑκουσίως αὐτὸν
ὑπακηκοέναι πρὸς ταύτην τὴν χρείαν, ἀλλ᾿ ὑπὸ τῶν
βασιλέων συνηναγκάσθαι προσδέξασθαι τὴν τοιαύτην
λειτουργίαν. καθόλου γὰρ διὰ τὴν συνέχειαν
τῆς στρατείας μηκέτι δύνασθαι φέρειν τὰς κακοπαθίας
καὶ πλάνας, καὶ ταῦτα μηδεμιᾶς ὑποκειμένης
ἀρχῆς ξένῳ καὶ τῆς ὁμοεθνοῦς τοῖς
4Μακεδόσιν ἐξουσίας κεχωρισμένῳ. ἀπεφαίνετο δὲ
αὑτὸν ἑωρακέναι κατὰ τὸν ὕπνον ὄψιν παράδοξον,
ἣν ἀναγκαῖον ἡγεῖσθαι δηλῶσαι πᾶσι· δοκεῖν γὰρ
αὐτὴν πολλὰ συνεργήσειν πρός τε ὁμόνοιαν καὶ τὸ
5κοινῃ συμφέρον. δόξαι γὰρ κατὰ τὸν ὕπνον ὁρᾶν
Ἀλέξανδρον τὸν βασιλέα ζῶντα καὶ τῇ βασιλικῇ

1Fischer suspects the loss of one or more words after
κατασκευὴν.176Book XVIII

again. He perceived that he himself was a foreigner 318 b.c. and had no claim to the royal power, that the Macedonians who were now subject to him had previously decreed his death, and that those who occupied the military commands were filled with arrogance and were aiming at great affairs. He therefore understood that he would soon be despised and at the same time envied, and that his life would eventually be in danger; for no one will willingly carry out orders given by those whom he regards as his inferiors, or be patient when he has over him as masters those who ought themselves to be subject to others. Reasoning about these matters with himself, when the five hundred talents for refitting and organization were offered him in accordance with the kings’ letters, he at first refused to accept them, saying that he had no need of such a gift as he had no desire to attain any position of command. Even now, he said, it was not of his own will that he had yielded with respect to his present office, but he had been compelled by the kings to undertake this great task. In any case, owing to his continuous military service, he was no longer able to endure the hardships and journeyings, especially since no magistracy was in prospect for one who was an alien and hence was excluded from the power that belonged of right to the Macedonians. He declared, however, that in his sleep he had seen a strange vision, which he considered it necessary to disclose to all, for he thought it would contribute much to harmony and the general good.1 He said that in his sleep he had seemed to see Alexander the king, alive and clad in his kingly garb, presiding over

1For this device of Eumenes cp. Plutarch, Eumenes, 13. 3–4; Nepos, Eumenes, 7. 2–3; Polyaenus, 4. 8. 2.177