Diodorus of Sicily

πάσας ἑκατὸν ἑβδομήκοντα. τῶν δὲ Μακεδονικῶν
νεῶν οὐσῶν διακοσίων καὶ τεσσαράκοντα τὴν ναυαρχίαν
9εἶχε Κλεῖτος. οὗτος δὲ ναυμαχήσας πρὸς
Εὐετίωνα1 τὸν Ἀθηναίων ναύαρχον ἐνίκησε δυσὶν
ναυμαχίαις καὶ συχνὰς τῶν πολεμίων νεῶν διέφθειρε
περὶ τὰς καλουμένας Ἐχινάδας2 νήσους.
16. Ἅμα δὲ τούτοις πραττομένοις Περδίκκας,
ἔχων μεθ᾿ ἑαυτοῦ τόν τε βασιλέα Φίλιππον καὶ τὴν
βασιλικὴν δύναμιν, ἐστράτευσεν ἐπὶ Ἀριαράθην τὸν
Καππαδοκίας δυνάστην. οὗτος γὰρ οὐ προσέχων
τοῖς Μακεδόσιν ὑπὸ μὲν Ἀλεξάνδρου παρεωράθη
διὰ τοὺς περὶ Δαρεῖον ἀγῶνας καὶ περισπασμούς,
ἀναστροφὴν δὲ πολυχρόνιον εἶχε κυριεύων τῆς Καππαδοκίας.
2διὸ καὶ πολλὰ μὲν ἐκ τῶν προσόδων
χρήματα ἤθροισε, δυνάμεις δ᾿ ἐγχωρίους καὶ ξενικὰς
μεγάλας συνεστήσατο. διὸ καὶ βασιλείας
ἀντιποιούμενος ἕτοιμος ἦν πρὸς τὸν Περδίκκαν
διαγωνίζεσθαι, πεζοὺς μὲν ἔχων τρισμυρίους ἱππεῖς
δὲ μυρίους πεντακισχιλίους. ὁ δὲ Περδίκκας
συνάψας αὐτῷ μάχην καὶ τῇ παρατάξει νικήσας




1Εὐετίωνα Böckh: Ἠετίωνα Fischer following the MSS.2Grauert suggests Λιχάδας for Ἐχινάδας (see note to translation).56Book XVIII

there were in all one hundred and seventy.1 Cleitus 322 b.c. was in command of the Macedonian fleet, which numbered two hundred and forty. Engaging with the Athenian admiral Evetion he defeated him in two naval battles and destroyed a large number of the ships of the enemy near the islands that are called the Echinades.
16. While these things were going on, Perdiccas, taking with him King Philip and the royal army, campaigned against Ariarathes, the ruler of Cappadocia. His failure to take orders from the Macedonians had been overlooked by Alexander, owing to the struggle with Darius and its distractions, and he had enjoyed a very long respite as king of Cappadocia.2 As a result he had amassed a great sum of money from the revenues and had formed a large body of native troops and mercenaries. He was thus ready to enter the lists against Perdiccas in defence of his kingdom with thirty thousand infantry and fifteen thousand cavalry. Perdiccas joined battle with him, and, defeating him in the conflict, slew men to the


1Diodorus has condensed his account of the naval campaign
to the point of unintelligibility, although it was probably
the decisive factor in the war. We cannot even be sure
whether Diodorus intends to mention two sea battles or three.
T. Walek (Revue de Philologie, 48 (1924), 23 ff.) reconstructs
the campaign as follows. While part of the original Athenian
fleet of 240 ships (chap. 10. 2) blockaded the fleet of Anti-pater
in the Malian Gulf, the rest held the Hellespont and
for a time prevented Leonnatus from coming to the aid of Antipater. Although this fleet was increased to 170 ships, it was defeated in the spring of 322 by the larger fleet of Cleitus at Abydos (cp. Inscriptiones Graecae, editio minor, 2. 298 and 493). Cleitus then crossed the Aegean and defeated the other Athenian fleet with great loss at the Lichades Islands in the Malian Gulf (see critical note), and at once removed to Amorgos for the final battle (Plutarch, Demetrius, 11. 3; Marmor Parium for 323/2), which ended Athenian sea power forever. It is hard to see how any battle of this war could have taken place near the Echinades (off the west coast of Acarnania), but this name may conceal a reference to Echinus on the north shore of the Malian Gulf.2According to Hieronymus of Cardia (FGrH, 154. 4), Ariarathes lived to the age of eighty-two. For this campaign cp. Arrian, FGrH, 156. 1. 11; Justin, 13. 6. 1–3; Plutarch, Eumenes, 3. 2, 6.57