Diodorus of Sicily

Δεκίῳ καὶ Κοΐντῳ Φαβίῳ, παρὰ δὲ τοῖς Ἠλείοις
ὀλυμπιὰς ἤχθη ὀγδόη πρὸς ταῖς ἑκατὸν δέκα, καθ᾿
ἣν ἐνίκα στάδιον Ἀπολλωνίδης Τεγεάτης. κατὰ
δὲ τούτους τοὺς χρόνους Πτολεμαῖος μὲν ἐκ τῆς
Μύνδου πλεύσας ἁδρῷ στόλῳ διὰ νήσων ἐν παράπλῳ
τὴν Ἄνδρον ἠλευθέρωσε καὶ τὴν φρουρὰν
ἐξήγαγε. κομισθεὶς δ᾿ ἐπὶ τὸν Ἰσθμὸν Σικυῶνα
καὶ Κόρινθον παρέλαβεν παρὰ Κρατησιπόλεως. τὰς
δὲ αἰτίας δι᾿ ἃς ἐκυρίευσε πόλεων ἐπιφανῶν προδεδηλωκότες
ἐν ταῖς πρὸ ταύτης βίβλοις τὸ διλογεῖν
2ὑπὲρ τὦν αὐτῶν παρήσομεν. ἐπεβάλετο μὲν
οὖν καὶ τὰς ἄλλας Ἑλληνίδας πόλεις Πτολεμαῖος
ἐλευθεροῦν, μεγάλην προσθήκην ἡγούμενος ἔσεσθαι
τοῖς ἰδίοις πράγμασι τὴν τῶν Ἑλλήνων εὔνοιαν·
ἐπεὶ δὲ οἱ Πελοποννήσιοι συνταξάμενοι χορηγήσειν
σῖτον καὶ χρήματα τῶν ὡμολογημένων οὐδὲν συνετέλουν,
ἀγανακτήσας ὁ δυνάστης πρὸς μὲν Κάσανδρον
εἰρήνην ἐποιήσατο, καθ᾿ ἣν ἑκατέρους ἔδει
κυριεύειν τῶν πόλεων ὧν εἶχον, τὴν δὲ Σικυῶνα
καὶ Κόρινθον ἀσφαλισάμενος φρουρᾷ διῆρεν εἰς τὴν
Αἴγυπτον.
3Ἅμα δὲ τούτοις πραττομένοις Κλεοπάτρα τῷ
μὲν Ἀντιγόνῳ προσκόπτουσα, τῇ δ᾿ αἱρέσει πρὸς
τὸν Πτολεμαῖον ἀποκλίνουσα προῆγεν ἐκ Σάρδεων,
ὡς διακομισθησομένη πρὸς ἐκεῖνον. ἦν δὲ ἀδελφὴ
μὲν Ἀλεξάνδρου τοῦ Πέρσας καταπολεμήσαντος,
θυγάτηρ δὲ Φιλίππου τοῦ Ἀμύντου, γυνὴ δὲ γεγενημένη
τοῦ εἰς Ἰταλίαν στρατεύσαντος Ἀλεξάνδρου.


240Book XX

Quintus Fabius1; and in Elis the Olympian Games 308 b.c. were celebrated for the one hundred and eighteenth time, at which celebration Apollonides of Tegea won the foot race. At this time,2 while Ptolemy was sailing from Myndus with a strong fleet through the islands, he liberated Andros as he passed by and drove out the garrison. Moving on to the Isthmus, he took Sicyon and Corinth from Cratesipolis. Since the causes that explain her becoming ruler of famous cities were made clear in the preceding Book,3 we shall refrain from again discussing the same subject. Now Ptolemy planned to free the other Greek cities also, thinking that the goodwill of the Greeks would be a great gain for him in his own undertakings; but when the Peloponnesians, having agreed to contribute food and money, contributed nothing of what had been promised, the prince in anger made peace with Cassander, by the terms of which peace each prince was to remain master of the cities that he was holding; and after securing Sicyon and Corinth with a garrison, Ptolemy departed for Egypt.
Meanwhile Cleopatra quarrelled with Antigonus and, inclining to cast her lot with Ptolemy, she started from Sardis in order to cross over to him. She was the sister of Alexander the conqueror of Persia and daughter of Philip, son of Amyntas, and had been the wife of the Alexander who made an expedition



1Charinus was archon in 308/7 b.c. In the Fasti the year
309 b.c. is a “dictator year” with L. Papirius Cursor as
dictator and C. Junius Bubulcus Brutus as his master-of-horse.
No consuls are given . For these dictator years, probably invented to accommodate two systems of chronology, cp. Introduction to Vol. IX and H. Stuart Jones in Cambridge Ancient History, 7. 321. This fictitious year is omitted by both Livy and Diodorus, and from this point on the Varronian chronology and that of Diodorus agree. The consuls for 308 b.c are given in the Fasti as P. Decius Mus for the second lime and Q. Fabius Maximus Rullianus for the third, cp. Livy, 9. 40, 41.2Continued from chap. 27. 3.3Cp. Book 19. 67. 1.241