Diodorus of Sicily

τοὺς μὲν πλείους μεταθεμένους πρὸς Κάσανδρον,
τοὺς δ᾿ ὑπολοίπους τῶν φίλων οὐκ ἰσχύοντας βοηθεῖν,
ἐπεχείρησε πεντήρη ναῦν κατασπᾶν καὶ διὰ
5ταύτης αὑτήν τε καὶ τοὺς φίλους σώζειν. αὐτομόλου
δέ τινος τὸ γινόμενον ἀπαγγείλαντος τοῖς
πολεμίοις ὁ μὲν Κάσανδρος ἐπιπλεύσας ἐκυρίευσε
τοῦ σκάφους, ἡ δ᾿ Ὀλυμπιὰς ἀπογνοῦσα τὰ καθ᾿
αὑτὴν πρέσβεις ἐξέπεμψε περὶ διαλύσεων. οἰομένου
δὲ δεῖν τοῦ Κασάνδρου τὰ καθ᾿ αὑτὴν ἐπιτρέπειν
μόγις ἔπεισεν ὥστε μόνην ἐξαίρετον λαβεῖν
6τὴν τοῦ σώματος ἀσφάλειαν. Κάσανδρος δὲ
κυριεύσας τῆς πόλεως ἐξέπεμψε τοὺς παραληψομένους
7τήν τε Πέλλαν καὶ τὴν Ἀμφίπολιν. ὁ μὲν
οὖν τῆς Πέλλης κυριεύων Μόνιμος ἀκούσας τὰ
συμβάντα περὶ τὴν Ὀλυμπιάδα παρέδωκε τὴν
πόλιν· ὁ δ᾿ Ἀριστόνους τὸ μὲν πρῶτον ἀντέχεσθαι
τῶν πραγμάτων διεγνώκει, στρατιώτας τε συχνοὺς
ἔχων καὶ προσφάτως εὐημερηκώς· ὀλίγαις γὰρ
ἔμπροσθεν ἡμέραις παραταξάμενος πρὸς τὸν Κασάνδρου
στρατηγὸν Κρατεύαν τοὺς πλείστους μὲν
ἀνεῖλε τῶν ἀντιταχθέντων, αὐτὸν δὲ τὸν Κρατεύαν
μετὰ δισχιλίων φυγόντα τῆς Βισαλτίας εἰς Βεδύνδια
περιστρατοπεδεύσας ἐξεπολιόρκησε καὶ τὰ ὅπλα
8παρελόμενος ὑπόσπονδον ἀφῆκε. διὰ δὲ ταῦτα
ἐπαιρόμενος καὶ τὸν Εὐμενοῦς θάνατον ἀγνοῶν, ἔτι
δὲ τοὺς περὶ Ἀλέξανδρον καὶ Πολυπέρχοντα νομίζων
συνεπιλήψεσθαι τὴν Ἀμφίπολιν οὐκ ἔφη παραδώσειν.
ἐπεὶ δὲ ἔγραψε πρὸς αὐτὸν Ὀλυμπιὰς
ἀπαιτοῦσα τὴν πίστιν καὶ κελεύουσα παραδοῦναι,
διαλαβὼν ἀναγκαῖον εἶναι τὸ προστασσόμενον
ποιεῖν, τήν τε πόλιν ἐνεχείρισε καὶ τὰ πιστὰ περὶ
τῆς ἀσφαλείας ἔλαβεν.
366Book XIX

her friends had gone over to Cassander and that 316 b.c. those who remained were not strong enough to come to her aid, attempted to launch a quinquereme and by this means to save herself and her friends. When, however, a deserter brought news of this attempt to the enemy and Cassander sailed up and took the ship, Olympias, recognizing that her situation was beyond hope, sent envoys to treat of terms. When Cassander gave his opinion that she must put all her interests into his hands, she with difficulty persuaded him to grant the single exception that he guarantee her personal safety. As soon as he had gained possession of the city, he sent men to take over Pella and Amphipolis. Now Monimus, the ruler of Pella, on hearing the fate of Olympias, surrendered his city; but Aristonoiis at first was minded to cling to his position, since he had many soldiers and had recently enjoyed a success. That is, a few days before this in a battle against Cassander’s general Cratevas he had killed most of those who faced him, and when Cratevas himself with two thousand men had fled to Bedyndia in Bisaltia,1 he invested him, took him by siege, and dismissed him on terms after taking away his arms. Aristonoüs, encouraged by this and ignorant of the death of Eumenes, believing, moreover, that Alexander and Polyperchon would support him, refused to surrender Amphipolis. But when Olympias wrote to him demanding his loyalty and ordering him to surrender, he perceived that it was necessary to do as ordered and delivered the city to Cassander, receiving pledges for his own safety.
1Bisaltia lies just to the west of the lower Strymon. The exact situation of Bedyndia is unknown.367