Diodorus of Sicily

ἀλλοτρίως διακειμένους τοῖς Πέρσαις τοὺς μὲν
βιασάμενος, τοὺς δὲ καταστρατηγήσας ἅπαντας
ταχέως κατεπολέμησεν.
Καὶ τὰ μὲν κατὰ τὴν Ἀσίαν ἐν τούτοις ἦν.
9Κατὰ δὲ τὴν Εὐρώπην Φίλιππος μὲν ὁ Μακεδόνων
βασιλεὺς στρατεύσας ἐπὶ τὰς Χαλκιδικὰς πόλεις
Ζερεία1 μὲν φρούριον ἐκπολιορκήσας κατέσκαψε,
τῶν δ᾿ ἄλλων πολισμάτων ἔνια καταπληξάμενος
ἠνάγκασεν ὑποτάττεσθαι· ἐπὶ δὲ τὰς Φερὰς τῆς
Θετταλίας παρελθὼν Πειθόλαον δυναστεύοντα τῆς
10πόλεως ἐξέβαλεν. ἅμα δὲ τούτοις πραττομένοις
ἐν τῷ Πόντῳ Σπάρτακος ὁ τοῦ Πόντου βασιλεὺς
ἐτελεύτησεν ἄρξας ἔτη πέντε, τὴν δ᾿ ἡγεμονίαν
διαδεξάμενος ὁ ἀδελφὸς Παιρισάδης2 ἐβασίλευσεν
ἔτη τριάκοντα ὀκτώ.
53. Τοῦ δ᾿ ἔτους τούτου διελθόντος Ἀθήνησι μὲν
ἦρχε Θεόφιλος, ἐν Ῥώμῃ δὲ κατεστάθησαν ὕπατοι
Γάιος Σουλπίκιος καὶ Γάιος Κοΐντιος, ὀλυμπιὰς δ᾿
ἤχθη ὀγδόη πρὸς ταῖς ἑκατόν, καθ᾿ ἣν ἐνίκα στάδιον
2Πολυκλῆς Κυρηναῖος. ἐπὶ δὲ τούτων Φίλιππος
μὲν σπεύδων τὰς ἐφ᾿ Ἑλλησπόντῳ πόλεις χειρώσασθαι
Μηκύβερναν μὲν καὶ Τορώνην χωρὶς κινδύνων
διὰ προδοσίας παρέλαβεν, ἐπὶ δὲ τὴν μεγίστην
τῶν περὶ τοὺς τόπους τούτους πόλεων Ὄλυνθον
στρατεύσας μετὰ πολλῆς δυνάμεως τὸ μὲν πρῶτον
νικήσας τοὺς Ὀλυνθίους δυσὶ μάχαις συνέκλεισεν
εἰς πολιορκίαν, προσβολὰς δὲ συνεχεῖς ποιούμενος
πολλοὺς τῶν στρατιωτῶν ἀπέβαλεν ἐν ταῖς τειχομαχίαις·


1Ζερεία Merritt, Wade-Gery, McGregor, The Athenian
Tribute Lists, 1. 488. 2, 603: Γεῖραν RV, Γείραν FM, Ζειρα
P, Ζειρὰ X. Fischer suggests Στάγειραν.2The proper form (cp. Latyschew, Insc. Ant. Orae Sept.
Ponti Eux. p. xxiii a 5): Παρυσάδης.386Book XVI

who were at odds with the Persians, whether by force 349/8 b.c. or by stratagem, he soon subdued them all.
And this was the state of affairs in Asia.
In Europe Philip, the Macedonian king, marched against the cities of Chalcidicê, took the fortress of Zereia1 by siege and razed it. He then intimidated some of the other towns and compelled them to submit. Then coming against Pherae in Thessaly he expelled Peitholaüs,2 who was in-control of the city. While these things were going on, there occurred in Pontus the death of Spartacus king of Pontus after a rule of five years. His brother Paerisades3 succeeded to the throne and reigned for thirty-eight years.
53. When this year had elapsed, at Athens Theophilus 348/7 b.c. was archon, and at Rome Gaius Sulpicius and Gaius Quintius were elected as consuls, and the one hundred eighth celebration of the Olympian games was held at which Polycles of Cyrenê won the stadion race. During their term of office Philip, whose aim was to subdue the cities on the Hellespont, acquired without a battle Mecyberna4 and Toronê5 by treasonable surrender, and then, having taken the field with a large army against the most important of the cities in this region, Olynthus, he first defeated the Olynthians in two battles and confined them to the defence of their walls; then in the continuous assaults that he made he lost many of his men in encounters at the walls,





1Cp. Demosthenes, 19. 266 and Philochorus, fr. 132.2Inconsistent with chaps. 37, 38 unless Peitholaüs had recovered Pherae in the meantime.3For his death see Book 20. 22. 1.4Mecyberna was the port of Olynthus, taken by Olynthus from Athens (cp. Book 12. 77. 5).5Toronê was probably subject to Olynthus (cp. Book 15. 81. 6).387