Diodorus of Sicily

οἰκιῶν καθ᾿ ἃς τυγχάνοιεν αἰεὶ γινόμενοι. καταλαβομένων
δ᾿ αὐτῶν ὑπερδέξιόν τινα τόπον οἱ
Καρχηδόνιοι τῶν πολιτῶν πάντων συνδραμόντων
ἐν τοῖς ὅπλοις ἀντεστρατοπέδευσαν τοῖς ἀφεστηκόσι.
6τέλος δὲ πρέσβεις πέμψαντες τῶν πρεσβυτάτων
τοὺς εὐθέτους καὶ τῶν ἐγκλημάτων δόντες
ἄφεσιν διελύθησαν· καὶ τοῖς μὲν ἄλλοις οὐδὲν ἐμνησικάκησαν
διὰ τοὺς περιεστῶτας τὴν πόλιν κινδύνους,
αὐτὸν δὲ τὸν Βορμίλκαν αἰκισάμενοι δεινῶς
τοῦ ζῆν ἐστέρησαν, οὐδὲν φροντίσαντες τῶν δεδομένων
ὅρκων. Καρχηδόνιοι μὲν οὖν κινδυνεύσαντες
τοῖς ὅλοις σφαλῆναι τοῦτον τὸν τρόπον ἐκομίσαντο
τὴν πατρῴαν πολιτείαν.
7Ἀγαθοκλῆς δὲ πλοῖα φορτηγὰ γεμίσας τῶν λαφύρων
καὶ τοὺς ἀχρήστους εἰς πόλεμον τῶν ἐκ
Κυρήνης παραγενομένων ἐμβιβάσας ἀπέστειλεν εἰς
Συρακούσσας. χειμώνων δ᾿ ἐπιγενομένων ἃ μὲν
διεφθάρη τῶν πλοίων, ἃ δ᾿ ἐξέπεσε πρὸς τὰς κατ᾿
Ἰταλίαν Πιθηκούσσας νήσους, ὀλίγα δ᾿ εἰς τὰς
Συρακούσσας διεσώθη.
8Κατὰ δὲ τὴν Ἰταλίαν οἱ τῶν Ῥωμαίων ὕπατοι,
Μαρσοῖς πολεμουμένοις ὑπὸ Σαμνιτῶν βοηθήσαντες,
τῇ τε μάχῃ προετέρησαν καὶ συχνοὺς τῶν πολεμίων
9ἀνεῖλον. εἶτα διὰ τῆς Ὀμβρίκων χώρας διελθόντες
ἐνέβαλον εἰς τὴν Τυρρηνίαν πολεμίαν οὖσαν καὶ
τὸ καλούμενον Καίριον φρούριον ἐξεπολιόρκησαν.
διαπρεσβευομένων δὲ τῶν ἐγχωρίων ὑπὲρ ἀνοχῶν
πρὸς μὲν Ταρκυνιήτας εἰς ἔτη τεσσαράκοντα, πρὸς
δὲ τοὺς ἄλλους Τυρρηνοὺς ἅπαντας εἰς ἐνιαυτὸν
ἀνοχὰς ἐποιήσαντο.
262Book XX

whatever houses they chanced at any time to be near. 308 b.c. After these had occupied a certain elevation, the Carthaginians, now that all the citizens had assembled in arms, drew up their forces against those who had taken part in the uprising. Finally, sending as envoys such of the oldest men as were qualified and offering amnesty, they came to terms. Against the rest they invoked no penalty on account of the dangers that surrounded the city, but they cruelly tortured Bormilcar
himself and put him to death, paying no heed to the oaths which had been given. In this way, then, the Carthaginians, after having been in the gravest danger, preserved the constitution of their fathers.
Agathocles, loading cargo vessels with his spoil and embarking on them those of the men who had come from Cyrenê who were useless for war, sent them to Syracuse. But storms arose, and some of the ships were destroyed, some were driven to the Pithecusan Islands off the coast of Italy, and a few came safe to Syracuse.1
In Italy2 the Roman consuls, going to the aid of the Marsi, against whom the Samnites were making war, were victorious in the battle and slew many of the enemy. Then, crossing the territory of the Umbrians, they invaded Etruria, which was hostile, and took by siege the fortress called Caerium.3 When the people of the region sent envoys to ask a truce, the consuls made a truce for forty years with the Tarquinians but with all the other Etruscans for one year.4
1Continued in chap. 54. 1.2Continued from chap. 36. 6. Cp. Livy, 9. 41. 5–7.3Unknown. Caprium in Table of Contents, p. 138, and in var. lect. here.4Continued in chap. 80. 1.263