Diodorus of Sicily

δὲ στρατιώτας μὲν ὁπλίτας καταλέξαι δισμυρίους
ἱππεῖς δὲ πεντακοσίους, ναῦς δὲ πληρῶσαι διακοσίας.
προσελάβοντο δὲ καὶ τοὺς Θηβαίους ἐπὶ
8τὸ κοινὸν συνέδριον ἐπὶ τοῖς ἴσοις πᾶσιν. ἐψηφίσαντο
δὲ καὶ τὰς γενομένας κληρουχίας ἀποκαταστῆσαι
τοῖς πρότερον κυρίοις γεγονόσι, καὶ
νόμον ἔθεντο μηδένα τῶν Ἀθηναίων γεωργεῖν
ἐκτὸς τῆς Ἀττικῆς. διὰ δὲ ταύτης τῆς φιλανθρωπίας
ἀνακτησάμενοι τὴν παρὰ τοῖς Ἕλλησιν
εὔνοιαν, ἰσχυροτέραν ἐποιήσαντο τὴν ἰδίαν ἡγεμονίαν.
30. Πολλαὶ μὲν οὖν καὶ τῶν ἄλλων πόλεων διὰ
τὴν εἰρημένην αἰτίαν προεκλήθησαν πρὸς τοὺς Ἀθηναίους
ἀποκλῖναι, πρῶται δὲ καὶ προθυμότατα
συνεμάχησαν αἱ κατὰ τὴν Εὔβοιαν οἰκοῦσαι χωρὶς
Ἑστιαίας· αὕτη γὰρ εὐηργετημένη μὲν1 ὑπὸ Λακεδαιμονίων
μεγάλα πεπολεμημένη δὲ δεινῶς ὑπὸ
Ἀθηναίων, εὐλόγως πρὸς μὲν Ἀθηναίους ἀδιάλυτον
ἐφύλαττε2 τὴν ἔχθραν πρὸς δὲ τοὺς Σπαρτιάτας
2βεβαίαν τὴν3 πίστιν διεφύλαττεν. οὐ μὴν ἀλλὰ
τοῖς Ἀθηναίοις εἰς συμμαχίαν συνέβησαν ἑβδομήκοντα
πόλεις καὶ μετέσχον ἐπ᾿ ἴσης τοῦ κοινοῦ
συνεδρίου· διὸ καὶ τοῖς Ἀθηναίοις αἰεὶ μᾶλλον τῆς
δυνάμεως αὐξομένης τοῖς δὲ Λακεδαιμονίοις ταπεινουμένης,
ἐφάμιλλον τὴν ἰσχὺν τῶν πόλεων
συνέβαινε γίνεσθαι. οἱ δ᾿ Ἀθηναῖοι, τῶν πραγμάτων





1μὲν added by Kaelker.2Warmington would delete ἐφύλαττε; ἐνεῖχε Post3βεβαίαν τὴν Vogel (cp. Book 13. 32. 5): βεβαιοτάτην.28Book XV

Callistratus.1 They voted to levy twenty thousand hoplites 377/6 b.c. and five hundred cavalry, and to man two hundred ships. They likewise admitted the Thebans into the common council on terms equal in all respects.2 They voted also to restore the land settled by cleruchs3 to its former owners and passed a law that no Athenian should cultivate lands outside of Attica.4 By this generous act they recovered the goodwill of the Greeks and made their own leadership more secure.
30. Now many of the other cities for the aforesaid reason were prompted to fall away to Athens; and the first to join in the alliance and the most eager were the cities of Euboea excepting Hestiaea5; for Hestiaea, having been treated most generously by the Lacedaemonians while she had suffered terribly in war with the Athenians, had very good reason for maintaining unabated her enmity to Athens and for continuing to observe inviolate her pledge to Sparta. Nevertheless seventy cities eventually entered into alliance with the Athenians and participated on equal footing in the common council. So with the constant increase in the strength of the Athenians and the diminution of that of the Lacedaemonians the two states were now well matched. The Athenians, seeing





1Callistratus of Aphidna, though one of the opponents of
the King’s Peace (see Book 14. 110. 2–3), had come to see
that Athens had no other choice. One of the most brilliant orators of this period, he was a keen politician and a skilful finance administrator.2Cp. Xenophon, Hell. 5. 4. 34; Plutarch, Pelopidas, 15. For the League see chap. 28. 4.3See chap. 23. 4.4Thousands of Athenian citizens lost their last hope of recovering the land outside Attica which they or their fathers had lost in the catastrophe of 404. These hopes were still alive in the Corinthian War.5In the list of cities, IG, 23. 1. 43, Hestiaea appears as having joined later than the other cities of Euboea. For the treatment of Hestiaea under Pericles see Book 12. 7.29