Diodorus of Sicily

ἀλλήλοις συμπλέκειν καὶ τὴν ὅλην τῶν σωμάτων
6πυκνότητα ποιεῖν ζεύγματι παραπλησίαν. παραβόλου
δὲ γενομένης τῆς διαβάσεως καὶ τῶν Μακεδόνων
μόγις διασωθέντων τὴν μὲν ἡμέραν ταύτην
προσανέλαβε τὴν δύναμιν, τῇ δ᾿ ὑστεραίᾳ συντεταγμένην
ἔχων τὴν στρατιὰν προῆγεν ἐπὶ τοὺς
πολεμίους καὶ σύνεγγυς γενόμενος τῶν Περσῶν
κατεστρατοπέδευσεν.
56. Ἀναλογιζόμενος δὲ τὸ πλῆθος τῆς τῶν Περσῶν
δυνάμεως καὶ τὸ μέγεθος τῶν ἐπικειμένων
κινδύνων, ἔτι δὲ τὴν περὶ τῶν ὅλων κρίσιν ἐν χερσὶν
οὖσαν διηγρύπνησε τὴν νύκτα συνεχόμενος τῇ περὶ
τοῦ μέλλοντος φροντίδι· ὑπὸ δὲ τὴν ἑωθινὴν φυλακὴν
τραπεὶς εἰς ὕπνον οὕτως ἐκοιμήθη βαθέως ὥστε
τῆς ἡμέρας ἐπιγενομένης μὴ δύνασθαι διεγερθῆναι.
2τὸ μὲν οὖν πρῶτον οἱ φίλοι τὸ συμβὰν ἡδέως ἑώρων,
νομίζοντες τὸν βασιλέα πρὸς τὸν ὑποκείμενον κίνδυνον
εὐτονώτερον ἔσεσθαι τετευχότα πολλῆς ἀνέσεως·
ὡς δ᾿ ὁ μὲν χρόνος προέβαινεν, ὁ δ᾿ ὕπνος
συνεῖχε τὸν βασιλέα, Παρμενίων πρεσβύτατος ὢν
τῶν φίλων ἀφ᾿ ἑαυτοῦ πρόσταγμα διέδωκε τοῖς
3πλήθεσιν ἑτοιμάζεσθαι τὰ πρὸς τὴν μάχην. οὐκ
ἀνιεμένου δ᾿ αὐτοῦ προσελθόντες οἱ φίλοι μόγις
διήγειραν τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον. θαυμαζόντων δ᾿ ἐπὶ
τῷ συμβεβηκότι πάντων καὶ τὴν αἰτίαν ἀκοῦσαι
βουλομένων ἔφησεν ὁ Ἀλέξανδρος Δαρεῖον εἰς ἕνα
τόπον ἠθροικότα τὰς δυνάμεις ἀπολελυκέναι πάσης



278Book XVII

other and to construct a sort of bridge out of the compact 331/0 b.c. union of their persons.1 Since the crossing had been hazardous and the Macedonians had had a narrow escape, Alexander rested the army that day, and on the following he deployed it and led it forward toward the enemy, then pitched camp not far from the Persians.2
56. Casting over in his mind the number of the Persian forces and the decisive nature of the impending battle, since success or failure lay now entirely in the strength of their arms, Alexander lay awake throughout the night occupied with concern for the next day. About the morning watch he fell asleep, and slept so soundly that he could not be wakened when the sun rose.3 At first his Friends were delighted, thinking that the king would be all the keener for the battle for his thorough relaxation. As time passed, however, and sleep continued to possess him, Parmenion, the senior among the Friends, issued on his own responsibility the order to the troops to make ready for the battle, and since his sleep continued, the Friends came to Alexander and at last succeeded in wakening him. As all expressed astonishment at the matter and pressed him to tell the reason for his unconcern, Alexander said that Dareius had freed him from all anxiety by assembling


1Curtius, 4. 9. 15–21. Arrian (3. 7. 5) merely remarks
that Alexander crossed with difficulty.2The tradition of the date of the battle is confused. Eleven
days before it (Plutarch, Alexander, 31. 4) there occurred in
the Attic month Boedromion an eclipse of the moon which has been identified as that of 20/21 September 331 b.c. (Curtius, 4. 10. 2; Arrian, 3. 7. 6). If the Attic month followed the moon in practice as it did in theory, this should have been on the 15th of Boedromion, and the battle fought on the 26th or 27th. Arrian, however, states that the battle took place in Pyanepsion (3. 15. 7), presumably the month of the eclipse also. Justin (11. 13. 1) simply says that the battle occurred “postero die” after the dismissal of Dareius’s embassy.3Curtius, 4. 13. 17–24; Plutarch, Alexander, 32. 1–2.279