Diodorus of Sicily
6ὄρος. κατὰ γὰρ τὴν τοῦ κυνὸς ἐπιτολὴν ἐπ᾿ ἄκρας
τῆς κορυφῆς διὰ τὴν νηνεμίαν τοῦ περιέχοντος
ἀέρος ὑπερπετῆ γίνεσθαι τὴν ἄκραν τῆς τῶν ἀνέμων
πνοῆς, ὁρᾶσθαι δὲ τὸν ἥλιον ἔτι νυκτὸς οὔσης ἀνατέλλοντα,
τὰς ἀκτῖνας οὐκ ἐν κυκλοτερεῖ σχήματι
γεγραμμένον,1 ἀλλὰ τὴν φλόγα κατὰ πολλοὺς τόπους
ἔχοντα διεσπαρμένην, ὥστε δοκεῖν πυρὰ
7πλείω θιγγάνειν τοῦ τῆς γῆς ὁρίζοντος. μετ᾿
ὀλίγον δὲ συνάγεται ταῦτα πρὸς ἓν μέγεθος, ἕως
ἂν γένηται τρίπλεθρον διάστημα· καὶ τότ᾿ ἤδη τῆς
ἡμέρας ἐπιλαβούσης τὸ φαινόμενον τοῦ ἡλίου
μέγεθος πληρωθὲν τὴν τῆς ἡμέρας διάθεσιν κατασκευάζει.
8Ὁ δ᾿ οὖν Μέμνων διελθὼν τὴν ὀρεινὴν ἄφνω τῇ
πόλει τῶν Κυζικηνῶν προσέπεσεν καὶ παρ᾿ ὀλίγον
αὐτῆς ἐκυρίευσεν· ἀποπεσὼν δὲ τῆς ἐπιβολῆς τὴν
χώραν αὐτῶν ἐπόρθησε καὶ πολλῶν λαφύρων ἐκυρίευσεν.
9ἅμα δὲ τούτοις πραττομένοις Παρμενίων
Γρύνιον μὲν πόλιν ἑλὼν κατὰ κράτος ἐξηνδραποδίσατο,
Πιτάνην δὲ πολιορκοῦντος αὐτοῦ Μέμνων
ἐπιφανεὶς καὶ καταπληξάμενος τοὺς Μακεδόνας
10ἔλυσε τὴν πολιορκίαν. μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα Κάλλας
μὲν ἔχων Μακεδόνας καὶ μισθοφόρους στρατιώτας



1γεγραμμένον, after περιγεγραμμένον, Post: τετραμμένον RX:
μένοντα F; συνεστραμμένον or συνέχοντα Hertlein; πέμποντα
Dindorf; τετορνευμένον Fischer (cp. Plato, Timaeus, 7. 33 b).136Book XVII

time of the rising of the Dog Star,1 if one stands upon 335/4 b.c. the highest peak, the stillness of the surrounding atmosphere gives the impression that the summit is elevated above the motion of the winds, and the sun can be seen rising while it is still night. Its rays are not circumscribed in a circular orb but its flame is dispersed in many places, so that you would think that there were many patches of fire burning along the horizon. Presently, then, these draw together into one huge flame the width of which reaches three plethra.2 Finally, as the day dawns, the usually observed size of the sun’s ball is attained and produces normal daylight.3
Memnon traversed this mountain and suddenly falling upon the city of Cyzicus came within an ace of taking it.4 Failing in this, he wasted its territory and collected much booty. While he was thus occupied, Parmenion took by storm the city of Grynium and sold its inhabitants as slaves, but when he besieged Pitane5 Memnon appeared and frightened the Macedonians into breaking off the siege. Later Callas with a mixed force of Macedonians and mercenaries





1According to the calculations of Mr. Alan E. Samuel, this
would be the heliacal rising of Sirius, which occurred about
20th July (P. V. Neugebauer, Astronomische Chronologie,
Berlin & Leipzig, 1929, Vol. 2, Tables E 58–62). Professor
Otto Neugebauer writes that the rising would occur between 18.h and 20th July, but that these references in the Greek authors are not to be pressed too closely.2The plethron was 100 Greek feet or somewhat less than 100 English feet, and varied somewhat. It is impossible to know its precise value in Diodorus or his source.3A somewhat different account of the same phenomenon is given by Pomponius Mela, 1. 18. Day began with the first appearance of the sun’s rim above the horizon, and the previous streaks of light occurred while it was still, strictly speaking, night. Cp. C. Bailey on Lucretius, 3 (1947), 1426 f. (pointed out by Prof. Robert J. Getty).4Reported with some details by Polyaenus, 5. 44. 5.5Grynium and Pitanê were old Aeolian cities on the Bay of Elaea. Parmenion was pursuing Philip’s mission of “liberation” (Book 16. 91. 2).137