Diodorus of Sicily
4κρέα τῶν ἀγρίων ζῴων. τούτους Ἀντίγονος πεῖσαι
μὲν ἢ δωροδοκεῖν ἀγεννὲς ἡγεῖτο τηλικαύτης
αὐτῷ δυνάμεως συνακολουθούσης, προχειρισάμενος
δὲ τῶν πελταστῶν τοὺς ἐπισημοτάτους
καὶ τοὺς τοξότας καὶ τοὺς σφενδονήτας καὶ τοὺς
ἄλλους ψιλοὺς εἰς δύο μέρη διελόμενος τοὺς μὲν
Νεάρχῳ παρέδωκε, προστάξας προάγειν καὶ τὰ
στενὰ καὶ τὰς δυσχωρίας προκαταλαμβάνεσθαι,
τοὺς δὲ ἄλλους παρ᾿ ὅλην τὴν ὁδὸν τάξας αὐτὸς
μὲν μετὰ τῆς φάλαγγος προῆγεν, ἐπὶ δὲ τῆς οὐραγίας
5ἔταξε Πίθωνα. οἱ μὲν οὖν μετὰ Νεάρχου προαποσταλέντες
ὀλίγας μὲν σκοπὰς προκατελάβοντο,
τῶν δὲ πολλῶν καὶ μάλιστα ἀναγκαίων τόπων
ὑστερήσαντες συχνοὺς ἀπέβαλον καὶ μόλις διεξέπεσαν
6ἐπικειμένων τῶν βαρβάρων. οἱ δὲ περὶ
τὸν Ἀντίγονον ἐπειδή ποθ᾿ ἧκον ἐπὶ τὰς δυσχωρίας,
ἀβοηθήτοις κινδύνοις περιέπιπτον. οἱ γὰρ ἐγχώριοι
τῶν τόπων ἔμπειροι καθεστῶτες καὶ τοὺς
κρημνοὺς προκατειληφότες ἐπεκύλιον τοῖς ὁδοιποροῦσι
πέτρας συνεχεῖς καὶ μεγάλας· ἅμα δὲ καὶ
τοῖς τόξοις πυκνοῖς χρώμενοι κατετίτρωσκον τοὺς
μήτε ἀμύνασθαι μήτ᾿ ἐκκλῖναι τὰ βέλη δυναμένους
7διὰ τὴν δυσχωρίαν τῶν τόπων. κρημνώδους δ᾿
οὔσης καὶ δυσβάτου τῆς ὁδοῦ συνέβαινε τούς τε
ἐλέφαντας καὶ τοὺς ἱππεῖς, ἔτι δὲ τοὺς ἐν τοῖς
βαρέσιν ὅπλοις κινδυνεύειν ἅμα καὶ πονεῖν ἀδυνατοῦντας
8ἑαυτοῖς βοηθῆσαι. εἰς τοιαύτην δ᾿ ἀμηχανίαν
συγκλεισθεὶς Ἀντίγονος μετεμέλετο μὲν ἐπὶ
τῷ μὴ πεισθῆναι τοῖς περὶ Πίθωνα, συμβουλεύουσι
χρημάτων πρίασθαι τὴν πάροδον· οὐ μὴν ἀλλὰ
πολλοὺς ἀποβαλὼν καὶ τοῖς ὅλοις κινδυνεύσας
284Book XIX

wild beasts. Since Antigonus regarded it as beneath 317 b.c. his dignity to use persuasion on these people or to make them presents when he had so great an army following him, he selected the finest of the peltasts and divided the bowmen, the slingers, and the other light-armed troops into two bodies, one of which he gave to Nearchus, ordering him to go on ahead and occupy in advance the places that were narrow and difficult. After arranging the other group along the entire line of march, he himself advanced with the phalanx, putting Pithon in command of the rear guard. Now Nearchus’ detachment going on ahead occupied a few of the lookouts; but since they were too late in the case of most of them and those the most important, they lost many men and barely made their way through with the barbarians pressing hard upon them. As for the troops led by Antigonus, whenever they came to these difficult passes, they fell into dangers in which no aid could reach them. For the natives, who were familiar with the region and had occupied the heights in advance, kept rolling great rocks in quick succession upon the marching troops; and at the same time, sending arrows thick and fast, they wounded men who were able neither to turn aside the missiles nor to avoid them because of the difficulties of the terrain. Since the road was precipitous and nearly impassable, the elephants, the cavalry, and even the heavy armed soldiers found themselves forced at the same time to face death and to toil hard, without being able to help themselves. Caught in such toils, Antigonus regretted that he had not heeded Pithon when he advised him to purchase the right of passage with money; nevertheless, after losing many men and endangering the
285