Diodorus of Sicily
2τῶν Λιβύων εἰς συμμαχίαν προσελάβετο. ἃ δὴ
πυθόμενοι οἱ Καρχηδόνιοι πᾶσαν τὴν δύναμιν προήγαγον
ἐπὶ τὸν Τύνητα καὶ τῆς μὲν Ἀγαθοκλέους
στρατοπεδείας ἐκυρίευσαν, τῇ πόλει δὲ μηχανὰς
3προσαγαγόντες συνεχεῖς προσβολὰς ἐποιοῦντο. ὁ
δ᾿ Ἀγαθοκλῆς, ἀπαγγειλάντων τινῶν αὐτῷ τὰ περὶ
τοὺς ἰδίους ἐλαττώματα, τὸ μὲν πολὺ τῆς δυνάμεως
κατέλιπεν ἐπὶ τῆς πολιορκίας, τὴν δὲ θεραπείαν
καὶ τῶν στρατιωτῶν ὀλίγους ἀναλαβὼν λάθρᾳ
προσῆλθεν ἐπί τινα τόπον ὀρεινόν, ὅθεν ὁρᾶσθαι
δυνατὸν ἦν αὐτὸν ὑπό τε1 τῶν Ἀδρυμητινῶν καὶ
τῶν Καρχηδονίων τῶν τὸν Τύνητα πολιορκούντων.
4νυκτὸς δὲ συντάξας τοῖς στρατιώταις ἐπὶ πολὺν
τόπον πυρὰ κάειν, δόξαν ἐνεποίησε2 τοῖς μὲν
Καρχηδονίοις ὡς μετὰ μεγάλης δυνάμεως ἐπ᾿
αὐτοὺς πορευόμενος, τοῖς δὲ πολιορκουμένοις ὡς
ἄλλης δυνάμεως ἁδρᾶς τοῖς πολεμίοις εἰς συμμαχίαν
5παραγεγενημένης. ἀμφότεροι δὲ τῷ ψεύδει
τοῦ στρατηγήματος παραλογισθέντες παραλόγως
ἠλαττώθησαν, οἱ μὲν τὸν Τύνητα πολιορκοῦντες
φυγόντες εἰς Καρχηδόνα καὶ τὰς μηχανὰς ἀπολιπόντες,
οἱ δ᾿ Ἀδρυμητινοὶ διὰ τὸν φόβον παραδόντες
6τὴν πατρίδα. Ἀγαθοκλῆς δὲ ταύτην δι᾿
ὁμολογίας παραλαβὼν Θάψον εἷλε κατὰ κράτος
καὶ τῶν ἄλλων τῶν ταύτῃ πόλεων ἃς μὲν ἐξεπολιόρκησεν,
ἃς δὲ προσηγάγετο· τὰς ἁπάσας δὲ
πόλεις πλείους τῶν διακοσίων κεχειρωμένος εἰς
τοὺς ἄνω τόπους τῆς Λιβύης διενοεῖτο στρατεύειν.
18. Ἀναζεύξαντος οὖν αὐτοῦ καὶ πλείους ἡμέρας
ὁδοιποροῦντος Καρχηδόνιοι τὴν ἐκ Σικελίας διακομισθεῖσαν
δύναμιν καὶ τὴν ἄλλην στρατιὰν προαγαγόντες
πάλιν τὸν Τύνητα πολιορκεῖν ἐπεχείρησαν
1τε Dindorf: τῆς.2ἐνεποίησε Hertlein: ἐποίησε.188Book XX

of the Libyans, into alliance. On hearing of these 310 b.c. moves the Carthaginians brought their entire army against Tunis and captured the encampment of Agathocles; then, after bringing siege engines up to the city, they made unremitting attacks. But Agathocles, when some had reported to him the reverses suffered by his men, left the larger part of his army for the siege, but with his retinue and a few of the soldiers went secretly to a place in the mountains whence he could be seen both by the people of Hadrumetum and by the Carthaginians who were besieging Tunis. By instructing his soldiers to light fires at night over a great area, he caused the Carthaginians to believe that he was coming against them with a large army, while the besieged thought that another strong force was at hand as an ally for their enemy. Both of them, deceived by the deceptive stratagem, suffered an unexpected defeat: those who were besieging Tunis fled to Carthage abandoning their siege engines, and the people of Hadrumetum surrendered their home-land because of their fright. After receiving this city on terms, Agathocles took Thapsus by force; and of the other cities of the region some he took by storm and some he won by persuasion. When he had gained control of all the cities, which were more than two hundred in number, he had in mind to lead his army into the inland regions of Libya.
18. After Agathocles had set out and had marched for a good many days, the Carthaginians, advancing with the force that had been brought across from Sicily and their other army, again undertook the siege



189