Diodorus of Sicily

Αἰγυπτίους καὶ διὰ τὴν καταφρόνησιν ἐπὶ τὴν ἀπόστασιν
ὁρμησάντων παροξυνθεὶς ἔκρινε πολεμεῖν
6τοὺς ἀφεστηκότας. τὸ μὲν οὖν στρατηγοὺς ἐκπέμπειν
ἀπεδοκίμασε, δι᾿ ἑαυτοῦ δὲ τοὺς ὑπὲρ τῆς
βασιλείας ἀγῶνας ποιήσασθαι διέγνω. διόπερ
ὅπλων καὶ βελῶν καὶ σίτου καὶ δυνάμεων μεγάλας
παρασκευὰς ποιησάμενος ἤθροισε πεζῶν μὲν τριάκοντα
μυριάδας, ἱππέων δὲ τρεῖς, τριήρεις δὲ
τριακοσίας, φορτηγοὺς δὲ καὶ τὰς ἄλλας τὰς τὴν
ἀγορὰν κομιζούσας πεντακοσίας.
41. Ἤρξατο δὲ καὶ πρὸς Φοίνικας πολεμεῖν διὰ
τοιαύτας τινὰς αἰτίας. κατὰ τὴν Φοινίκην ἐστὶ
πόλις ἀξιόλογος ὀνόματι Τρίπολις, οἰκείαν ἔχουσα
τῇ φύσει τὴν προσηγορίαν· τρεῖς γάρ εἰσιν ἐν αὐτῇ
πόλεις σταδιαῖον ἀπ᾿ ἀλλήλων ἔχουσαι διάστημα·
ἐπικαλεῖται δὲ τούτων ἡ μὲν Ἀραδίων, ἡ δὲ Σιδωνίων,
ἡ δὲ Τυρίων. ἀξίωμα δ᾿ ἔχει μέγιστον αὕτη
τῶν κατὰ τὴν Φοινίκην πόλεων, ἐν ᾗ συνέβαινεν
τοὺς Φοίνικας συνέδριον ἔχειν καὶ βουλεύεσθαι περὶ
2τῶν μεγίστων. τῶν δὲ σατραπῶν καὶ στρατηγῶν
ἐν τῇ Σιδωνίων διατριβόντων καὶ κατὰ τὰς τῶν
πραγμάτων1 ἐπιταγὰς ὑβριστικῶς καὶ ὑπερηφάνως
προσφερομένων τοῖς Σιδωνίοις οἱ κακούμενοι
τὴν ἐπήρειαν χαλεπῶς φέροντες ἔγνωσαν
ἀποστῆναι
3τῶν Περσῶν. πείσαντες δὲ καὶ τοὺς ἄλλους
Φοίνικας τῆς αὐτονομίας ἀντέχεσθαι διεπρεσβεύσαντο
πρὸς τὸν Αἰγυπτίων βασιλέα Νεκτανεβώ,
πολέμιον ὄντα Περσῶν, καὶ πείσαντες παραλαβεῖν
αὐτοὺς εἰς τὴν συμμαχίαν παρεσκευάζοντο τὰ
4πρὸς τὸν πόλεμον. τῆς δὲ Σιδῶνος εὐδαιμονίᾳ διαφερούσης
καὶ τῶν ἰδιωτῶν διὰ τὰς ἐμπορίας μεγάλους

1So MSS.; προσταγμάτων edd.350Book XVI

disregard of him made a move to revolt, he 351/0 b.c. became enraged and decided to make war upon the insurgents. So he rejected the practice of sending out generals, and adopted the plan of carrying out in person the struggles to preserve his kingdom. Wherefore, having made great provision of arms, missiles, food, and forces, he assembled three hundred thousand foot-soldiers, thirty thousand horsemen, three hundred triremes, and five hundred merchantmen and other ships to carry the supplies.
41. He began to make war also on the Phoenicians for the following reasons. In Phoenicia there is an important city called Tripolis, whose name is appropriate to its nature, for there are in it three cities, at a distance of a stade from one another, and the names by which these are called are the city of the Aradians, of the Sidonians, and of the Tyrians. This city enjoys the highest repute amongst the cities of Phoenicia, for there, as it happens, the Phoenicians held their common council and deliberated on matters of supreme importance. Now since the King’s satraps and generals dwelt in the city of the Sidonians and behaved in an outrageous and high-handed fashion toward the Sidonians in ordering things to be done, the victims of this treatment, aggrieved by their insolence, decided to revolt from the Persians. Having persuaded the rest of the Phoenicians to make a bid for their independence,1 they sent ambassadors to the Egyptian king Nectanebos, who was an enemy of the Persians, and after persuading him to accept them as allies they began to make preparations for the war. Inasmuch as Sidon was distinguished for its wealth and its private citizens

1Cp. Isocrates, Philip, 102.351