Diodorus of Sicily

παραθαλάττιον, τῆς δ᾿ ἄλλης στρατιᾶς ἣν μὲν Αἰσχρίωνι
παραδοὺς ἐξέπεμψεν, ἧς δ᾿ αὐτὸς ἡγεῖτο,
καταλιπὼν τὴν ἱκανὴν φυλακὴν ἐπὶ τοῦ Τύνητος.
2τοσούτων δὲ στρατοπέδων ἐπὶ τῆς χώρας πανταχῇ
πλαζομένων καὶ προσδοκωμένης ἔσεσθαι πραγμάτων
ὁλοσχεροῦς1 μεταβολῆς ἅπαντες ἠγωνίων,
3καραδοκοῦντες τὸ τέλος τῶν ἀποβησομένων. Ἄννων
μὲν οὖν ἡγούμενος τοῦ κατὰ τὴν μεσόγειον
στρατοπέδου θεὶς ἐνέδραν τοῖς περὶ τὸν Αἰσχρίωνα
καὶ παραδόξως ἐπιθέμενος ἀνεῖλε πεζοὺς μὲν
πλείους τῶν τετρακισχιλίων, ἱππεῖς δὲ περὶ διακοσίους,
ἐν οἷς ἦν καὶ αὐτὸς ὁ στρατηγός· τῶν δ᾿
ἄλλων οἱ μὲν ἥλωσαν οἱ δὲ διεσώθησαν πρὸς
Ἀρχάγαθον, ἀπέχοντα σταδίους πεντακοσίους.
4Ἰμίλκων δ᾿ ἐπὶ τοὺς ἄνω τόπους στρατεύειν ἀποδειχθεὶς
τὸ μὲν πρῶτον ἐφήδρευε ἔν τινι2 πόλει
προσδεχόμενος3 τὸν Εὔμαχον, ἐφελκόμενον βαρὺ
τὸ στρατόπεδον διὰ τὰς ἐκ τῶν ἁλουσῶν πόλεων
5ὠφελείας. μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα τῶν Ἑλλήνων ἐκταξάντων
τὴν δύναμιν καὶ προκαλουμένων εἰς μάχην
Ἰμίλκων μέρος μὲν τῆς στρατιᾶς κατέλιπε διεσκευασμένον
ἐν τῇ πόλει, διακελευσάμενος, ὅταν
αὐτὸς ἀναχωρῇ προσποιούμενος φεύγειν, ἐπεξελθεῖν
τοῖς ἐπιδιώκουσιν· αὐτὸς δὲ προαγαγὼν τοὺς ἡμίσεις
τῶν στρατιωτῶν καὶ μικρὸν πρὸ τῆς παρεμβολῆς
συνάψας μάχην εὐθὺς ἔφευγεν ὡς καταπεπληγμένος.
6οἱ δὲ περὶ τὸν Εὔμαχον ἐπαρθέντες τῇ
νίκῃ καὶ τῆς τάξεως οὐδὲν φροντίσαντες ἐδίωκον
καὶ τεθορυβημένως τῶν ὑποχωρούντων ἐξήπτοντο·

1ὁλοσχεροῦς Dindorf: ὁλοσχερῶν.2ἔν τινι Holm: τῇ MSS., Fischer.3προσδεχόμενος Reiske: πρὸς MSS., Fischer.306Book XX

coastal region, and of the rest of his forces he gave 307 b.c. part to Aeschrion and sent him forth, and part he led himself, leaving an adequate garrison in Tunis. When so many armies were wandering everywhere in the country and when a decisive crisis in the campaign was expected, all anxiously awaited the final outcome. Now Hanno,1 who commanded the army of the midland region, laid an ambush for Aeschrion and fell on him suddenly, slaying more than four thousand foot-soldiers and about two hundred mounted troops, among whom was the general himself; of the others some were captured and some escaped in safety to Archagathus, who was about five hundred stades distant.2 As for Himilco, who had been appointed to conduct the campaign into the interior, at first he rested in a certain city lying in wait for Eumachus, who was dragging along his army heavily loaded with the spoils from the captured cities. Then when the Greeks drew up their forces and challenged him to battle, Himilco left part of his army under arms in the city, giving them orders that, when he retired in pretended flight, they should burst out upon the pursuers. He himself, leading out half of his soldiers and joining battle a little distance in front of the encampment, at once took to flight as if panic-stricken. Eumachus’ men, elated by their victory and giving no thought at all to their formation, followed, and in confusion pressed hard upon those who were withdrawing; but when





1To be distinguished from the Hanno of chaps. 10. 1. and 12. 3, who is now dead. Nothing further is known of this Hanno.2About 57 miles.307