Diodorus of Sicily

Λιβύων νομαδικὸν ἔθνος καὶ πρὸς τὴν μεσόγειον
ἀνῆκον τὸ τῶν Νασαμώνων ὀνομαζομένων ἔθνος.
3Τῶν δ᾿ Ἀμμωνίων κωμηδὸν οἰκούντων κατὰ
μέσην αὐτῶν τὴν χώραν ἀκρόπολις ὑπάρχει τριπλοῖς
ὠχυρωμένη τοῖς τείχεσι· καὶ ταύτης ὁ μὲν πρῶτος
περίβολος ἔχει τῶν ἀρχαίων δυναστῶν βασίλεια, ὁ
δ᾿ ἕτερος τὴν γυναικωνῖτιν αὐλὴν καὶ τὰς τῶν
τέκνων καὶ γυναικῶν καὶ συγγενῶν οἰκήσεις καὶ
φυλακτήρια τῶν σκοπῶν,1 ἔτι δὲ τὸν τοῦ θεοῦ
σηκὸν καὶ τὴν ἱερὰν κρήνην, ἀφ᾿ ἧς τὰ τῷ θεῷ
προσφερόμενα τυγχάνει τῆς ἁγνείας, ὁ δὲ τρίτος
τὰς τῶν δορυφόρων καταλύσεις καὶ τὰ φυλακτήρια
τῶν τὸν τύραννον δορυφορούντων.
4Καθίδρυται δὲ τῆς ἀκροπόλεως ἐκτὸς οὐ μακρὰν
ἕτερος ναὸς Ἄμμωνος πολλοῖς καὶ μεγάλοις δένδροις
σύσκιος. τούτου δὲ πλησίον ὑπάρχει κρήνη
διὰ τὸ συμβεβηκὸς ὀνομαζομένη Ἡλίου κρήνη·
αὕτη δὲ τὸ ὕδωρ ἔχει συμμεταβαλλόμενον αἰεὶ ταῖς
5ἡμεριναῖς ὥραις παραδόξως. ἅμ᾿ ἡμέρᾳ γὰρ ἐξίησι
τὴν πηγὴν χλιαράν, προϊούσης δὲ τῆς ἡμέρας τῇ
προσθέσει τῶν ὡρῶν ἀνάλογον καταψύχεται, τοῦ
μεσημβρινοῦ δὲ καύματος ἀκμάζει τῇ ψυχρότητι·
πάλιν δὲ ἀνάλογον ἀπολήγει πρὸς τὴν ἑσπέραν καὶ
τῆς νυκτὸς ἐπιλαβούσης ἀναθερμαίνεται μέχρι μέσων
νυκτῶν καὶ τὸ λοιπὸν ἀπολήγει, μέχρι ἂν



1σκοπῶν Fischer; τόπων codd.262Book XVII

the Libyans, a nomadic people, and the so-called 331/0 b.c. Nasamonians who reach on into the interior.1
All the people of Ammon dwell in villages. In the midst of their country there is a fortress secured by triple walls.2 The innermost circuit encloses the palace of the ancient rulers; the next, the women’s court, the dwellings of the children, women, and relatives, and the guardrooms of the scouts, as well as the sanctuary of the god and the sacred spring, from the waters of which offerings addressed to the god take on holiness; the outer circuit surrounds the barracks of the king’s guards and the guardrooms of those who protect the person of the ruler.3
Outside of the fortress at no great distance there is another temple of Ammon shaded by many large trees, and near this is the spring which is called the Spring of the Sun from its behaviour.4 Its waters change in temperature oddly in accordance with the times of day. At sunrise it sends forth a warm stream, but as the day advances it grows cooler proportionally with the passage of the hours, until under the noonday heat it reaches its extreme degree of cold. Then again in the same proportion it grows warmer toward evening and as the night advances it continues to heat up until midnight when again the trend is reversed,



1Curtius’s account (4. 7. 18–19) is more systematic:
Ethiopians on the east and west, Trogodytes on the south,
Nasamonians on the north. Strabo (17. 3. 20) calls the
Nasamonians a Libyan people, and states (2. 5. 33) that they
live on the coast near the Syrtes.2Curtius, 4. 7. 20–21. For a description of Siwah and its antiquities see Ahmed Fakhry, Siwa Oasis, Its History and Antiquities (1944); The Oasis of Siwa, Its Customs, History and Monuments (1950). The fortress and the shrine of the oracle were on the hill called Aghurmi, never systematically excavated.3Curtius’s description of the fortress (4. 7. 21) is clearer. The inner walls enclosed the palace; the second, the dwellings of wives, concubines, and children, and the shrine of the oracle; the third, the quarters of the guards.4Curtius, 4. 7. 22; Arrian, 3. 4. 2.263