Diodorus of Sicily

ἀγαθῶν ἐλπίδων ἅπαντες ἐπληροῦντο, καθάπερ
θεοῦ τινος αὐτῶν ἡγουμένου. ὁμοίως δὲ τούτοις
καὶ πρὸς τοὺς ἀργυράσπιδας Μακεδόνας πολιτευόμενος
ἀποδοχῆς μεγάλης ἐτύγχανεν παρ᾿ αὐτοῖς,
ὡς ἄξιος ὢν τῆς τῶν βασιλέων φροντίδος.
4Προχειρισάμενος δὲ τῶν φίλων τοὺς εὐθετωτάτους
καὶ δοὺς χρήματα δαψιλῆ πρὸς τὴν ξενολογίαν
ἐξέπεμψεν ὁρίσας ἀξιολόγους μισθούς. εὐθὺς δ᾿ οἱ
μὲν εἰς τὴν Πισιδικὴν καὶ Λυκίαν καὶ τὴν πλησιόχωρον
παρελθόντες ἐξενολόγουν ἐπιμελῶς, οἱ δὲ
τὴν Κιλικίαν ἐπεπορεύοντο, ἄλλοι δὲ τὴν Κοίλην
Συρίαν καὶ Φοινίκην, τινὲς δὲ τὰς ἐν τῇ Κύπρῳ
5πόλεις. διαβοηθείσης δὲ τῆς ξενολογίας καὶ τῆς
μισθοφορᾶς ἀξιολόγου προκειμένης πολλοὶ καὶ ἐκ
τῶν1 τῆς Ἑλλάδος πόλεων ἐθελοντὶ κατήντων καὶ
πρὸς τὴν στρατείαν ἀπεγράφοντο. ἐν ὀλίγῳ δὲ
χρόνῳ συνήχθησαν πεζοὶ μὲν πλείους τῶν μυρίων,
ἱππεῖς δὲ δισχίλιοι χωρὶς τῶν ἀργυρασπίδων καὶ
τῶν μετ᾿ Εὐμενοῦς κατηντηκότων.
62. Παραδόξου δὲ καὶ ταχείας τῆς περὶ τὸν
Εὐμενῆ γενομένης αὐξήσεως Πτολεμαῖος μὲν μετὰ
στόλου πλεύσας εἰς Ζεφύριον τῆς Κιλικίας διεπέμπετο
πρὸς τοὺς τῶν ἀργυρασπίδων ἡγεμόνας,
παρακαλῶν μὴ προσέχειν τῷ Εὐμενεῖ, καθ᾿ οὗ
2πάντες Μακεδόνες θάνατον κατέγνωσαν. ὁμοίως
δὲ πρὸς τοὺς ἐπὶ τῶν ἐν Κυῒνδοις φρουρίων τεταγμένους
ἐξέπεμψε διαμαρτυρόμενος μὴ διδόναι μηδὲν
τῶν χρημάτων Εὐμενεῖ, καὶ τὴν ἀσφάλειαν αὐτοῖς
ἐπηγγείλατο παρέξεσθαι. ἀλλὰ τούτῳ μὲν οὐδεὶς

1ἐκ τῶν Dindorf: τῶν ἐκ.180Book XVIII

happy expectations, just as if some god were leading 318 b.c. them. And by conducting himself toward the Macedonian Silver Shields in a similar way, Eumenes gained great favour among them as a man worthy of the solicitude of the kings.
Eumenes selected the most able of his friends, gave them ample funds, and sent them out to engage mercenaries, establishing a notable rate of pay. Some of them went at once into Pisidia, Lycia, and the adjacent regions, where they zealously enrolled troops. Others travelled through Cilicia, others through Coelê Syria and Phoenicia, and some through the cities in Cyprus. Since the news of this levy spread widely and the pay offered was worthy of consideration, many reported of their own free will even from the cities of Greece and were enrolled for the campaign. In a short time more than ten thousand foot soldiers and two thousand horsemen were gathered together, not including the Silver Shields and those who had accompanied Eumenes.
62. At Eumenes’ unexpected and sudden rise to power, Ptolemy, who had sailed to Zephyrium in Cilicia with a fleet, kept sending to the commanders of the Silver Shields, exhorting them not to pay any attention to Eumenes, whom all the Macedonians had condemned to death.1 Likewise he sent to those who had been placed in command of the garrisons in Cyinda,2 protesting solemnly against their giving any of the money to Eumenes, and promised to guarantee their safety. But no one paid any attention to him


1Cp. chap. 37. 2, For the various plots against Eumenes cp. Plutarch, Eumenes, 8. 6, 13. 6. 16. 1.2Called Quinda (Κούϊνδα) in Book 20. 108. 2, a fortress in Cilicia where the royal treasure had been deposited. The exact location is unknown.181