Diodorus of Sicily
58. Ἐπ᾿ ἄρχοντος δ᾿ Ἀθήνησιν Ἀρχίππου Ῥωμαῖοι
κατέστησαν ὑπάτους Κόιντον Αἴλιον καὶ
Λεύκιον Παπίριον. ἐπὶ δὲ τούτων Εὐμενὴς μὲν
ἄρτι τὴν ἐκ τοῦ φρουρίου πεποιημένος ἀποχώρησιν
ἐκομίσατο τὰς ἐπιστολὰς τὰς ἀποσταλείσας ὑπὸ
Πολυπέρχοντος, ἐν αἷς ἦν γεγραμμένον χωρὶς τῶν
προειρημένων ὅτι πεντακόσια μὲν τάλαντα διδόασιν
αὐτῷ δωρεὰν οἱ βασιλεῖς εἰς ἐπανόρθωσιν τῶν
γεγενημένων περὶ αὐτὸν ἐλαττωμάτων καὶ διότι
γράμματα ἀπέστειλαν οἱ βασιλεῖς πρὸς τοὺς ἐν τῇ
Κιλικίᾳ στρατηγοὺς καὶ θησαυροφύλακας, ὅπως
αὐτῷ τὰ πεντακόσια τάλαντα δῶσι καὶ τῶν ἄλλων
χρημάτων ὅσα ἂν αἰτήσῃ πρός τε τὰς ξενολογίας
καὶ τὰς ἄλλας τὰς κατεπειγούσας χρείας, τούς τε
τῶν ἀργυρασπίδων Μακεδόνων τρισχιλίων ἀφηγουμένους,
ἵνα παραδῶσιν αὑτοὺς Εὐμενεῖ καὶ τἄλλα
συμπράττωσι προθύμως, ὡς ἂν ἀποδεδειγμένῳ
2στρατηγῷ τῆς ὅλης Ἀσίας αὐτοκράτορι. ἧκεν δὲ
καὶ παρ᾿ Ὀλυμπιάδος αὐτῷ γράμματα, δεομένης
καὶ λιπαρούσης βοηθεῖν τοῖς βασιλεῦσι καὶ ἑαυτῇ·
μόνον γὰρ ἐκεῖνον πιστότατον ἀπολελεῖφθαι τῶν
φίλων καὶ δυνάμενον διορθώσασθαι τὴν ἐρημίαν
3τῆς βασιλικῆς οἰκίας. ἠξίου δ᾿ αὐτὸν ἡ Ὀλυμπιὰς
συμβουλεῦσαι πότερον αὐτῷ δοκεῖ συμφέρειν μένειν
αὐτὴν ἐν Ἠπείρῳ καὶ μὴ πιστεύειν τοῖς αἰεὶ
δοκοῦσι μὲν ἐπιμεληταῖς εἶναι, τῇ δὲ ἀληθείᾳ τὴν


170Book XVIII
58. When Archippus was archon of Athens, the 318 b.c. Romans elected Quintus Aelius and Lucius Papirius consuls.1 While these held office Eumenes, just after he had made good his retreat from the fortress,2 received the letters that had been dispatched by Polyperchon. They contained, apart from what has been told above, the statement that the kings were giving him a gift of five hundred talents as recompense for the losses that he had experienced, and that to effect this they had written to the generals and treasurers in Cilicia directing them to give him the five hundred talents and whatever additional money he requested for raising mercenaries and for other pressing needs. The letter also added that they were writing to the commanders of the three thousand Macedonian Silver Shields3 ordering them to place themselves at the disposal of Eumenes and in general to co-operate wholeheartedly with him, since he had been appointed supreme commander of all Asia. There also came to him a letter from Olympias in which she begged and besought him to aid the kings and herself, saying that he alone was left, the most faithful of her friends and the one able to remedy the isolation of the royal house. Olympias asked him to advise her whether he thought it better for her to remain in Epirus and place no trust in those who were from time to time supposed to be guardians of the kings, but were in truth trying to transfer the kingdom to


1Archippus was archon in 318/17. Livy (9. 15. 11) gives
as consuls for 319, L. Papirius Cursor for the third time or
L. Papirius Mugillanus (the former is more probable) and
Q. Aulius Cerretanus for the second time. The latter had
been consul in 323, where he is called Gaius Aelius by Diodorus
(chap. 26. 1) and Q. Aemilius Cerretanus by Livy (8. 37. 1).2Cp. chap. 53. 5. The activities of Eumenes described in the following chaps. (58–63) all belong to 318.3The Silver Shields, heavy armed Macedonians picked for their valour, are first heard of in the battle at Arbela (Book 17. 57. 2). They were now old men, but tough and troublesome (Book 19. 41. 2, 43. 7, 48. 3–4). They had been sent to Cilicia as guard for the royal treasure.171