Diodorus of Sicily
Παρασκευὴ τὴς ἐπὶ Ἰνδοὺς στρατείας.
Ἐμβολὴ εἰς τὴν Ἰνδικὴν καὶ ἀναίρεσις ἄρδην τοῦ
πρώτου ἔθνους πρὸς κατάπληξιν τῶν ἄλλων.
Ὡς τὴν Νυσίαν ὀνομαζομένην πόλιν εὐεργέτησε διὰ
τὴν ἀπὸ Διονύσου συγγένειαν.
Ὡς Μάσσακα1 πόλιν ὀχυρὰν ἐκπορθήσας τοὺς μισθοφόρους
ἅπαντας λαμπρῶς ἀγωνισαμένους κατέκοψεν.
Ὡς τὴν Ἄορνον καλουμένην Πέτραν, ἀνάλωτον ἀεὶ
γεγενημένην, ἐξεπολιόρκησεν.
Ὡς Ταξίλην μὲν τὸν βασιλέα τῶν Ἰνδῶν προσηγάγετο,
Πῶρον δὲ μεγάλῃ παρατάξει νικήσας καὶ τοῦ σώματος
κρατήσας, ἀπέδωκε τὴν βασιλείαν αὐτῷ δι᾿ ἀνδραγαθίαν.
Ἀπαγγελία τῶν κατὰ τὴν χώραν παραδόξων ὄφεών τε
καὶ τῶν φυομένων καρπῶν.
Ὡς τὰ πλησιόχωρα τῶν ἐθνῶν τὰ μὲν προσηγάγετο, τὰ
δὲ κατεπολέμησεν.
Ὡς τὴν ὑπὸ Σωπείθην τεταγμένην ἐχειρώσατο.
Περὶ τῆς εὐνομίας τῶν ἐν ταύτῃ τῇ χώρᾳ πόλεων.
Περὶ τῆς ἀρετῆς τῶν δωρηθέντων Ἀλεξάνδρῳ κυνῶν.
Περὶ τῆς ἀφηγήσεως2 τοῦ Ἰνδῶν βασιλέως.
Ὡς τοῦ Ἀλεξάνδρου βουλομένου διαβῆναι τὸν Γάγγην
ποταμὸν καὶ στρατεύειν ἐπὶ τοὺς Γανδαρίδας ὀνομαζομένους
οἱ Μακεδόνες οὐχ ὑπήκουσαν.
Ὡς ὅρια θέμενος τῆς στρατείας ὁ βασιλεὺς ἐπῆλθε τὰ
λοιπὰ τῶν Ἰνδῶν.3
1Μάσσαγα in Arrian, 4. 26. 1; Μασόγα πόλις Strabo, 15. 1.
27; ad Mazagas Curtius, 8. 10. 22.2Dindorf would supply Φηγέως from chap. 93. 2.3MSS. add καὶ τοξευθεὶς ἐκινδύνευσε, transferred by Cospus to follow Ὠκεανόν infra.112Book XVII
Preparation for the campaign against the Indians.
Invasion of India and complete annihilation of their first nation in order to overawe the rest.
How he benefited the city named Nysia because of his relationship to it through Dionysus.
How, after plundering the stronghold of Massaca, he cut down all the mercenaries although they fought magnificently (chap. 84).
How he took by assault the Rock called Aornus, which had always proved impregnable (chap. 85).
How he won over to his side Taxiles, king of the Indians, and in a great engagement defeated Porus, took him prisoner and gave him back his throne because of his gallant conduct (chaps. 86–89).
An account of the marvellous serpents in the country and of the fruits which grow there (chap. 90).
How he won over to his side many of the neighbouring tribes and defeated others (chap. 91. 1–4).
How he subdued the country that was subject to Sopeithes (chap. 91. 4).
Concerning the good government of the cities in this country (chap. 91. 4–6).
Concerning the excellence of the dogs presented to Alexander (chap. 92).
Concerning the story told by the king of the Indians (chap. 93. 1–3).
How, when Alexander desired to cross the Ganges River and march against the people called Gandaridae. the Macedonians mutinied (chaps. 93. 4–94).
How, after marking the furthest point reached by his army, the king visited the remaining regions of the Indians (chap. 95).
113