Diodorus of Sicily

ἀπὸ τῆς εἰς τὰς Θήβας καθόδου τῶν φυγάδων1
μέχρι τῆς ἑαυτοῦ τελευτῆς βοιωταρχῶν πάντα τὸν
χρόνον διετελεσε, μηδενὸς ἄλλου τῶν πολιτῶν ταύτης
ἠξιωμένου τῆς τιμῆς. Πελοπίδας μὲν οὖν,
διὰ τὴν ἰδίαν ἀρετὴν ὑπὸ πάντων ἀποδοχῆς ἠξιωμένος,
ἐχέτω καὶ παρ᾿ ἡμῶν τὸν διὰ τῆς ἱστορίας
ἔπαινον.
5Κατὰ δὲ τοὺς αὐτοὺς χρόνους Κλέαρχος, τὸ
γένος ὢν ἐξ Ἡρακλείας τῆς ἐν τῷ Πόντῳ, ἐπέθετο
τυραννίδι· κρατήσας δὲ τῆς ἐπιβολῆς ἐζήλωσε
μὲν τὴν διαγωγὴν τὴν Διονυσίου τοῦ Συρακοσίων
τυράννου,2 τυραννεύσας δὲ τῶν Ἡρακλεωτῶν ἐπιφανῶς
6ἦρξεν ἔτη δώδεκα. ἅμα δὲ τούτοις πραττομένοις
Τιμόθεος ὁ Ἀθηναίων στρατηγὸς ἔχων
δύναμιν πεζήν3 τε καὶ ναυτικὴν Τορώνην μὲν καὶ
Ποτίδαιαν πολιορκήσας εἷλε, Κυζικηνοῖς δὲ πολιορκουμένοις
ἐβοήθησεν.
82. Τοῦ δ᾿ ἔτους τούτου διεληλυθότος Ἀθήνησι
μὲν ἦρχε Χαρικλείδης, ἐν Ῥώμῃ δ᾿ ὕπατοι κατεστάθησαν
Λεύκιος Αἰμίλιος Μάμερκος καὶ Λεύκιος
Σέξτιος Λατερίας. ἐπὶ δὲ τούτων Ἀρκάδες
μετὰ Πισαίων κοινῇ τεθεικότες ὑπῆρχον τὸν ἀγῶνα






1φυγάδων Post: πολιτῶν.2τὴν διαγωγὴν τὴν Δ. τοῦ Σ. τυράννου P, Vogel: τ. δ. Δ.
. . τ. ALFJK, τ. Δ. . . . τ. δ. cet., Dindorf, Bekker.3πεζήν Dindorf: πεζικήν.178Book XV

he was so favourably treated that from the return of 364/3 b.c. the exiles to Thebes until his death he continued every year to hold the office of boeotarch,1 an honour accorded to no other citizen. So let Pelopidas, whose personal merits received the approbation of all, receive from us too the approbation of History.
At the same time, Clearchus, who was a native of Heracleia on the Black Sea, set out to win a tyranny, and when he had achieved his purpose, he emulated the methods of Dionysius tyrant of Syracuse, and after becoming tyrant of Heracleia ruled with conspicuous success for twelve years.2 While these things were going on Timotheüs, the Athenian general, commanding a force of both infantry and ships, besieged and took Toronê and Potidaea,3 and brought relief to Cyzicus,4 which was undergoing a siege.
82. When this year had ended, at Athens Charicleides5 363/2 b.c. became archon, and in Rome consuls were elected, Lucius Aemilius Mamercus and Lucius Sextius Lateranus. During their term of office the Arcadians collaborating with the Pisans administered




1Confirmed by Plutarch, Pelopidas, 34. 5. property, freed their slaves, and set up a tyranny along the line of Dionysius of Syracuse. See Justin, 16. 4–5.2Clearchus had been a student of Isocrates and Plato.
He was exiled from Heracleia a few years previous to 364
and had become a mercenary commander in the service of
Persia. Called in by the council of Heracleia to combat the
democracy, Clearchus placed himself at the head of the
democratic movement, ousted the oligarchs, confiscated their3On Torone and Potidaea see Isocrates, Antidasis, 108, 113 f. and Polyaenus, 3. 10. 15.4The Theban fleet under Epameinondas had been operating during the summer of 364 in the Sea of Marmora and had caused Byzantium to withdraw from the Athenian confederacy (see chap. 79. 1). At the arrival of Timotheüs in the region, Epameinondas prudently withdrew and Timo-theüs recovered Byzantium and relieved the siege of Cyzicus. See Nepos, Timotheus, 1. 3 and Glotz, Hist. gr. 3. 170.5The battle of Mantineia, described under this archonship, occurred in 362 just as the Mantineians were gathering in the harvest (Xenophon, Hell. 7. 5. 14), which would normally take place from the middle of June on (Fougeres, Mantinée et l’Arcadie orientale, 56, 460).179