Diodorus of Sicily

δύναμιν προῆγεν ἐπὶ Μακεδονίαν, κατάξων τοὺς
βασιλεῖς ἐπὶ τὴν πατρίδα.
40. Ἀντίγονος δὲ ἐπὶ τῆς Ἀσίας ἀποδεδειγμένος
στρατηγὸς διαπολεμήσων πρὸς Εὐμενῆ ἤθροισεν ἐκ
τῆς χειμασίας τὰς δυνάμεις. παρασκευασάμενος
δὲ τὰ πρὸς τὴν μάχην προῆγεν ἐπὶ τὸν Εὐμενῆ,
2διατρίβοντα περὶ Καππαδοκίαν. ὁ δ᾿ Εὐμενής, ἀποστάντος
ἀπ᾿ αὐτοῦ τινος τῶν ἐπιφανῶν ἡγεμόνων
ὀνόματι Περδίκκου, στρατοπεδεύοντος ἀπὸ τριῶν
ἡμερῶν ὁδοῦ μετὰ τῶν συναποστάντων στρατιωτῶν
πεζῶν μὲν τρισχιλίων, ἱππέων δὲ πεντακοσίων,
ἐξέπεμψεν ἐπ᾿ αὐτὸν Φοίνικα τὸν Τενέδιον,
ἔχοντα πεζοὺς μὲν ἐπιλέκτους τετρακισχιλίους,
3ἱππεῖς δὲ χιλίους. οὗτος δὲ νυκτοπορίᾳ συντόνῳ
χρησάμενος προσέπεσε τοῖς ἀποστάταις ἀπροσδοκήτως
περὶ δευτέραν φυλακὴν νυκτερινήν· καταλαβὼν
δ᾿ αὐτοὺς κοιμωμένους τόν τε Περδίκκαν
ἐζώγρησε καὶ τῆς δυνάμεως ἐγκρατὴς ἐγένετο.
4Εὐμενὴς δὲ τοὺς αἰτιωτάτους τῆς ἀποστάσεως
ἡγεμόνας ἐθανάτωσε· τοὺς δὲ στρατιώτας τοῖς
ἄλλοις ἀναμίξας καὶ φιλανθρώπως προσενεχθεὶς
ἰδίους ταῖς εὐνοίαις ἐποιήσατο.
5Μετὰ δὲ ταῦθ᾿ ὁ μὲν Ἀντίγονος διαπεμψάμενος
πρὸς Ἀπολλωνίδην τινά, τῶν ἱππέων ἀφηγούμενον
παρ᾿ Εὐμενεῖ, μεγάλαις ἐπαγγελίαις δι᾿ ἀπορρήτων


124Book XVIII

into Macedonia in order to restore the kings to
their 321 b.c. native land.1
40. Antigonus, who had been designated general 320 b.c. of Asia for the purpose of finishing the war with Eumenes, collected his troops from their winter quarters.2 After making preparations for the battle, he set out against Eumenes, who was still in
Cappadocia. Now one of Eumenes’ distinguished
commanders named Perdiccas had deserted him and
was encamped at a distance of three days’ march with
the soldiers who had joined him in the mutiny, three thousand infantry and five hundred cavalry.
Eumenes, accordingly, sent against him Phoenix of
Tenedos with four thousand picked foot-soldiers and a
thousand horsemen. After a forced night march Phoenix fell unexpectedly on the deserters at about the second watch of the night, and catching them asleep, took Perdiccas alive and secured control of his troops. Eumenes put to death the leaders who had been most responsible for the desertion, but by
distributing the common soldiers among the other troops and treating them with kindness, he secured them as
loyal supporters.
Thereafter Antigonus sent messages to a certain Apollonides, who commanded the cavalry in the
army of Eumenes, and by great promises secretly persuaded


1There appears to be a lacuna of considerable length at
about this point. Cassander convinced Antipater that his
suspicions of Antigonus were ill founded. Antipater accordingly
left to Antigonus for use in the war against Eumenes
a large part of the army that he himself had brought from
Europe. He then returned to Macedonia, accompanied by
the kings and probably by Cassander. Eumenes meantime
tried in vain to secure the moral aid of Cleopatra. Alexander’s sister who was then in Sardes; and his efforts toward effective co-operation with Alcetas were also
unavailing. In spite of this he was too strong for Antigonus to attack,
and an army sent by Antigonus against Alcetas was defeated. Eumenes spent the winter (321/0) in Greater Phrygia,
and then withdrew to Cappadocia. Cp. Arrian, FGrH, 156. 11. 40–45; Justin, 14. 1; Plutarch, Eumenes, 8. 3–7. For the continuation of the narrative cp. chap. 48. 1.2This is the winter of 321/0. For the following campaign cp. Plutarch, Eumenes, 9; Justin, 14. 2. 1–3.125