Diodorus of Sicily

μὲν ἐν Χερρονήσῳ πόλιν ἔκτισεν ἀφ᾿ ἑαυτοῦ Λυσιμαχίαν
καλέσας. Κλεομένης δ᾿ ὁ τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων
βασιλεὺς ἐτελεύτησεν ἄρξας ἔτη ἑξήκοντα
καὶ μῆνας δέκα, τὴν δὲ βασιλείαν διαδεξάμενος ὁ
Ἀρεὺς . . . υἱὸς1 ἦρξεν ἔτη τέσσαρα πρὸς τοῖς
τεσσαράκοντα.
2Περὶ δὲ τοὺς αὐτοὺς καιροὺς Ἀμίλκας ὁ τῶν ἐν
Σικελίᾳ δυνάμεων στρατηγὸς τὰ λοιπὰ τῶν χωρίων
χειρωσάμενος προῆγεν μετὰ τῆς δυνάμεως ἐπὶ τὰς
Συρακούσσας, ὡς καὶ ταύτας αἱρήσων κατὰ κράτος.
3τὴν μὲν οὖν σιτοπομπείαν διεκώλυε πολὺν ἤδη χρόνον
θαλασσοκρατῶν, τοὺς δ᾿ ἐπὶ τῆς χώρας καρποὺς
καταφθείρας ἐπεβάλετο καταλαβέσθαι τοὺς περὶ τὸ
Ὀλυμπιεῖον2 τόπους, κειμένους μὲν πρὸ τῆς πόλεως·
εὐθὺς δὲ καὶ προσβάλλειν ἐξ ἐξόδου τοῖς τείχεσι
διεγνώκει, τοῦ μάντεως εἰρηκότος αὐτῷ κατὰ τὴν
ἐπίσκεψιν τῶν ἱερῶν ὅτι τῇ μετὰ ταύτην ἡμέρᾳ
4πάντως ἐν Συρακούσσαις δειπνήσει. οἱ δ᾿ ἐκ τῆς
πόλεως αἰσθόμενοι τὴν ἐπίνοιαν τῶν πολεμίων ἐξέπεμψαν
τῶν μὲν πεζῶν νυκτὸς περὶ τρισχιλίους
καὶ τῶν ἱππέων περὶ τετρακοσίους, προστάξαντες
5καταλαβέσθαι τὸν Εὐρύηλον. ταχὺ δὲ τούτων τὸ
παραγγελθὲν πραξάντων οἱ Καρχηδόνιοι νυκτὸς
οὔσης προσῆγον, νομίζοντες λήσεσθαι τοὺς πολεμίους.


1ὁ Ἀρέτα υἱὸς RX, ὁ Ἀρέου υἱὸς F. Post suggests the loss of
a line, e.g., ὁ Ἀρεὺς <υἱωνὸς ὢν Κλεωμένους, Ἀκροτάτου δὲ>
υἱὸς, cp. Plutarch, Agis, 3.2Ὀλυμπιεῖον Post, cp. Book 16. 68. 1, 83. 2: Ὀλύμπιον.216Book XX

founded a city in the Chersonesus, calling it 309 b.c. Lysimachea after himself.1 Cleomenes, the king of the Lacedaemonians, died after having ruled sixty years and ten months2; and Areus, grandson of Cleomenes and son of Acrotatus,3 succeeded to the throne and ruled for forty-four years.
At about this time Hamilcar,4 the general of the armies in Sicily, after gaining possession of the remaining outposts, advanced with his army against Syracuse, intending to take that city also by storm. He prevented the importation of grain since he had controlled the sea for a long time; and after destroying the crops on the land he now undertook to capture the region about the Olympieum,5 which lies before the city. Immediately on his arrival, however, he also decided to attack the Avails, since the soothsayer had said to him at the inspection of the victims that on the next day he would certainly dine in Syracuse. But the people of the city, learning the intention of their enemy, sent out at night about three thousand of their infantry and about four hundred of their cavalry, ordering them to occupy Euryelus.6 These quickly carried out the orders; but the Carthaginians advanced during the night, believing that they would






1The settlers came from the city of Cardia, which had been destroyed by Lysimachus (Pausanias, 1. 9. 8).2In Book 15. 60. 4 (370 b.c.) we are wrongly told that the reign lasted for 34 years.3The translation follows the reading suggested in the critical note.4Continued from chap. 18. 3,5South of the city on the shore of the Great Harbour, near the mouth of the Anapus River.6The narrow entrance at the west end of the plateau, Epipolae, which lies above the city on the west and overlooks the valley of the Anapus River.217