Diodorus of Sicily

μὲν ἔτυχε διατρίβων περὶ Καυλωνίαν τῆς Ἰταλίας,
Φίλιστον δὲ τὸν στρατηγὸν περὶ τὸν Ἀδρίαν ὄντα
μετεπέμψατο μετὰ τῆς ναυτικῆς δυνάμεως καὶ
προσέταξε πλεῖν εἰς τὰς Συρακούσσας. ἀμφοτέρων
δ᾿ εἰς τὸν αὐτὸν τόπον ἐλθεῖν σπευδόντων ὁ μὲν
Διονύσιος ἧκεν εἰς τὰς Συρακούσσας ἡμέραις ὕστερον
4ἑπτὰ τῆς Δίωνος καθόδου. εὐθὺς οὖν καταστρατηγῆσαι
βουλόμενος τοὺς Συρακοσίους περὶ
διαλύσεως ἐπρεσβεύετο καὶ πολλὰς ἐμφάσεις ἐδίδου
παραδώσειν τὴν τυραννίδα τῷ δήμῳ καὶ τῆς δημοκρατίας
ἀλλάξεσθαι1 τιμὰς ἀξιολόγους· ἠξίου τε
πρέσβεις ἀποστεῖλαι πρὸς αὐτόν, μεθ᾿ ὧν συνεδρεύσας
5καταλύσηται τὸν πόλεμον. οἱ μὲν οὖν
Συρακόσιοι μετεωρισθέντες ταῖς ἐλπίσιν ἐξαπέστειλαν
πρέσβεις τοὺς ἀξιολογωτάτους τῶν ἀνδρῶν·
ὁ δὲ Διονύσιος τούτοις μὲν φυλακὴν περιστήσας
ἀνεβάλετο τὴν ἔντευξιν, αὐτὸς δ᾿ ὁρῶν τοὺς Συρακοσίους
διὰ τὴν ἐλπίδα τῆς εἰρήνης τά τε περὶ
τὰς φυλακὰς ῥᾳθύμως ἔχοντας καὶ τὰ πρὸς μάχην
ἀπαρασκεύους ἄφνω τὰς πύλας τῆς κατὰ τὴν
Νῆσον ἀκροπόλεως ἀνοίξας ἐξεχύθη συντεταγμένῃ
τῇ δυνάμει.
12. Τῶν δὲ Συρακοσίων κατεσκευακότων ἀπὸ
θαλάττης εἰς θάλατταν διατείχισμα αὑτῶν2 προσέπεσον
οἱ μισθοφόροι τῷ τείχει μετὰ πολλῆς βοῆς
καὶ καταπλήξεως καὶ πολλοὺς μὲν τῶν φυλάκων
ἀνεῖλον, τοῦ δὲ τείχους ἐντὸς γενόμενοι πρὸς τοὺς


1ἀλλάξεσθαι edd.: ἀλλάξασθαι.2So Post: διατειχίσας αὐτῶν P; διατείχισμα αὐτῶν X; διατειχίσματα
edd.270Book XVI

sojourning near Caulonia1 in Italy, and he sent for 357/6 b.c. Philistus2 his general, who was cruising the Adriatic, to come with his fleet and ordered him to sail to Syracuse. Both men made haste to reach the same spot, but Dionysius arrived seven days after the return of Dion. Immediately, then, on his arrival, desirous of outmanoeuvring the Syracusans, he sent an embassy to make peace, and gave many indications that he would surrender his power as tyrant to the people and would accept of the people’s government important privileges in exchange. He requested them to dispatch envoys to him so that he might sit in conference with them and bring the war to an end.3 The Syracusans, accordingly, elated with hopes, dispatched as envoys the most important of their men; but Dionysius, having placed them under guard, postponed the conference and, observing that the Syracusans because of their hope of peace were lax in the matter of garrisons and unprepared for a battle, suddenly opened the gates of the citadel on the Island,4 and issued forth with his army in battle array.
12. Since the Syracusans had constructed a cross-wall of their own from sea to sea, the mercenaries fell upon the wall with a loud and terrifying outcry, massacred many of the garrison and, getting inside




1See chap. 10. 2 and note.2This is the historian (see Book 15. 89. 3 and 94. 4) who aided Dionysius the Elder to secure his tyranny (Book 13. 91. 4), was driven into exile by him and presently recalled (Book 15. 7. 3–4).3See Plutarch. Dion, 30. 1–3.4The island of Ortygia, which is actually attached to the mainland, stretches south, leaving a narrow passage of twelve hundred yards as the mouth of the Great Harbour between itself and Plemmyrium. Ortygia had been strongly fortified by Dionysius the Elder.271