Diodorus of Sicily

κρίσει προστεθείσης τῆς γενομένης ἐλπίδος ἀσμένως
ὑπήκουσε καὶ πρὸς μὲν Ἀθηναίους περὶ ουμμαχίας
διεπέμπετο, γεγαμηκὼς Εὐθυδίκην τὴν Μιλτιάδου
θυγατέρα τοῦ τὴν προσηγορίαν φέροντος εἰς τὸν
6στρατηγήσαντα τῶν ἐν Μαραθῶνι νικησάντων. διὰ
δὴ ταύτην τὴν ἐπιγαμίαν καὶ τὴν ἄλλην σπουδήν,
ἣν1 ὑπῆρχεν ἀποδεδειγμένος εἰς τὴν πόλιν, καὶ
πολλοὶ τῶν Ἀθηναίων προθύμως ὑπήκουσαν εἰς
τὴν στρατείαν. οὐκ ὀλίγοι δὲ καὶ τῶν ἄλλων
Ἑλλήνων ἔσπευδον κοινωνῆσαι τῆς ἐπιβολῆς, ἐλπίζοντες
τήν τε κρατίστην τῆς Λιβύης κατακληρουχήσειν
καὶ τὸν ἐν Καρχηδόνι διαρπάσειν πλοῦτον.
7τὰ μὲν γὰρ κατὰ τὴν Ἑλλάδα διὰ τοὺς συνεχεῖς
πολέμους καὶ τὰς τῶν δυναστῶν πρὸς ἀλλήλους
φιλοτιμίας ἀσθενῆ καὶ ταπεινὰ καθειστήκει· ὥσθ᾿
ὑπελάμβανον μὴ μόνον ἐγκρατεῖς ἔσεσθαι πολλῶν
ἀγαθῶν, ἀλλὰ καὶ τῶν παρόντων κακῶν ἀπαλλαγήσεσθαι.
41. Ὁ δ᾿ οὖν Ὀφέλλας, ἐπειδὴ πάντ᾿ αὐτῷ πρὸς
τὴν στρατείαν κατεσκεύαστο λαμπρῶς, ἐξώρμησε
μετὰ τῆς δυνάμεως, ἔχων πεζοὺς μὲν πλείους τῶν
μυρίων, ἱππεῖς δὲ ἑξακοσίους, ἅρματα δὲ ἑκατόν,
ἡνιόχους δὲ καὶ παραβάτας πλείους τῶν τριακοσίων.
ἠκολούθουν δὲ καὶ τῶν ἔξω τάξεως λεγομένων οὐκ
ἐλάττους μυρίων· πολλοὶ δὲ τούτων τέκνα καὶ
γυναῖκας καὶ τὴν ἄλλην παρασκευὴν ἦγον, ὥστε
2ἐμφερῆ τὴν στρατιὰν ὑπάρχειν ἀποικίᾳ. ὀκτωκαίδεκα
μὲν οὖν ἡμέρας ὁδοιπορήσαντες καὶ διελθόντες
σταδίους τρισχιλίους κατεσκήνωσαν περὶ

1ἣν added by Dindorf.250Book XX

was added this actual hope, gladly consented and sent 308 b.c. to the Athenians an envoy to confer about an alliance, for Ophelias had married Euthydice,1 the daughter of a Miltiades who traced that name back to him who had commanded the victorious troops at Marathon. On account of this marriage and the other marks of favour which he had habitually displayed toward their city, a good many of the Athenians eagerly enlisted for the campaign. No small number also of the other Greeks were quick to join in the undertaking since they hoped to portion out for colonization the most fertile part of Libya and to plunder the wealth of Carthage. For conditions throughout Greece on account of the continuous wars and the mutual rivalries of the princes had become unstable and straitened, and they expected not only to gain many advantages, but also to rid themselves of their present evils.
41. And so Ophellas, when everything for his campaign had been prepared magnificently, set out with his army, having more than ten thousand foot-soldiers, six hundred horsemen, a hundred chariots, and more than three hundred charioteers and men to fight beside them. There followed also of those who are termed non-combatants not less than ten thousand; and many of these brought their children and wives and other possessions, so that the army was like a colonizing expedition. When they had marched for eighteen days and had traversed three thousand stades,2 they encamped at Automala3; thence as



1After Ophellas’ death she returned to Athens and became a wife of Demetrius Poliorcetes (Plutarch, Demetrius, 14. 1).2About 345 miles.3At the extreme western limit of Cyrenê, at the most southern point of the Greater Syrtis (Strabo, 2. 5. 20).251