Diodorus of Sicily

εἰρήνης. ἀνῃρέθησαν δὲ τῶν Ἰλλυριῶν ἐν ταύτῃ
τῇ μάχῃ πλείους τῶν ἑπτακισχιλίων.
5. Ἡμεῖς δ᾿ ἐπεὶ τὰ κατὰ τὴν Μακεδονικὴν καὶ
τὴν Ἰλλυρίδα διήλθομεν, μεταβησόμεθα πρὸς τὰς
ἑτερογενεῖς πράξεις. κατὰ γὰρ τὴν Σικελίαν
Διονύσιος ὁ τῶν Συρακοσίων τύραννος ὁ νεώτερος
παρειληφὼς μὲν τὴν δυναστείαν ἐν τοῖς ἀνωτέρω
καιροῖς, ἄπρακτος δ᾿ ὢν καὶ πολὺ τοῦ πατρὸς
καταδεέστερος προσεποιεῖτο διὰ τὴν ἀπραγίαν εἰρηνικὸς
2εἶναι καὶ πρᾷος τὸν τρόπον. διόπερ πρὸς
Καρχηδονίους διαδεδεγμένος τὸν πόλεμον πρός τε
τούτους εἰρήνην συνέθετο καὶ πρὸς Λευκανοὺς
ὁμοίως διαπολεμήσας ἀργῶς ἐπί τινα χρόνον καὶ
ταῖς τελευταίαις μάχαις ἐπὶ τοῦ προτερήματος γενόμενος
ἀσμένως πρὸς αὐτοὺς κατελύσατο τὸν πόλεμον.
3κατὰ δὲ τὴν Ἀπουλίαν δύο πόλεις ἔκτισε
βουλόμενος ἀσφαλῆ τοῖς πλέουσι τὸν Ἰόνιον πόρον
ποιῆσαι· οἱ γὰρ τὴν παραθαλάττιον οἰκοῦντες βάρβαροι
λῃστρίσι πολλαῖς πλέοντες ἄπλουν τοῖς ἐμπόροις
παρεσκεύαζον πᾶσαν τὴν περὶ τὸν Ἀδρίαν
4θάλατταν. μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα δοὺς ἑαυτὸν εἰς βίον
εἰρηνικὸν ἐξέλυσε μὲν τῶν στρατιωτῶν τὰς ἐν τοῖς
πολεμικοῖς1 γυμνασίας, μεγίστην δὲ τῶν κατὰ τὴν
Εὐρώπην δυναστειῶν παραλαβὼν τὴν ἀρχὴν καὶ
τὴν ὑπὸ τοῦ πατρὸς λεγομένην ἀδάμαντι δεδέσθαι




1So Fischer (cp. Books 17. 2. 3; 18. 42. 2): πολεμίοις
PX, πολέμοις cet.248Book XVI

more than seven thousand Illyrians were slain in this 359/8 b.c. battle.
5. Since we have finished with the affairs of Macedonia and Illyria, we shall now turn to events of a different kind. In Sicily Dionysius the Younger, tyrant of the Syracusans, who had succeeded to the realm1 in the period preceding this but was indolent and much inferior to his father, pretended because of his lack of enterprise to be peacefully inclined and mild of disposition.2 Accordingly, since he had inherited the war with the Carthaginians,3 he made peace with them and likewise pursued war listlessly for some time against the Lucanians4 and then, in the latest battles having had the advantage, he gladly brought to a close the war against them. In Apulia he founded two cities because he wished to make safe for navigators the passage across the Ionian Sea; for the barbarians who dwelt along the coast were accustomed to put out in numerous pirate ships and render the whole shore along the Adriatic Sea unsafe for merchants. Thereafter, having given himself over to a peaceful existence, he relieved the soldiers of their drills in warfare and though he had succeeded to the greatest of the realms in Europe, the tyranny that was said by his father to be bound


1For the succession of Dionysius II see Book 15. 74. 5.2For the character of Dionysius II see Plutarch, Dion, 7.
3–4 and Hackforth, Cambridge Ancient History, 6. 272–273.3The cessation of activities against Carthage is noted in Book 15. 73. 4.4No mention is made previously of this war with the Lucanians. In Book 14. 100. 5 Dionysius I is said to have made an alliance with the Lucanians and his policy of supporting them against the Italiot Greeks is clearly shown in chapter 101 of that Book. This seems to be the war mentioned in Plutarch, Dion, 16. 3 and Plato, Epistles, 3. 317 a. For this war see Costanzi, “De bello Lucanico quod Dionysius minor recens ab imperio composuerit,” Rivista di Filologia, 26 (1898), 450 ff.249