Diodorus of Sicily

πολὺν ἄργυρόν τε καὶ χρυσὸν εὗρον, ὡς ἂν πόλεως
γεγενημένης εὐδαίμονος ἐκ πολλῶν χρόνων.
23. Μετὰ δὲ τὴν ἀπώλειαν τῶν πόλεων1 ἧκον δύο
γυναῖκες εἰς συνοικισμὸν τῷ Περδίκκᾳ, Νίκαιά τε
ἡ Ἀντιπάτρου θυγάτηρ, ἣν αὐτὸς ὁ Περδίκκας ἦν
μεμνηστευκώς, καὶ Κλεοπάτρα ἡ Ἀλεξάνδρου μὲν
ἀδελφὴ γνησία, θυγάτηρ δὲ Φιλίππου τοῦ Ἀμύντου.
2ὁ δὲ Περδίκκας πρότερον μὲν ἦν κεκρικὼς κοινοπραγίαν
Ἀντιπάτρῳ καὶ διὰ τοῦτο τὴν μνηστείαν
ἐπεποίητο μήπω τῶν κατ᾿ αὐτὸν πραγμάτων βεβαίως
ἐστερεωμένων· ὡς δὲ παρέλαβε τάς τε βασιλικὰς
δυνάμεις καὶ τὴν τῶν βασιλέων προστασίαν,
3μετέπεσε τοῖς λογισμοῖς. ὀρεγόμενος γὰρ βασιλείας
ἔσπευδε τὴν Κλεοπάτραν γῆμαι, νομίζων διὰ
ταύτης προτρέψεσθαι τοὺς Μακεδόνας συγκατασκευάζειν
αὐτῷ τὴν τῶν ὅλων ἐξουσίαν. οὔπω δὲ
βουλόμενος ἀποκαλύψασθαι πρὸς τὴν ἐπιβολὴν
κατὰ μὲν τὸ παρὸν ἦγε τὴν Νίκαιαν, ὅπως μὴ τὸν
Ἀντίπατρον ἀλλότριον ἔχῃ ταῖς ἰδίαις ἐπιβολαῖς·
μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα Ἀντιγόνου τὴν προαίρεσιν αὐτοῦ
κατανοήσαντος καὶ φιλίαν ἔχοντος πρὸς Ἀντίπατρον,
ἔτι δὲ ὄντος τοῦ ἀνδρὸς τούτου πρακτικωτάτου
τῶν ἡγεμόνων ἔκρινεν αὐτὸν ἐκποδὼν ποιήσασθαι.
4ἐπιβαλὼν οὖν αὐτῷ διαβολὰς ψευδεῖς καὶ κατηγορίας
ἀδίκους φανερὸς ἦν ἀναιρήσων αὐτόν. ὁ δ᾿
Ἀντίγονος συνέσει καὶ τόλμῃ διαφέρων φανερῶς
μὲν ἀπεφαίνετο βούλεσθαι περὶ τῶν ἐγκαλουμένων
ἀπολογήσασθαι, λάθρᾳ δὲ παρασκευασάμενος τὰ
πρὸς τὸν δρασμὸν ἔλαθε μετὰ τῶν ἰδίων φίλων καὶ



1πόλεων Wesseling: πολεμίων.80Book XVIII

silver and gold, as was natural in a city that had been 322 b.c. prosperous for a great many years.
23. After the destruction of the cities there came two women to marry Perdiccas,1 Nicaea, the daughter of Antipater, for whose hand Perdiccas himself had sued, and Cleopatra, who was Alexander’s own sister, daughter of Philip son of Amyntas. Perdiccas had formerly planned to work in harmony with Antipater, and for this reason he had pressed his suit when his position was not yet firmly established; but when he had gained control of the royal armies and the guardianship of the kings, he changed his calculations. For since he was now reaching out for the kingship, he was bent upon marrying Cleopatra, believing that he could use her to persuade the Macedonians to help him gain the supreme power. But not wishing as yet to reveal his design, he married Nicaea for the time, so that he might not render Antipater hostile to his own undertakings. Presently, however, Antigonus learned his intentions, and since Antigonus was a friend of Antipater and, moreover, the most energetic of the commanders, Perdiccas decided to put him out of the way. So, by bringing false slanders and unjust charges against him, he clearly revealed his intention of destroying him. Antigonus, however, who excelled in keenness and daring, outwardly let it be known that he wished to defend himself against these charges, but secretly he made arrangements for flight and, with his personal friends

1For these and other intrigues, and for the flight of Anti-gonus
to Macedonia, cp. Arrian, FGrH, 156. 9. 20–24, 26: Justin, 13. 6. 4–8. The flight cannot be dated before the winter of 322/1.81