Diodorus of Sicily

δὲ πύργους κατασκευάσας, ὑπεραίροντας
πολὺ τῶν κατὰ τὴν Πέρινθον πύργων, ἐξ
ὑπεροχῆς κατεπόνει τοὺς πολιορκουμένους· ὁμοίως
δὲ καὶ διὰ τῶν κριῶν σαλεύων τὰ τείχη καὶ διὰ
τῆς μεταλλείας ὑπορύττων ἐπὶ πολὺ μέρος τὸ τεῖχος1
κατέβαλεν. ἀμυνομένων δὲ τῶν Περινθίων εὐρώστως
καὶ ταχὺ τεῖχος ἕτερον ἀντοικοδομησάντων
ἀγῶνες θαυμαστοὶ καὶ τειχομαχίαι συνίσταντο.
4μεγάλης δὲ φιλοτιμίας ἐξ ἀμφοτέρων συνισταμένης
ὁ μὲν βασιλεὺς πολλοὺς ἔχων καὶ παντοδαποὺς
ὀξυβελεῖς διὰ τούτων τοὺς ἐπὶ τῶν ἐπάλξεων διαγωνιζομένους
διέφθειρεν, οἱ δὲ Περίνθιοι πολλοὺς
καθ᾿ ἡμέραν ἀποβάλλοντες συμμαχίαν καὶ βέλη καὶ
καταπέλτας παρὰ τῶν Βυζαντίων προσελάβοντο.
5ἐξισωθέντες οὖν πάλιν τοῖς πολεμίοις ἀνεθάρρησαν
καὶ τετολμηκότως τοὺς ὑπὲρ τῆς πατρίδος κινδύνους
ὑπέμενον. οὐ μὴν ὁ βασιλεὺς ἔληγε τῆς φιλοτιμίας,
ἀλλὰ διελόμενος τὰς δυνάμεις εἰς πλείω μέρη συνεχῶς
ἐκ διαδοχῆς ἐτειχομάχει καὶ καθ᾿ ἡμέραν καὶ
νύκτωρ. τρισμυρίους δ᾿ ἔχων στρατιώτας καὶ βελῶν
καὶ μηχανῶν πολιορκητικῶν πλῆθος, ἔτι δὲ
τὰς ἄλλας μηχανὰς2 ἀνυπερβλήτους κατεπόνει τοὺς
πολιορκουμένους.
75. Τῆς δὲ πολιορκίας πολυχρονίου γινομένης
καὶ τῶν κατὰ τὴν πόλιν πολλῶν μὲν ἀναιρουμένων,
οὐκ ὀλίγων δὲ τραυματιζομένων, τῶν δ᾿ ἐπιτηδείων
ἐκλειπόντων προσδόκιμος ἦν ἡ τῆς πόλεως ἅλωσις.
οὐ μὴν ἡ τύχη γε περιεῖδε τὴν τῶν κινδυνευόντων
σωτηρίαν, ἀλλὰ παράδοξον αὐτοῖς κατεσκεύασε
βοήθειαν. τῆς γὰρ τοῦ βασιλέως αὐξήσεως διαβεβοημένης
κατὰ τὴν Ἀσίαν ὁ βασιλεὺς ὑφορώμενος
τὴν τοῦ Φιλίππου δύναμιν ἔγραψε πρὸς τοὺς ἐπὶ
1τὸ τεῖχος Fischer (cp. chap. 49. 1): τοῦ τείχους.2παρασκευὰς Fischer (cp. chaps. 73. 3; 78. 5).46Book XVI

built towers eighty cubits high, which far overtopped 341/0 b.c. the towers of Perinthus, and from a superior height kept wearing down the besieged. He rocked the walls with battering rams and undermined them with saps, and cast down a long stretch of the wall. The Perinthians fought stoutly in their own defence and quickly threw up a second wall; many admirable feats were performed in the open and on the fortifications. Both sides displayed great determination. The king, for his part, rained destruction with numerous and varied catapults upon the men fighting steadfastly along the battlements, while the Perinthians, although their daily losses were heavy, received reinforcements of men, missiles, and artillery from Byzantium. When they had again become a match for the enemy, they took courage and resolutely bore the brunt of battle for their homeland. Still the king persevered in his determination. He divided his forces into several divisions and with frequent reliefs kept up a continuous attack on the walls both day and night. He had thirty thousand men and a store of missiles and siege engines besides other machines in plenty, and kept up a steady pressure against the besieged people.
75. So the siege dragged on. The numbers mounted of dead and wounded in the city and provisions were running short. The capture of the city was imminent. Fortune, however, did not neglect the safety of those in danger but brought them an unexpected deliverance. Philip’s growth in power had been reported in Asia, and the Persian king, viewing this power with alarm, wrote to his satraps on the



47