Diodorus of Sicily

μὲν πορίων ἥλω πλείω τῶν ἑκατόν, ἐν οἷς ἦσαν
σχεδὸν στρατιῶται ὀκτακισχίλιοι· τῶν δὲ μακρῶν
αὔτανδροι μὲν ἐλήφθησαν τεσσαράκοντα, διεφθάρησαν
δὲ περὶ ὀγδοήκοντα, ἃς πλήρεις οὔσας θαλάττης
κατήγαγον οἱ κρατήσαντες εἰς τὴν πρὸς τῇ πόλει
στρατοπεδείαν. διεφθάρη δὲ καὶ τῶν Δημητρίου
σκαφῶν εἴκοσι· πάντα δὲ τῆς προσηκούσης ἐπιμελείας
τυχόντα παρείχετο τὰς ἁρμοζούσας χρείας.
53. Μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα Πτολεμαῖος ἀπογνοὺς τὰ
κατὰ τὴν Κύπρον ἀπῆρεν εἰς Αἴγυπτον. Δημήτριος
δὲ πάσας τὰς ἐν τῇ νήσῳ πόλεις παραλαβὼν καὶ
τοὺς φρουροῦντας στρατιώτας, τούτους μὲν εἰς
τάξεις κατεχώρισεν, ὄντας πεζοὺς μὲν μυρίους
ἑξακισχιλίους συντεταγμένους, ἱππεῖς δὲ περὶ ἑξακοσίους,
πρὸς δὲ τὸν πατέρα ταχέως ἐμβιβάσας εἰς
τὴν μεγίστην ναῦν τοὺς δηλώσοντας περὶ τῶν κατορθωθέντων
2ἐξαπέστειλεν. ὁ δ᾿ Ἀντίγονος πυθόμενος
τὴν γεγενημένην νίκην καὶ μετεωρισθεὶς ἐπὶ
τῷ μεγέθει τοῦ προτερήματος διάδημα περιέθετο
καὶ τὸ λοιπὸν ἐχρημάτιζε βασιλεύς, συγχωρήσας
καὶ τῷ Δημητρίῳ τῆς αὐτῆς τυγχάνειν προσηγορίας
3καὶ τιμῆς. ὁ δὲ Πτολεμαῖος οὐδὲν τῇ ψυχῇ ταπεινωθεὶς
διὰ τὴν ἧτταν καὶ αὐτὸς ὁμοίως ἀνέλαβε
τὸ διάδημα καὶ πρὸς ἅπαντας ἀνέγραφεν ἑαυτὸν
4βασιλέα. παραπλησίως δὲ τούτοις καὶ οἱ λοιποὶ
δυνάσται ζηλοτυπήσαντες ἀνηγόρευον ἑαυτοὺς βασιλεῖς,
Σέλευκος μὲν προσφάτως τὰς ἄνω σατραπείας
προσκεκτημένος, Λυσίμαχος δὲ καὶ Κάσανδρος τὰς
ἐξ ἀρχῆς δοθείσας μερίδας διατηροῦντες.
Ἡμεῖς δὲ περὶ τούτων ἱκανῶς εἰρηκότες ἐν μέρει
διέξιμεν περὶ τῶν κατὰ Λιβύην καὶ Σικελίαν
πραχθέντων.
288Book XX

more than a hundred of the supply ships were taken, 307 b.c. upon which were almost eight thousand soldiers, and of the warships forty were captured with their crews and about eighty were disabled, which the victors towed, full of sea water, to the camp before the city. Twenty of Demetrius’ ships were disabled, but all of these, after receiving proper care, continued to perform the services for which they were suited.
53. Thereafter Ptolemy gave up the fight in Cyprus and returned to Egypt. Demetrius, after he had taken over all the cities of the island and their garrisons, enrolled the men in companies; and when they were organized they came to sixteen thousand foot and about six hundred horse. He at once sent messengers to his father to inform him of the successes, embarking them on his largest ship. And when Antigonus heard of the victory that had been gained, elated by the magnitude of his good fortune, he assumed the diadem and from that time on he used the style of king; and he permitted Demetrius also to assume this same title and rank. Ptolemy, however, not at all humbled in spirit by his defeat, also assumed the diadem and always signed himself king.1 And in a similar fashion in rivalry with them the rest of the princes also called themselves kings: Seleucus, who had recently gained the upper satrapies, and Lysimachus and Cassander, who still retained the territories originally allotted to them.2
Now that we have said enough about these matters, we shall relate in their turn the events that took place in Libya and in Sicily.
1Ptolemy’s assumption of the diadem is placed in the year 305/4 by the Parian Marble, FGrH, 239. B 23.2Continued in chap. 73.289