Diodorus of Sicily
3τοὺς πολεμίους. οἱ δὲ περὶ τὸν Εὐμενῆ πυθόμενοι
τὰ πεπραγμένα Ξενοφίλῳ μὲν τῷ τὴν ἐν Σούσοις
ἄκραν φυλάττοντι ἐκέλευσαν μήτε τῶν χρημάτων
Ἀντιγόνῳ δοῦναί τι μήτ᾿ εἰς λόγους ἔρχεσθαι,
αὐτοὶ δὲ τὰς δυνάμεις ἀναλαβόντες ὥρμησαν ἐπὶ
τὸν Τίγριν ποταμόν, ἀπέχοντα Σούσων ὁδὸν ἡμέρας,
ᾗ τῆς ὀρεινῆς ἐκχεῖται1 τῆς ὑπὸ τῶν αὐτονόμων
κατεχομένης, οὓς Οὐξίους προσαγορεύουσι,
πλάτος μὲν κατὰ πολλοὺς2 τόπους τριῶν σταδίων,
ἔστι δὲ ὅτε καὶ τεσσάρων, βάθος δὲ κατὰ μέσον τὸ
ῥεῦμα πρὸς τὰ μεγέθη τῶν ἐλεφάντων, καὶ φερόμενος
μὲν ἀπὸ τῆς ὀρεινῆς ἐπὶ σταδίους ἑπτακοσίους
εἰς τὴν Ἐρυθρὰν ἐξερεύγεται θάλασσαν, ἔχει
δὲ καὶ θαλάσσιον ἰχθὺν πολὺν καὶ θηρία τῶν
πελαγίων, ἃ φαίνεται μάλιστα περὶ κυνὸς ἀνατολάς.
4τοῦτον δὲ τὸν ποταμὸν προβαλόμενοι καὶ πᾶσαν τὴν
παραποταμίαν ἀπὸ τῶν πηγῶν ἕως τῆς θαλάσσης
φυλακαῖς διαλαβόντες ἀνέμενον τὴν τῶν πολεμίων
ἔφοδον. προσδεομένης δὲ τῆς φυλακῆς διὰ τὸ
μῆκος στρατιωτῶν οὐκ ὀλίγων οἱ περὶ τὸν Εὐμενῆ
καὶ Ἀντιγένη ἠξίωσαν τὸν Πευκέστην ἐκ τῆς
5Περσίδος μεταπέμψασθαι τοξότας μυρίους. ὁ δὲ
τὸ μὲν πρῶτον οὐ προσεῖχεν αὐτοῖς, μεμψιμοιρῶν
ἐπὶ τῷ μὴ τετευχέναι τῆς στρατηγίας, ὕστερον δὲ
δοὺς αὑτῷ λόγον συνεχώρησεν ὅτι κρατήσαντος
Ἀντιγόνου συμβήσεται καὶ τὴν σατραπείαν αὐτὸν
ἀποβαλεῖν καὶ περὶ τοῦ σώματος κινδυνεῦσαι.




1ἐκχεῖται Post, ἐκρεῖ Fischer, ἐξέρχεται Hertlein: ἔχει RX,
ἔχεται F.2μὲν after πολλοὺς deleted by editors.276Book XIX

against the enemy. When Eumenes learned what 317 b.c. had taken place, he ordered Xenophilus, who was guarding the citadel of Susa, not to give any of the money to Antigonus nor to have any conference with him. Eumenes himself with his forces set out for the Tigris River,1 which is a day’s march from Susa at the place where it flows out of the mountainous country that is occupied by the unconquered tribesmen called the Uxii. Its width in many places is three stades, and in some places even four2; and in the middle of the stream the depth is about the height of an elephant. After flowing along for some seven hundred stades3 from the mountains, it empties into the Red Sea,4 and it contains abundant salt-water fishes as well as sharks, which appear just about the time of the rising of the Dog Star.5 Keeping this river in front of them as a protection and holding the bank from its source to the sea with pickets, they awaited the onset of the enemy. Since this guard because of its length required no small number of soldiers, Eumenes and Antigenes requested Peucestes to summon ten thousand bowmen from Persia. At first he paid no heed to them, since he still bore a grudge for not having received the generalship; but later, reasoning with himself, he admitted that should Antigonus be victorious the result would be that he himself would lose his satrapy and also be in danger





1Apparently an error for the Pasitigris (cp. chap. 21. 2 Plutarch, Eumenes, 14. 2; Strabo, 15. 3. 6) as also in chap. 18. 4, and in Book 17. 67. 1–2, where, however, the distance to Susa is correctly given as four days’ march (Droysen, Geschichte des Hellenismus, 2. 1. 266, note 1).2About 1800 and 2400 feet respectively.3About eighty miles.4i.e. the Persian Gulf. The river now empties into the Shatt-al-Arab.5In the latter part of June.277