Diodorus of Sicily

πέντε, μίαν δὲ Πεπαρηθίαν εἷλε, καὶ σωμάτων
3ἐκυρίευσεν ἑξακοσίων. οἱ δ᾿ Ἀθηναῖοι παροξυνθέντες
τοῦ μὲν Λεωσθένους ὡς προδότου θάνατον
κατέγνωσαν καὶ τὴν οὐσίαν ἐδήμευσαν, ἑλόμενοι δὲ
στρατηγὸν Χάρητα καὶ ναυτικὴν δύναμιν δόντες
ἐξέπεμψαν. οὗτος δὲ τοὺς μὲν πολεμίους εὐλαβούμενος,
τοὺς δὲ συμμάχους ἀδικῶν διετέλει.
καταπλεύσας γὰρ εἰς Κόρκυραν συμμαχίδα πόλιν,
στάσεις ἐν αὐτῇ μεγάλας ἐκίνησεν ἐξ ὧν συνέπεσε
γενέσθαι σφαγὰς πολλὰς καὶ ἁρπαγάς, δι᾿ ἃς συνέβη
τὸν δῆμον τῶν Ἀθηναίων διαβληθῆναι παρὰ τοῖς
συμμάχοις. ὁ μὲν οὖν Χάρης καὶ ἕτερα τοιαῦτα
παρανομῶν ἀγαθὸν μὲν οὐδὲν διεπράξατο, τῇ δὲ
πατρίδι διαβολάς.
4Τῶν δὲ συγγραφέων Διονυσόδωρος1 καὶ Ἄναξις
οἱ Βοιωτοὶ τὴν τῶν Ἑλληνικῶν ἱστορίαν2 εἰς τοῦτον
τὸν ἐνιαυτὸν κατεστρόφασι τὰς συντάξεις.
ἡμεῖς δὲ τὰς πρὸ Φιλίππου τοῦ βασιλέως πράξεις
διεληλυθότες, ταύτην μὲν τὴν βύβλον κατὰ τὴν ἐν
ἀρχῇ πρόθεσιν αὐτοῦ περιγράφομεν,3 τὴν δ᾿ ἐχομένην
ἀπὸ τῆς Φιλίππου παραλήψεως τῆς βασιλείας
ἀρξάμενοι πάσας διέξιμεν τὰς τοῦ βασιλέως
τούτου πράξεις μέχρι τῆς τελευτῆς, συμπεριλαμβάνοντες
καὶ τὰς ἄλλας τὰς γεγενημένας4 ἐν τοῖς
γνωριζομένοις μέρεσι τῆς οἰκουμένης.
1So Dindorf: Διονυσιόδωρος.2Dindorf deletes τὴν . . . ἱστορίαν (cp. Book 14. 117. 8).3So editors: παραγράφομεν.4So PAJL, γενομένας cet.220Book XV

triremes and one Peparethian, and took six hundred 361/0 b.c. captives. The Athenians, enraged, condemned Leos-thenes to death as a traitor and confiscated his property, then choosing Chares1 as general in command and giving him a fleet, they sent him out. But he spent his time avoiding the enemy and injuring the allies. For he sailed to Corcyra, an allied city, and stirred up such violent civil strife in it that many murders and seizures took place, with the result that the Athenian democracy was discredited in the eyes of the allies. So it turned out that Chares, who did many other such lawless acts, accomplished nothing good but brought his country into discredit.
The historians Dionysodorus and Anaxis,2 Boeotians, closed their narrative of Greek history with this year. But we, now that we have narrated the events before the time of King Philip, bring this book to a close here in accordance with the plan stated at the beginning.3 In the following book which begins with Philip’s accession to the throne, we shall record all the achievements of this king to his death, including in its compass those other events as well which have occurred in the known portions of the world.
1For Chares and Corcyra see Aeneas Tacticus, 11. 13 ff. Demosthenes notes the hostility of Corcyra in 24. 202 and 18. 234.2These Boeotian historians are to us mere names. No fragments exist.3See chap. 1. 6.221