Diodorus of Sicily

ἐπὶ δὲ τούτων ὁ κληθεὶς Βοιωτικὸς πόλεμος ἐνέστη
Λακεδαιμονίοις πρὸς Βοιωτοὺς διὰ τοιαύτας αἰτίας.
τὴν Καδμείαν φρουρούντων Λακεδαιμονίων ἀδίκως
καὶ πολλοὺς τῶν ἀξιολόγων ἀνδρῶν πεφυγαδευκότων,
συνεστράφησαν οἱ φυγάδες, καὶ συνεπιλαβομένων
Ἀθηναίων κατῆλθον εἰς τὴν πατρίδα νυκτός.
2καὶ πρῶτον μὲν τοὺς τὰ Λακεδαιμονίων φρονοῦντας
ἐν ταῖς ἰδίαις οἰκίαις ἐφόνευσαν, ἔτι κοιμωμένους
καταλαβόντες· ἔπειτα τοὺς πολίτας ἐπὶ τὴν ἐλευθερίαν
παρακαλέσαντες συνεργοὺς ἔσχον ἅπαντας
τοὺς Θηβαίους. ταχὺ δὲ τοῦ πλήθους συνδραμόντος
μετὰ τῶν ὅπλων, ἅμ᾿ ἡμέρᾳ τὴν Καδμείαν πολιορκεῖν
3ἐπεχείρησαν. οἱ δὲ φρουροῦντες τὴν ἄκραν
Λακεδαιμόνιοι, μετὰ τῶν συμμάχων ὄντες οὐκ
ἐλάττους τῶν χιλίων καὶ πεντακοσίων, εἰς μὲν τὴν
Σπάρτην ἐξέπεμψαν τοὺς δηλώσοντας τὴν τῶν
Θηβαίων ἐπανάστασιν καὶ βοηθεῖν τὴν ταχίστην
παρακαλέσοντας, αὐτοὶ δ᾿ ἐκ τόπων ὑπερδεξίων
ἀμυνόμενοι τοὺς πολιορκοῦντας πολλοὺς μὲν ἀνῄρουν
4οὐκ ὀλίγους δὲ κατετραυμάτιζον. οἱ δὲ
Θηβαῖοι μεγάλην δύναμιν προσδοκῶντες ἥξειν ἐκ
τῆς Ἑλλάδος Λακεδαιμονίοις, ἐξέπεμψαν πρεσβευτὰς
εἰς τὰς Ἀθήνας ὑπομιμνήσκοντες μὲν ὅτι καὶ
αὐτοὶ συγκατήγαγον τὸν δῆμον τῶν Ἀθηναίων
καθ᾿ ὃν καιρὸν ὑπὸ τῶν τριάκοντα τυράννων κατεδουλώθησαν,
ἀξιοῦντες δὲ πανδημεὶ βοηθῆσαι καὶ
πρὸ τῆς τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων παρουσίας συνεκπολεμῆσαι
τὴν Καδμείαν.
14Book XV

office what is known as the Boeotian War broke out 378/7 b between the Lacedaemonians and the Boeotians for the following reasons. When the Lacedaemonians maintained a garrison unjustly in the Cadmeia and had exiled many important citizens, the exiles gathered together, secured the support of the Athenians, and returned by night to their native city. Having first slain in their own houses those who favoured the Lacedaemonian cause, whom they surprised while still asleep,1 they next rallied the citizens to the cause of freedom and obtained the co-operation of all the Thebans. When the populace had quickly assembled under arms, at daybreak they attempted to assault the Cadmeia. The Lacedaemonians who formed the garrison of the citadel, numbering with their allies not less than fifteen hundred, sent men to Sparta to announce the insurrection of the Thebans and to urge them to send help as soon as possible. Favoured by their position, they slew many of the attackers and wounded severely no small number. The Thebans, anticipating the arrival of a large army from Greece to aid the Lacedaemonians, dispatched envoys to Athens to remind them that they too once aided in restoring the democracy of the Athenians at the time when the Athenians had been enslaved by the Thirty Tyrants,2 and to request the Athenians to come with all their forces and assist them in reducing the Cadmeia before the arrival of the Lacedaemonians.
1Fuller accounts are found in Xenophon, Hell. 5. 4. 2–12;
Nepos, Pelopidas, 3; Plutarch, Pelopidas, 7–12 and De Genio
Socratis, 596. Criticism of these accounts in von Stern, Gesch.
d. spartan. u. theban. Hegemonie, 44 ff. Beloch, Griechische
Geschichte2, 3. 2. 234, gives the date as December 379.2The Thirty Tyrants, established after the fall of Athens, 404, by Lysander of Sparta, were headed by Critias and Theramenes, the latter judicially murdered by Critias. Exiles of the democratic régime received help from Thebes to overthrow this tyranny.15