Diodorus of Sicily

καὶ κατὰ τὴν ἀπολογίαν ἀπορηθεὶς λόγων ἐθανατώθη.
3Ὁ δ᾿ Ἀλέξανδρος ἐκπέμψας τινὰς ἐπὶ δρομάδων
καμήλων καὶ φθάσας τὴν φήμην τῆς περὶ τὸν
Φιλώταν τιμωρίας τὸν πατέρα τοῦ Φιλώτου Παρμενίωνα
ἐδολοφόνησε, τεταγμένον μὲν τῆς Μηδείας
ἄρχοντα, πεπιστευμένον δὲ τοὺς βασιλικοὺς θησαυροὺς
ἐν Ἐκβατάνοις, ἔχοντας ταλάντων ὀκτωκαίδεκα
4μυριάδας. ὁ δ᾿ Ἀλέξανδρος ἐπιλεξάμενος ἐκ
τῶν Μακεδόνων τοὺς ἀλλοτρίας κατ᾿ αὐτοῦ προϊεμένους
φωνὰς καὶ τοὺς ἠγανακτηκότας ἐπὶ τῷ τοῦ
Παρμενίωνος θανάτῳ, πρὸς δὲ τούτοις τοὺς ἐν ταῖς
ἀποσταλείσαις εἰς Μακεδονίαν ἐπιστολαῖς ἀλλότριόν
τι γεγραφότας τοῖς οἰκείοις περὶ τῶν τῷ βασιλεῖ
συμφερόντων εἰς ἓν κατέλεξε σύστημα καὶ προσηγόρευσεν
ἀτάκτων τάγμα, ὅπως μὴ διὰ τὰς τούτων
ἀκαίρους φωνὰς καὶ παρρησίας τὸ λοιπὸν πλῆθος
τῶν Μακεδόνων συνδιαφθείρηται.
81. Ἀπὸ δὲ τούτων γενόμενος καὶ τὰ κατὰ τὴν
Δραγγινὴν καταστήσας ἀνέζευξε μετὰ τῆς δυνάμεῳς
ἐπὶ τοὺς πρότερον μὲν Ἀριμασπούς, νῦν δ᾿
Εὐεργέτας ὀνομαζομένους διὰ τοιαύτας τινὰς αἰτίας.
Κῦρος ὁ τὴν Μήδων ἀρχὴν μεταστήσας εἰς Πέρσας
ἔν τινι στρατείᾳ περιληφθεὶς ἐν ἐρήμῳ χώρᾳ καὶ
πάσῃ σπάνει τῶν ἀναγκαίων ἦλθε μὲν ἐπὶ τοὺς
ἐσχάτους κινδύνους,1 διὰ τὴν ἔνδειαν τῆς τροφῆς



1ἦλθε μὲν καὶ τοὺς ἐσχάτους κινδύνους ὑπέστη F.350Book XVII

Macedonians and was put to death, lacking words to 329/8 b.c. defend himself.1
Alexander dispatched riders on racing camels, who travelled faster than the report of Philotas’s punishment and murdered his father Parmenion.2 He had been appointed governor of Media and was in charge of the royal treasures in Ecbatana, amounting to one hundred and eighty thousand talents. Alexander selected from among the Macedonians those who made remarks hostile to him and those who were distressed at the death of Parmenion, as well as those who wrote in letters sent home to Macedonia to their relatives anything contrary to the king’s interests. These he assembled into one unit which he called the Disciplinary Company, so that the rest of the Macedonians might not be corrupted by their improper remarks and criticism.3
81. After his hands were free of this affair and he had settled things in Dranginê, Alexander marched with his army against a people who used to be called Arimaspians but are now known as Benefactors for the following reason. That Cyrus who had transferred the rule from the Medes to the Persians was once engaged in a campaign in the desert and running out of provisions was brought into extreme danger, so that



1The arrest of Alexander was mentioned above (chap. 32.
1). If the throne were vacant, he would have been the logical
person to become king, so that his continued existence involved
king Alexander in a certain risk. His wife was one of the many daughters of Antipater (Curtius, 7. 1. 7), but his relationship to Antigonus is unknown, The latter was King Alexander’s representative in Phrygia, but it is likely that his name is a mistake for Antipater’s, since Alexander Lyncestes was his son-in-law (Curtius, 7. 1. 7; Justin, 11.7. 1).2Polydamas and two Arab guides (Curtius, 7. 2. 17–18). They made the thirty-days’ trip in eleven days (Strabo, 15. 2. 10).3Curtius, 7. 2. 35–38; Justin, 12. 5. 4–8. This name, the “Company of the Undisciplined,” is not otherwise reported. The term could be translated also “Unassigned.”351