Diodorus of Sicily
3ἡνιόχου τοῦ βασιλέως κατατυχὼν κατέβαλεν. τῶν
δὲ περὶ τὸν Δαρεῖον ἀναβοησάντων οἱ πορρώτερον
ἀφεστηκότες ὑπέλαβον αὐτὸν τὸν βασιλέα πεπτωκέναι·
καὶ τούτων τῆς φυγῆς ἀρξαμένων οἱ συνεχεῖς
συνείποντο καὶ τὸ συνεστὸς τῷ Δαρείῳ σύνταγμα
κατ᾿ ὀλίγον αἰεὶ παρερρήγνυτο. διὸ καὶ τῆς ἑτέρας
πλευρᾶς παραγυμνωθείσης τῶν συναγωνιζομένων
4καὶ αὐτὸς καταπλαγεὶς πρὸς φυγὴν ὥρμησεν. τούτων
δὲ οὕτως φευγόντων καὶ τοῦ κονιορτοῦ τῶν
ἱππέων πρὸς ὕψος αἰρομένου καὶ τῶν περὶ τὸν
Ἀλέξανδρον ἐκ ποδὸς ἑπομένων διὰ τὸ πλῆθος
καὶ τὴν πυκνότητα τοῦ κονιορτοῦ συνιδεῖν μὲν οὐκ
ἦν τὸν Δαρεῖον ὅποι ποιεῖται τὴν φυγήν, στεναγμὸς
δὲ τῶν πιπτόντων ἀνδρῶν καὶ κτύπος τῶν ἱππέων,1
ἔτι δὲ τῶν μαστίγων συνεχὴς ψόφος ἐγίνετο.
5Ἅμα δὲ τούτοις πραττομένοις Μαζαῖος ὁ τοῦ
δεξιοῦ κέρατος ἡγούμενος, πλείστους ἔχων καὶ
κρατίστους ἱππεῖς, βαρὺς ἐπέκειτο τοῖς κατ᾿ αὐτὸν
τεταγμένοις· Παρμενίων δὲ μετὰ τῶν Θετταλῶν
ἱππέων καὶ τῶν ἄλλων τῶν μετ᾿ αὐτοῦ κινδυνευόντων
6ὑπέστη τοὺς πολεμίους. τὸ μὲν οὖν πρῶτον
λαμπρῶς ἀγωνιζόμενος διὰ τὰς ἀρετὰς τῶν Θετταλῶν
προετέρει· τῶν δὲ περὶ τὸν Μαζαῖον τῷ τε
πλήθει καὶ βάρει τοῦ συστήματος ἐγκειμένων κατεπονεῖτο
7τὸ τῶν Μακεδόνων ἱππικόν. πολλοῦ δὲ
φόνου γινομένου καὶ τῆς τῶν βαρβάρων βίας δυσυποστάτου
γινομένης ὁ Παρμενίων ἐξέπεμψέ τινας
τῶν περὶ αὐτὸν ἱππέων πρὸς τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον,
λέγων κατὰ τάχος βοηθῆσαι. ὀξέως δὲ τούτων
τὸ παραγγελθὲν πραττόντων καὶ τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον
πυθομένων πολὺ τῆς τάξεως ἀπεσπάσθαι κατὰ τὸν
1Rhodoman corrected to ἵππων.290Book XVII

but struck the driver standing beside him and knocked 331/0 b.c. him to the ground. A shout went up at this from the Persians around Dareius, and those at a greater distance thought that the king had fallen. They were the first to take to flight, and they were followed by those next to them, and steadily, little by little, the solid ranks of Dareius’s guard disintegrated. As both flanks became exposed, the king himself was alarmed and retreated. The flight thus became general. Dust raised by the Persian cavalry rose to a height, and as Alexander’s squadrons followed on their heels, because of their numbers and the thickness of the dust, it was impossible to tell in what direction Dareius was fleeing. The air was filled with the groans of the fallen, the din of the cavalry, and the constant sound of lashing of whips.1
At this time Mazaeus, the commander of the Persian right wing, with the most and the best of the cavalry, was pressing hard on those opposing him, but Parmenion with the Thessalian cavalry and the rest of his forces put up a stout resistance. For a time, fighting brilliantly, he even seemed to have the upper hand thanks to the fighting qualities of the Thessalians, but the weight and numbers of Mazaeus’s command brought the Macedonian cavalry into difficulties. A great slaughter took place, and despairing of withstanding the Persian power, Parmenion sent off some of his horsemen to Alexander, begging him to come to their support quickly. They carried out their orders with dispatch, but finding that Alexander was already in full pursuit at a great



1Curtius, 4. 15. 33.291