Diodorus of Sicily
86.Ἅμα δ᾿ ἡμέρᾳ τῶν δυνάμεων ἐκταττομένων
ὁ μὲν βασιλεὺς τὸν υἱὸν Ἀλέξανδρον, ἀντίπαιδα
τὴν ἡλικίαν ὄντα, διάδηλον δὲ τὴν ἀνδρείαν καὶ τὴν
ὀξύτητα τῆς ἐνεργείας ἔχοντα, κατέστησεν ἐπὶ
θάτερον τῶν κεράτων, παρακαταστήσας αὐτῷ τῶν
ἡγεμόνων τοὺς ἀξιολογωτάτους· αὐτὸς δὲ τοὺς ἐπιλέκτους
ἔχων μεθ᾿ ἑαυτοῦ τὴν ἡγεμονίαν εἶχε τοῦ
ἑτέρου μέρους καὶ τὰς κατὰ μέρος τάξεις οἰκείως
2τοῖς παροῦσι καιροῖς διεκόσμησεν. οἱ δ᾿ Ἀθηναῖοι
κατ᾿ ἔθνος τὴν διαίρεσιν τῆς τάξεως ποιησάμενοι
τοῖς μὲν Βοιωτοῖς τὸ ἕτερον μέρος παρέδωκαν,
αὐτοὶ δὲ τοῦ λοιποῦ τὴν ἡγεμονίαν εἶχον. γενομένης
δὲ μάχης καρτερᾶς ἐπὶ πολὺν χρόνον καὶ
πολλῶν πιπτόντων παρ᾿ ἀμφοτέροις μέχρι μέν τινος
ὁ ἀγὼν ἀμφιδοξουμένας εἶχε τὰς ἐλπίδας τῆς νίκης.
3Μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα τοῦ Ἀλεξάνδρου φιλοτιμουμένου
τῷ πατρὶ τὴν ἰδίαν ἀνδραγαθίαν ἐνδείξασθαι καὶ
φιλοτιμίας ὑπερβολὴν οὐκ ἀπολείποντος, ὁμοίως
δὲ καὶ πολλῶν αὐτῷ συναγωνιζομένων ἀνδρῶν
ἀγαθῶν πρῶτος τὸ συνεχὲς τῆς τῶν πολεμίων
τάξεως ἔρρηξε καὶ πολλοὺς καταβαλὼν κατεπόνει
4τοὺς καθ᾿ αὑτὸν τεταγμένους. τὸ δ᾿ αὐτὸ καὶ τῶν
παραστατῶν αὐτῷ ποιησάντων τὸ συνεχὲς αἰεὶ τῆς
τάξεως παρερρήγνυτο. πολλῶν δὲ σωρευομένων
νεκρῶν οἱ περὶ τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον πρῶτοι βιασάμενοι
τοὺς καθ᾿ αὑτοὺς ἐτρέψαντο. μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα καὶ ὁ
βασιλεὺς αὐτὸς προκινδυνεύων καὶ τῆς νίκης τὴν
ἐπιγραφὴν οὐδ᾿ αὐτῷ παραχωρῶν Ἀλεξάνδρῳ τὸ
μὲν πρῶτον ἐξέωσε τῇ βίᾳ τοὺς ἀντιτεταγμένους,


78Book XVI
86. The armies deployed1 at dawn, and the king 338/7 b.c. stationed his son Alexander, young in age but noted for his valour and swiftness of action, on one wing, placing beside him his most seasoned generals, while he himself at the head of picked men exercised the command over the other; individual units were stationed where the occasion required.2 On the other side, dividing the line according to nationality, the Athenians assigned one wing to the Boeotians and kept command of the other themselves. Once joined, the battle was hotly contested for a long time and many fell on both sides, so that for a while the struggle permitted hopes of victory to both.
Then Alexander, his heart set on showing his father his prowess and yielding to none in will to win, ably seconded by his men, first succeeded in rupturing the solid front of the enemy line and striking down many he bore heavily on the troops opposite him. As the same success was won by his companions, gaps in the front were constantly opened. Corpses piled up, until finally Alexander forced his way through the line and put his opponents to flight. Then the king also in person advanced, well in front and not conceding credit for the victory even to Alexander; he first forced back the troops stationed


1According to Plutarch, Camillus, 19. 5. this was the 9th
of Metageitnion, the second month of the Attic year, which began after the summer solstice; so perhaps 4th August, since a new moon was visible at Athens on 27th July.2Diodorus’s account of the battle is vague, and much is uncertain in the reconstruction of events from scattered and partial references. It seems certain that Philip, on the Macedonian right, did not engage the Athenians until the Thebans, on the allied right, had been shattered by Alexander. Since, in his later battles, Alexander normally commanded the cavalry guard on his own right, Philip here must have occupied the traditional position of the Macedonian king. But Diodorus does not say who these “picked men” were.79