Diodorus of Sicily

πρὸς τὸν πόλεμον ἐξέπεμψέ τινας τῶν φίλων εἰς τὴν
Εὐρώπην, προστάξας πειρᾶσθαι τοῖς ὁμοίοις λόγοις
ἐχθροὺς Ἀντιγόνου καταστῆσαι Κάσανδρόν τε καὶ
4Λυσίμαχον. ὧν ταχὺ τὸ κελευσθὲν συντελεσάντων
ἀρχὴ διαφορᾶς ἐφύετο καὶ μεγάλων πολέμων. ὁ
δ᾿ Ἀντίγονος ἐκ τῶν εἰκότων συλλογισάμενος τὴν
Σελεύκου προαίρεσιν ἐξέπεμψε πρεσβευτὰς πρός τε
Πτολεμαῖον καὶ Λυσίμαχον καὶ Κάσανδρον, ἀξιῶν
διαφυλάσσειν τὴν προϋπάρχουσαν φιλίαν· τῆς δὲ
Βαβυλωνίας καταστήσας σατράπην Πίθωνα τὸν ἐκ
τῆς Ἰνδικῆς καταβεβηκότα, μετὰ τῆς δυνάμεως
ἀνέζευξεν, ἐπὶ τῆς Κιλικίας τὴν πορείαν ποιούμενος.
5ὡς δ᾿ εἰς Μάλον παρεγένετο, διεμέρισε τὴν δύναμιν
εἰς παραχειμασίαν μετὰ δύσιν Ὠρίωνος. παρέλαβε
δὲ καὶ τὰ ἐν Κυΐνδοις χρήματα, τάλαντα μύρια.
χωρὶς δὲ τούτων ἔπιπτεν1 ἐκ τῶν προσόδων αὐτῷ
τῶν κατ᾿ ἐνιαυτὸν τάλαντα μύρια χίλια. διόπερ
συνέβαινεν αὐτὸν φοβερὸν εἶναι καὶ διὰ τὸ μέγεθος
τῶν δυνάμεων καὶ διὰ τὸ πλῆθος τῶν χρημάτων.
57. Προάγοντος δ᾿ εἰς τὴν ἄνω Συρίαν Ἀντιγόνου
παρεγένοντο πρέσβεις παρὰ τε Πτολεμαίου
καὶ Λυσιμάχου καὶ Κασάνδρου. οὗτοι δ᾿ εἰσαχθέντες
εἰς τὸ συνέδριον ἠξίουν Καππαδοκίαν
μὲν καὶ Λυκίαν2 Κασάνδρῳ3 δοθῆναι, Φρυγίαν δὲ
τὴν ἐφ᾿ Ἑλλησπόντῳ Λυσιμάχῳ, Συρίαν δὲ πᾶσαν
Πτολεμαίῳ, Βαβυλωνίαν δὲ Σελεύκῳ, τῶν δὲ θησαυρῶν,
οὓς παρέλαβεν μετὰ τὴν πρὸς Εὐμενῆ
μάχην, ποιήσασθαι μερισμόν· καὶ γὰρ αὐτοὺς κεκοινωνηκέναι



1ἔπιπτεν Fischer in apparatus: ἐκπίπτειν.2Tarn (Cambridge Ancient History, 6. 484) suggests
Κιλικίαν.3Wesseling reads Ἀσάνδρῳ, with approval of Fischer, cp.
Droysen, Geschichte des Hellenismus (ed. 2), 2. 2. 6.386Book XIX

war, he sent certain of his friends to Europe, directing 316 b.c. them to try by similar arguments to convert Cassander and Lysimachus into enemies of Antigonus. They quickly carried out their instructions, and the seed of a quarrel and of great wars began to grow. But Antigonus, who had deduced by reasoning from probabilities what course of action Seleucus was following, sent envoys to Ptolemy, Lysimachus, and Cassander, urging them to maintain the existing friendship. He next established as satrap of Babylonia that Pithon who had come from India,1 and then, setting out with his army, he marched toward Cilicia. He arrived at Malus2 and, after the setting of Orion,3 divided the army for passing the winter. He also took the money at Cyinda,4 which amounted to ten thousand talents. Apart from this there fell to him from the annual revenue eleven thousand talents. As a result he was a formidable antagonist both because of the size of his armies and because of the amount of his wealth.
57. While Antigonus was going into upper Syria, envoys arrived from Ptolemy, Lysimachus, and Cassander. When they had been brought into the council, they demanded that Cappadocia and Lycia be given to Cassander,5 Hellespontine Phrygia to Lysimachus, all Syria to Ptolemy, and Babylonia to Seleucus, and that Antigonus should divide the treasures that he had captured after the battle with





1i.e. Pithon, the son of Agenor, who had been made satrap of India by Antipater (Book 18. 39. 6).2Malus or Mallus, a city of Cilicia on the Pyramus River, exact situation unknown, cp, Strabo, 14. 5, 16.3In November, 316.4A city of Cilicia, exact situation unknown, cp. Book 18. 62. 2.5But cp. critical note.387