Diodorus of Sicily
Κατὰ μὲν γὰρ τὴν Σικελίαν Ἀγαθοκλῆς, εἰρήνην
ἀγόντων τῶν Λιπαραίων, ἐπιπλεύσας αὐτοῖς ἀπροσδοκήτως
εἰσεπράξατο τοὺς μηδ᾿ ὁτιοῦν προαδικήσαντας
2ἀργυρίου τάλαντα πεντήκοντα. ὅτε δὴ
πολλοῖς ἔδοξε θεῖον εἶναι τὸ ῥηθησόμενον, τῆς
παρανομίας τυχούσης ἐπισημασίας παρὰ τοῦ δαιμονίου.
ἀξιούντων γὰρ τῶν Λιπαραίων εἰς τὰ
προσελλείποντα τῶν χρημάτων δοῦναι χρόνον καὶ
λεγόντων μηδέποτε τοῖς ἱεροῖς ἀναθήμασι κατακεχρῆσθαι,
ὁ Ἀγαθοκλῆς βιασάμενος αὐτοὺς δοῦναι
τὰ κατὰ τὸ πρυτανεῖον, ὧν εἶχον ἐπιγραφὴν τὰ μὲν
Αἰόλου, τὰ δ᾿ Ἡφαίστου, λαβὼν παραχρῆμα ἐξέπλευσεν.
πνεύματος δ᾿ ἐπιγενομένου τῶν νεῶν
ἕνδεκα συνετρίβησαν αἱ τὰ χρήματα κομίζουσαι.
3διόπερ ἔδοξε πολλοῖς ὁ μὲν λεγόμενος περὶ τοὺς
τόπους ἐκείνους εἶναι κύριος τῶν ἀνέμων εὐθὺς
κατὰ τὸν πρῶτον πλοῦν λαβεῖν παρ᾿ αὐτοῦ τιμωρίαν,
ὁ δὲ Ἥφαιστος ἐπὶ τῆς τελευτῆς, οἰκείως τῆς
ἀσεβείας κολάσαι1 τὸν τύραννον ἐν τῇ πατρίδι,
συνωνύμως ἐπὶ θερμοῖς τοῖς ἄνθραξι κατακαύσας
ζῶντα· τῆς γὰρ αὐτῆς προαιρέσεως ἦν καὶ δικαιοσύνης
τὸ τῶν περὶ τὴν Αἴτνην σωζόντων τοὺς
ἑαυτῶν γονεῖς ἀποσχέσθαι καὶ τὸ τοὺς ἀσεβοῦντας
εἰς τὸ θεῖον διὰ τῆς ἰδίας δυνάμεως μετελθεῖν.
4Οὐ μὴν ἀλλ᾿ ὑπὲρ μὲν τῆς καταστροφῆς Ἀγαθοκλέους,
ὅταν πρὸς τοὺς οἰκείους χρόνους ἔλθωμεν,
αὐτὸ2 τὸ γενόμενον βεβαιώσει τὸ νῦν εἰρημένον·




1κολάσαι Madvig: κολάσας.2ἔλθωμεν, αὐτὸ Post: ἔλθωμεν αὐτοῦ.410Book XX
In Sicily,1 although the inhabitants of the Liparaean 304 b.c. Islands were at peace with him, Agathocles sailed against them without warning and exacted from men who had done him no prior injury whatever, fifty talents of silver. To many, indeed, what I am about to relate seemed the work of a god, since his crime received its brand from the divinity. When the Liparaeans begged him to grant them time for what was lacking in the payment and said that they had never turned the sacred offerings to profane uses, Agathocles forced them to give him the dedications in the Prytaneum, of which some bore inscriptions to Aeolus and some to Hephaestus; and taking these he at once sailed away. But a wind came up and the eleven of his ships that were carrying the money were sunk. And so it seemed to many that the god who was said in that region to be master of the winds at once on his first voyage exacted punishment from him, and that at the end Hephaestus punished him in his own country in a way that matched the tyrant’s impious actions and the god’s own name by burning him alive on hot coals2; for it belonged to the same character and the same justice to refrain from touching those who were saving their own parents on Aetna,3 and with his proper power to search after those who had been guilty of impiety toward his shrine.
However, as regards the disaster that befell Agathocles, when we come to the proper time, the action itself will confirm what we now have said; but we


1Continued from chap. 90. 2.2For the death of Agathocles ep. Book 21, frag, 16.3The reference is to Amphinomus and Anapia. While they were rescuing their parents from an irruption of Aetna, the volcanic fires opened and made a way for them to pass. Cp., e.g., Seneca, de Beneficiis, 3. 37. 2; Pausanias, 10. 28. 4.411