Diodorus of Sicily

μήτε μάχην ἔσεσθαι, ἀλλ᾿ ἀκονιτὶ τῶν Βοιωτῶν
κρατήσειν.
52. Οὗτοι μὲν οὖν προάγοντες ὡς ἧκον εἰς Κορώνειαν,1
κατεστρατοπέδευσαν καὶ τοὺς καθυστεροῦντας
τῶν συμμάχων ἀνέμενον. οἱ δὲ Θηβαῖοι
διὰ τὴν παρουσίαν τῶν πολεμίων ἐψηφίσαντο τέκνα
μὲν καὶ γυναῖκας εἰς Ἀθήνας ὑπεκθέσθαι, αὐτοὶ δ᾿
Ἐπαμεινώνδαν στρατηγὸν ἑλόμενοι τούτῳ τὰ κατὰ
τὸν πόλεμον ἐπέτρεψαν, συμπαρόντων αὐτῷ βοιωταρχῶν
2ἕξ. ὁ δ᾿ Ἐπαμεινώνδας πανδημεὶ τοὺς
Θηβαίους τοὺς ἐν ἡλικίᾳ στρατιᾶς ὄντας καταλέξας
εἰς τὴν μάχην καὶ τῶν ἄλλων Βοιωτῶν τοὺς εὐθέτους,
προῆγε τὴν δύναμιν ἐκ τῶν Θηβῶν, ἔχων
τοὺς σύμπαντας οὐ πλείους τῶν ἑξακισχιλίων.
3κατὰ δὲ τὴν τῆς πόλεως ἔξοδον τῶν στρατιωτῶν
πολλοῖς ἔδοξε δυσχερῆ σημεῖα φανῆναι τῷ στρατοπέδῳ.
περὶ γὰρ τὰς πύλας ἀπήντησε τοῖς περὶ
τὸν Ἐπαμεινώνδαν κῆρυξ τυφλός, ὃς2 ἀνδράποδ᾿3
ἀποδεδρακότα ἀνακομίζων,4 καὶ καθάπερ ἦν εἰθισμένον
ἀνηγόρευε κηρύττων μήτ᾿ ἐξάγειν Θήβηθεν
μήτ᾿ ἀφανίζειν, ἀλλ᾿ ἀπάγοντα πάλιν ἀνασώζειν.
4οἱ μὲν οὖν πρεσβύτεροι τῶν ἀκουόντων τοῦ κήρυκος
οἰωνὸν ἐποιοῦντο τοῦ μέλλοντος, οἱ δὲ νεώτεροι
ἡσυχίαν εἶχον, ἵνα μὴ δόξωσι διὰ δειλίαν ἀποτρέπειν5
τὸν Ἐπαμεινώνδαν τῆς στρατείας. ὁ δ᾿




1Κορώνειαν Wesseling: χαιρώνειαν (χερώνειαν PA).2τυφλός, ὃς Vogel, τυφλός Madvig: τυφλόν.3So Vogel, ἀνδράποδα Madvig: ἄνδρα.4ἀνακομίζων Post: κομίζων. Vogel, following PA, deletes κομίζων καὶ. (On the whole passage see Vogel, Praefatio, xiii.)5ἀποτρέπειν Wesseling: ἀνατρέπειν.96Book XV

battle but that they would master the Boeotians 371/0 b.c. without a struggle.
52. The Spartans accordingly advanced till they came to Coroneia, where they encamped and waited for such of their allies as were tardy. The Thebans, in view of the presence of the enemy, first voted to remove their wives and children to safety in Athens, then chose Epameinondas general and turned over to him the command in the war, giving him as his advisers six boeotarchs. Epameinondas, having conscripted for the battle all Thebans of military age and the other Boeotians who were willing and qualified, led forth from Thebes his army, numbering in all not more than six thousand. As the soldiers were marching out from the city it seemed to many that unfavourable omens appeared to the armament. For by the gates Epameinondas was met by a blind herald, who, seeking recovery of runaway slaves, just as was usual,1 cried his warning not to take them from Thebes nor to spirit them away, but to bring them home and keep them secure. Now the older people amongst those who heard the herald considered it an omen for the future; but the younger folk kept quiet so as not to appear through cowardice to hold Epameinondas back from the expedition. But




1The Thebans had recently been slaves to Sparta, so the proclamation portended their destruction if they were led forth from the city. This translation is based on the assumption that the crier was reporting names and descriptions of slaves who had run away and whom the owners sought to recover, coupled with the warning not to export or conceal them but to arrest them and keep them safe for the owner.97