Diodorus of Sicily

γεμίσαντας σίτου καὶ τῶν ἄλλων ἐπιτηδείων.
8οὗτοι μὲν οὖν ὀξέως διανύσαντες πρὸς τοὺς σατράπας
τούτων τῶν ἐπαρχιῶν ἐποίησαν παρακομισθῆναι
πολλὴν ἀγορὰν ἐπὶ τὸν ὡρισμένον τόπον. ὁ
δὲ Ἀλέξανδρος τὸ μὲν πρῶτον διὰ τὴν ἀβοήθητον
ἔνδειαν πολλοὺς ἀπέβαλε τῶν στρατιωτῶν, μετὰ
δὲ ταῦτα κατὰ τὴν πορείαν ὄντος αὐτοῦ τῶν
Ὠρειτῶν τινες ἐπιθέμενοι τοῖς περὶ τὸν Λεοννάτον
τεταγμένοις καὶ συχνοὺς καταβαλόντες ἀπέφυγον
εἰς τὴν ἑαυτῶν χώραν.
106. Μόγις δὲ περάσας τὴν ἔρημον ἧκεν εἰς
χώραν οἰκουμένην καὶ πάντων τῶν χρησίμων
εὐποροῦσαν. ἐν ταύτῃ δὲ προσαναλαβὼν τὴν δύναμιν
ἐφ᾿ ἑπτὰ μὲν ἡμέρας προῄει κεκοσμημένῃ τῇ
δυνάμει πανηγυρικῶς καὶ Διονύσῳ κῶμον ἤγαγεν
ἑορτάζων καὶ μέθῃ καὶ πότοις χρώμενος2 κατὰ τὴν
ὁδοιπορίαν.
2Ἀπὸ τούτων δὲ γενόμενος, ἀκούσας ὅτι πολλοὶ
τῶν βιαίως καὶ ὑβριστικῶς κεχρημένων ταῖς ἐξουσίαις
παρανενομήκασι, πολλοὺς τῶν τε σατραπῶν




1This word does not make sense, and must be corrupt.
Since after camels we should expect mules to be mentioned,
Fischer’s suggestion of ὀρεικῶν is attractive, L. A. Post
suggests φορβάδων.2χρώμενος ἦν F.426Book XVII

with food and other necessities.1 These messengers 326/5 b.c. hurried to the satraps of these provinces and caused supplies to be transported in large quantities to the specified place. Alexander lost many of his soldiers, nevertheless, first because of shortages that were not relieved, and then at a later stage of this march, when some of the Oreitae attacked Leonnatus’s division and inflicted severe losses, after which they escaped to their own territory.2
106. So with great difficulty Alexander passed through the desert and came into a well-populated country provided with everything needful.3 Here he rested his army, and for seven days proceeded with his troops in festive dress. He himself led a Dionysiac comus, feasting and drinking as he travelled.4
After this celebration was over, Alexander learned that many of his officials who had used their powers arbitrarily and selfishly had committed serious offences, and he punished a number of his satraps and




1Curtius, 9. 10.17; Plutarch, Alexander, 66. 3. Arrian
does not mention this, and all of these districts are so far
from Carmania that they can hardly have sent help in time
to be of any use. This tradition may be connected with the subsequent execution or removal of the satraps of Gedrosia, Susianê, and Paraetacenê as evidence for Alexander’s attempt to find scapegoats for his ill-planned march through the desert (E. Badian, Classical Quarterly, 52 (1958), 147–150).2Curtius, 9. 10. 19. Leonnatus was later crowned for a victory on this occasion (Arrian, 7. 5. 5).3This was Gedrosia; Curtius, 9. 10, 18; Plutarch, Alexander, 66. 3; 67. 4; Arrian, 6. 27. 1.4This was in Carmania. Curtius (9. 10. 22–28) gives a lurid account of this celebration; so also Plutarch, Alexander, 67. 1–3. Arrian (6. 28. 1–2) states that this story was not told by Ptolemy or Aristobulus, and that he himself did not believe it. It may be connected, however, with the tradition of dramatic and athletic games held at this time in celebration of the safe return of both army and fleet (E. Badian, Classical Quarterly, 52 (1958), 152). But both Philip (Book 16. 87. 1) and Alexander (chap. 72. 5) were fond of the comus in general. See Addenda.427