Diodorus of Sicily

ἀπολαμβάνειν τῆς εὐεργεσίας καρπὸν
3κάλλιστον τὸν ἔπαινον. προσεκτήσατο δὲ καὶ τῆς
συνοριζούσης βαρβάρου πολλὴν καὶ τὴν βασιλείαν
ἐπιφανεστέραν ἐπὶ πολὺ κατεσκεύασε. καθόλου
δ᾿ ἐπεχείρησε πάντα τὰ περὶ τὸν Πόντον ἔθνη
καταστρέφεσθαι καὶ τάχα ἂν ἐκράτησε τῆς ἐπιβολῆς
εἰ μὴ σύντομον ἔσχε τὴν τοῦ βίου τελευτήν.
πέντε γὰρ ἔτη καὶ τοὺς ἴσους μῆνας βασιλεύσας
κατέστρεψε τὸν βίον, παραδόξῳ συμπτώματι χρησάμενος.
4ἐκ γὰρ τῆς Σινδικῆς1 ἐπανιὼν εἰς τὴν
οἰκείαν καὶ σπεύδων πρός τινα θυσίαν ἤλαυνε μὲν
ἐπί τινος τεθρίππου πρὸς τὰ βασίλεια, τοῦ δ᾿
ἅρματος ὄντος τετρακύκλου καὶ σκηνὴν ἔχοντος
συνέβη τοὺς ἵππους διαταραχθέντας ἐξενεγκεῖν αὐτόν.
τοῦ γὰρ ἡνιόχου μὴ δυναμένου κρατῆσαι τῶν
ἡνιῶν, φοβηθεὶς μὴ κατενεχθῇ πρὸς τὰς φάραγγας,
ἐπεχείρησεν ἀφάλλεσθαι· ἐμπλακέντος δὲ τοῦ ξίφους
εἰς τὸν τροχὸν συνεφειλκύσθη τῇ φορᾷ καὶ παραχρῆμα
ἐτελεύτησεν.
26. Περὶ δὲ τῆς τῶν ἀδελφῶν τελευτῆς Εὐμήλου
τε καὶ Σατύρου παραδέδονται χρησμοί, μικρὸν μὲν
ἠλιθιώτεροι πιστευόμενοι δὲ παρὰ τοῖς ἐγχωρίοις.
τῷ μὲν γὰρ Σατύρῳ λέγουσι χρῆσαι τὸν θεὸν φυλάξασθαι
τὸν μῦν μήποτ᾿ αὐτὸν ἀνέλῃ. διόπερ
οὔτε δοῦλον οὔτ᾿ ἐλεύθερον τῶν τεταγμένων ὑφ᾿
ἑαυτὸν εἴα τοῦτ᾿ ἔχειν τοὔνομα· ἔπειτα δὲ τοὺς ἐν
ταῖς οἰκίαις καὶ ταῖς ἀρούραις ἐφοβεῖτο μῦς καὶ
τοῖς παισὶν ἀεὶ συνέταττε τούτους ἀποκτείνειν καὶ
τὰς κοίτας ἐμπλάττειν. πάντα δ᾿ ἐνδεχομένως
αὐτοῦ ποιοῦντος οἷς ᾤετο κατισχύσειν τὸ πεπρωμένον,
κατέστρεψε τὸν βίον πληγεὶς τοῦ βραχίονος

1Σινδικῆς Wesseling: Ἰνδικῆς RX, Σκυθικῆς F.208Book XX

received that highest reward of well-doing—praise. 310 b.c. He also gained possession of much of the adjacent region inhabited by the barbarians and made his kingdom far more famous. In sum, he undertook to subdue all the nations around the Pontus, and possibly he would have accomplished his purpose if his life had not been suddenly cut off. For, after he had been king for five years and an equal number of months, he died, suffering a very strange mishap. As he was returning home from Sindicê and was hurrying for a sacrifice, riding to his palace in a four-horse carriage which had four wheels and a canopy, it happened that the horses were frightened and ran away with him. Since the driver was unable to manage the reins, the king, fearing lest he be carried to the ravines, tried to jump out; but his sword caught in the wheel,1 and he was dragged along by the motion of the carriage and died on the spot.
26. About the death of the brothers, Eumelus and Satyrus, prophecies have been, handed down, rather silly yet accepted among the people of the land. They say that the god had told Satyrus to be on his guard against the mouse lest it sometime cause his death. For this reason he permitted neither slave nor freeman of those assigned to his service to have this name; and he also feared domestic and field mice and was always ordering his slaves to kill them and block up their holes. But, although he did everything possible by which he thought to ward off his doom, he died, struck in the upper arm through the

1Or possibly, “in the hoop that supported the canopy,” cp. chap. 26. 2.209