Diodorus of Sicily
3Ἅμα δὲ τούτοις πραττομένοις συνέστη πόλεμος
Ἀργείοις πρὸς Λακεδαιμονίους, καὶ γενομένης
μάχης περὶ πόλιν Ὀρνεὰς ἐνίκων οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι
καὶ τὰς Ὀρνεὰς ἐκπολιορκήσαντες ἐπανῆλθον εἰς
τὴν Σπάρτην. Χάρης δὲ ὁ τῶν Ἀθηναίων στρατηγὸς
εἰσπλεύσας εἰς Ἑλλήσποντον καὶ Σηστὸν
πόλιν ἑλὼν τοὺς μὲν ἡβῶντας ἀπέσφαξεν, τοὺς δ᾿
4ἄλλους ἐξηνδραποδίσατο. Κερσοβλέπτου δὲ τοῦ
Κότυος διά τε τὴν πρὸς Φίλιππον ἀλλοτριότητα
καὶ τὴν πρὸς Ἀθηναίους φιλίαν ἐγχειρίσαντος τοῖς
Ἀθηναίοις τὰς ἐν Χερρονήσῳ πόλεις πλὴν Καρδίας
ἀπέστειλεν ὁ δῆμος κληρούχους εἰς τὰς πόλεις.
Φίλιππος δ᾿ ὁρῶν τοὺς Μεθωναίους ὁρμητήριον
παρεχομένους τὴν πόλιν τοῖς πολεμίοις ἑαυτοῦ
5πολιορκίαν συνεστήσατο. καὶ μέχρι μέν τινος οἱ
Μεθωναῖοι διεκαρτέρουν, ἔπειτα κατισχυόμενοι συνηναγκάσθησαν
παραδοῦναι τὴν πόλιν τῷ βασιλεῖ
ὥστε ἀπελθεῖν τοὺς πολίτας ἐκ τῆς Μεθώνης
ἔχοντας ἓν ἱμάτιον ἕκαστον. ὁ δὲ Φίλιππος τὴν
μὲν πόλιν κατέσκαψε τὴν δὲ χώραν διένειμε τοῖς
Μακεδόσιν. ἐν δὲ τῇ πολιορκίᾳ ταύτῃ συνέβη τὸν
Φίλιππον εἰς τὸν ὀφθαλμὸν πληγέντα τοξεύματι
διαφθαρῆναι τὴν ὅρασιν.
35. Μετὰ δὲ ταῦθ᾿ ὁ Φίλιππος ὑπὸ Θετταλῶν
μετακληθεὶς ἧκεν εἰς Θετταλίαν μετὰ τῆς δυνάμεως,
καὶ τὸ μὲν πρῶτον πρὸς Λυκόφρονα τὸν
Φερῶν τύραννον διεπολέμει βοηθῶν τοῖς Θετταλοῖς·


332Book XVI
While these things were going on, war broke out 353/2 b.c. between the Argives and the Lacedaemonians, and in a battle that took place near the city of Orneae1 the Lacedaemonians won, and after they had taken Orneae by siege, returned to Sparta. Chares the Athenian general sailed to the Hellespont, captured Sestus, slew its adult inhabitants, and enslaved the rest. And when Cersobleptes,2 son of Cotys, because of his hostility to Philip and his alliance of friendship with the Athenians, had turned over to the Athenians the cities on the Chersonese except Cardia, the assembly sent out colonists3 to these cities. Philip, perceiving that the people of Methonê were permitting their city to become a base of operations for his enemies, began a siege. And although for a time the people of Methonê held out, later, being overpowered, they were compelled to hand the city over to the king on the terms that the citizens should leave Methonê with a single garment each. Philip then razed the city and distributed its territory among the Macedonians.4 In this siege it so happened that Philip was struck in the eye by an arrow and lost the sight of that eye.
35. After this Philip in response to a summons from the Thessalians entered Thessaly with his army, and at first carried on a war against Lycophron, tyrant of Pherae,5 in support of the Thessalians6; but later,





1A city in Argolis. See chap. 39. 4 for repetition of this
event with greater detail of narrative. (Cp. Beloch, Griechische
Geschichte2, 3. 2. 272.)2So spelled by Diodorus. Properly Κερσεβλέπτης (cp. Hoeck, Hermes, 26. 100, note 3). King of Thrace, 360–341.3Cleruchs or holders of allotments of land. See IG, 2. 795.4See Justin, 7. 6. 13–16; Demosthenes, 4. 35; and chap. 31. 6; also IG, 22. 1. 130.5See chap. 14. 1.6See chap. 33. 3 and Polyaenus, 4. 2. 19.333