Diodorus of Sicily

τέταρτον δὲ περὶ Κιλικίαν, κομιζομένης τῆς ὕλης
5ἐκ τοῦ Ταύρου. ἦν δὲ καὶ περὶ Ῥόδον ἄλλο,
συγχωρήσαντος τοῦ δήμου κατασκευάζειν ναῦς ἀπὸ
τῆς ὕλης τῆς εἰσκομιζομένης. τοῦ δ᾿ Ἀντιγόνου
περὶ ταῦτα ὄντος καὶ πλησίον τῆς θαλάσσης κατεστρατοπεδευκότος
ἧκεν ἐξ Αἰγύπτου Σέλευκος μετὰ
νεῶν ἑκατὸν κεκοσμημένων βασιλικῶς καὶ πλεουσῶν
ἱκανῶς. ποιουμένου δ᾿ αὐτοῦ τὸν παράπλουν
παρ᾿ αὐτὴν τὴν στρατοπεδείαν καταπεφρονηκότως
οἵ τε ἐκ τῶν συμμαχίδων πόλεων καὶ πάντες οἱ
κοινοπραγοῦντες τοῖς περὶ Ἀντίγονον ἄθυμοι καθειστήκεισαν·
6πρόδηλον γὰρ ἦν ὅτι θαλασσοκρατοῦντες
οἱ πολέμιοι πορθήσουσι τοὺς τοῖς ἐναντίοις
κοινοπραγοῦντας ἀπὸ τῆς πρὸς Ἀντίγονον φιλίας.
ὁ δ᾿ Ἀντίγονος τούτους μὲν παρεκάλει θαρρεῖν,
διαβεβαιούμενος ἐν ταύτῃ τῇ θερίᾳ ἀναπλευσεῖσθαι1
ναυσὶ πεντακοσίαις.
59. Ὄντος δ᾿ αὐτοῦ περὶ ταῦτα παρῆν Ἀγησίλαος
ὁ πεμφθεὶς εἰς Κύπρον πρεσβευτής, ἀπαγγέλλων
ὅτι Νικοκρέων μὲν καὶ τῶν ἄλλων οἱ
κράτιστοι βασιλεῖς πρὸς Πτολεμαῖον πεποίηνται
συμμαχίαν, ὁ δὲ Κιτιεὺς καὶ Λαπίθιος, ἔτι δὲ
Μαριεὺς2 καὶ Κερυνίτης τὴν πρὸς αὐτὸν φιλίαν
2συντέθεινται. ἀκούσας δὲ ταῦτα τρισχιλίους μὲν
στρατιώτας καὶ στρατηγὸν Ἀνδρόνικον κατέλιπεν
ἐπὶ τῆς πολιορκίας, αὐτὸς δὲ μετὰ τῆς δυνάμεως
ἀναζεύξας τήν τ᾿ Ἰόππην καὶ Γάζαν ἀπειθούσας
κατὰ κράτος εἷλε καὶ τοὺς μὲν καταληφθέντας


1ἀναπλευσεῖσθαι Hertlein: ἀπελεύσεσθαι R, πλευσεῖσθαι X,
διελεύσεσθαι F.2Μαριεὺς Gronovius: Μάριος, cp. chap. 62. 6 (Μανέων R,
Μανεῶν X), 79. 4 (Μαλιέως).392Book XIX

fourth in Cilicia, the timber for which was brought 315 b.c. from Mount Taurus. There was also another in Rhodes, where the state agreed to make ships from imported timber. While Antigonus was busy with these matters and after he had established his camp near the sea, Seleucus arrived from Egypt with a hundred ships, which were royally equipped and which sailed excellently. As he sailed contemptuously along past the very camp, men from the allied cities and all who were co-operating with Antigonus were downhearted; for it was very clear that, since the enemy dominated the sea, they would plunder the lands of those who aided their opponents out of friendship for Antigonus. Antigonus, however, bade them be of good courage, affirming that in that very summer he would take the sea with five hundred vessels.
59. While Antigonus was thus engaged, Agesilaüs, the envoy whom he had sent to Cyprus, arrived with the information that Nicocreon1 and the most powerful of the other kings had made an alliance with Ptolemy, but that the kings of Cition, Lapithus, Marion, and Ceryneia had concluded a treaty of friendship with himself. On learning this, Antigonus left three thousand soldiers under Andronicus to carry on the siege, but he himself set out with the army and took by storm Joppa and Gaza, cities that had refused obedience. The soldiers of Ptolemy

1Nicocreon, king of Cyprian Salamis, had made an alliance with Ptolemy in 321 (Arrian, FGrH, 156. 10. 6), and later governed the whole island for the Egyptian king (chap. 79. 5).393