Diodorus of Sicily

ὑπὸ τοῦ βασιλέως Κλεοπάτρας ἀδελφιδοῦς, ἐπὶ δὲ
τῆς προαπεσταλμένης δυνάμεως εἰς τὴν Ἀσίαν
στρατηγὸς προκεχειρισμένος, ἐν δὲ τοῖς πολεμικοῖς
ἀγῶσιν ἀνδρεῖος. διόπερ ὁ βασιλεὺς πραῧναι βουλόμενος
τοῦ Παυσανίου τὴν ἐπὶ τῷ πάθει γεγενημένην
δικαίαν ὀργὴν δωρεὰς ἀξιολόγους ἀπένειμεν
αὐτῷ καὶ κατὰ τὴν σωματοφυλακίαν προῆγεν
αὐτὸν ἐντίμως.
94. Ὁ δὲ Παυσανίας ἀμετάθετον φυλάττων τὴν
ὀργὴν ἔσπευδε μὴ μόνον παρὰ τοῦ πράξαντος λαβεῖν
τιμωρίαν, ἀλλὰ καὶ παρὰ τοῦ μὴ τιμωροῦντος
αὐτῷ. συνεπελάβετο δὲ ταύτης τῆς προαιρέσεως
μάλιστα ὁ σοφιστὴς Ἑρμοκράτης. τοῦ γὰρ Παυσανίου
σχολάζοντος αὐτῷ καὶ κατὰ τὴν διατριβὴν
πυθομένου πῶς ἄν τις γένοιτο ἐπιφανέστατος, ὁ
σοφιστὴς ἀπεκρίθη εἰ τὸν τὰ μέγιστα πράξαντα
ἀνέλοι· τῇ γὰρ περὶ τούτου μνήμῃ συμπεριληφθήσεσθαι
καὶ τὸν τὴν ἀναίρεσιν αὐτοῦ ποιησάμενον.
2ἀνενέγκας δὲ πρὸς τὴν ἰδίαν ὀργὴν τὸν λόγον καὶ
διὰ τὸν θυμὸν οὐδεμίαν τῆς γνώμης ὑπέρθεσιν
ποιησάμενος ἐν αὐτοῖς τοῖς ὑποκειμένοις ἀγῶσι τὴν
3ἐπιβουλὴν συνεστήσατο τοιῷδέ τινι τρόπῳ. ἵππους
παραστησάμενος ταῖς πύλαις παρῆλθε πρὸς τὰς εἰς
τὸ θέατρον εἰσόδους ἔχων κεκρυμμένην Κελτικὴν
μάχαιραν. τοῦ δὲ Φιλίππου τοὺς παρακολουθοῦντας
φίλους κελεύσαντος προεισελθεῖν εἰς τὸ θέατρον
καὶ τῶν δορυφόρων διεστώτων, ὁρῶν τὸν βασιλέα


98Book XVI

whom the king had just married as a new wife and he 336/5 b.c. had been selected as a general of the advanced force being sent into Asia, for he was a man valiant in battle. For these reasons, the king tried to mollify the righteous anger of Pausanias at his treatment, giving him substantial presents and advancing him in honour among the bodyguards.
94. Pausanias, nevertheless, nursed his wrath implacably,1 and yearned to avenge himself, not only on the one who had done him wrong, but also on the one who failed to avenge him. In this design he was encouraged especially by the sophist Hermocrates.2 He was his pupil, and when he asked in the course of his instruction how one might become most famous, the sophist replied that it would be by killing the one who had accomplished most, for just as long as he was remembered, so long his slayer would be remembered also. Pausanias connected this saying with his private resentment, and admitting no delay in his plans because of his grievance he determined to act under cover of the festival in the following manner. He posted horses at the gates of the city and came to the entrance of the theatre carrying a Celtic dagger under his cloak. When Philip directed his attending friends to precede him into the theatre, while the guards kept their distance, he saw that the king was


1These events cannot be dated exactly, but they must
have occurred some years before the assassination of Philip,
perhaps as early as 344 b.c. (Berve, Alexanderreich, 2, p. 308). Pausanias waited a long time for his revenge, and it is curious that he chose the occasion most advantageous for Alexander.2No sophist Hermocrates is otherwise known at this time, but it may be possible to identify this man with the grammarian of the same name who is best known to fame as the teacher of Callimachus. For the latter cp. F. Susemihl, Geschichte der grieckischen Litteratur in der Alexandrinerzeit, 2 (1895), 668; O. Stählin, W. Schmid, W. von Christs Geschichte der griechischen Litteratur6, 2. 1 (1920), 126; Funaioli, Real-Encyclopädie, 8 (1913), 887 f.99