Diodorus of Sicily

τεταγμένης δυνάμεως ἐτρέψαντο τοὺς παρεισπεπτωκότας
5καὶ κατέβαλον εἰς τριακοσίους. τῶν δ᾿
ἄλλων ἐπιβαλομένων μὲν φεύγειν διά τινος στενοῦ
τόπου καὶ τὴν σωτηρίαν ἀπεγνωκότων παραδόξως
αὐτοὺς Ἀγαθοκλῆς ἐκ τῶν κινδύνων ἐρρύσατο.
6αὐτὸς μὲν γὰρ λαμπρότατα πάντων ἀγωνισάμενος
ἑπτὰ τραύμασι περιέπεσε καὶ διὰ τὸ πλῆθος τοῦ
ῥυέντος αἵματος τὸ σῶμα παρελύετο· τῶν δὲ πολεμίων
ἐπικειμένων παρήγγειλε τοῖς σαλπιγκταῖς ἐπ᾿
ἀμφότερα τὰ μέρη τοῦ τείχους παρελθόντας σημαίνειν
7τὸ πολεμικόν. ὧν ταχέως τὸ ῥηθὲν πραξάντων
οἱ προσβοηθήσαντες ἐκ τῆς Γέλας τὸ μὲν ἀληθὲς
διὰ τὸ σκότος οὐκ ἠδύναντο συνιδεῖν, ὑπολαβόντες
δὲ τὴν ἄλλην δύναμιν τῶν Συρακοσίων κατ᾿ ἀμφότερα
τὰ μέρη παρεισπεπτωκέναι τοῦ μὲν ἔτι διώκειν
ἀπέστησαν, διελόμενοι δὲ τὰς τάξεις διχῇ ταχέως
ἐβοήθουν, συντρέχοντες πρὸς τὸν ἦχον τῶν σαλπιγκτῶν.
ἐν τοσούτῳ δὲ τυχόντες ἀνοχῆς οἱ περὶ
τὸν Ἀγαθοκλέα μετὰ πάσης ἀσφαλείας διεσώθησαν
εἰς τὸν χάρακα. ἐνταῦθα μὲν οὖν τοῦτον τὸν τρόπον
καταστρατηγήσας τοὺς πολεμίους οὐ μόνον
τοὺς σὺν αὐτῷ παραδόξως ἔσωσεν, ἀλλὰ καὶ τῶν
συμμάχων ἑπτακοσίους ἄνδρας.
5. Μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα ἐν ταῖς Συρακούσσαις αἱρεθέντος
Ἀκεστορίδου τοῦ Κορινθίου στρατηγοῦ
δόξας ἐπιθέσθαι τυραννίδι διὰ τὴν σύνεσιν ἐξέφυγε
τὸν κίνδυνον. ὁ μὲν γὰρ Ἀκεστορίδης εὐλαβηθεὶς
τὴν στάσιν καὶ διὰ τοῦτο οὐ βουλόμενος αὐτὸν
φανερῶς ἀνελεῖν ἐκέλευεν ἐκ τῆς πόλεως μεταστῆναι
καὶ τοὺς νυκτὸς κατὰ τὴν ὁδὸν ἀποκτενοῦντας


238Book XIX

suddenly, routed those who had made their way in, 317 b.c. and struck down about three hundred of them. When the remainder tried to escape through a certain narrow passage and had abandoned hope of safety, Agathocles unexpectedly saved them from the danger. Fighting most brilliantly of all, he had received seven wounds, and because of the quantity of blood he had lost, he was weak in body; but when the enemy were upon them, he ordered the trumpeters to go out to the walls on each side and sound the signal for battle. When they quickly carried out the order, those who had sallied out from Gela to give aid were not able to learn the truth because of the darkness, but supposing that the remaining force of the Syracusans had broken in on both sides, they abandoned further pursuit, divided their forces into two parts, and went quickly to meet the danger, running toward the sound made by the trumpeters. In this situation Agathocles and his men gained a respite from fighting and came safe to their fortified camp in complete security. Thus on this occasion, by outwitting the enemy in this way, he not only saved his own companions by a miracle but also seven hundred of the allies.
5. Thereafter, at the time when Acestorides the Corinthian had been elected general in Syracuse,1 Agathocles was reputed to have made an attempt at tyranny, but he escaped from this danger by his own shrewdness. For Acestorides, who was wary of factional strife and therefore was not willing to de-troy him openly, ordered him to leave the city and sent out men to kill him on the road during the night.

1After the death of Timoleon and in his honour the Syra- cusans passed a law that henceforth they would always elect a Corinthian to lead them in foreign wars (Plutarch, Timoleon, 38. 2).239