Diodorus of Sicily

τριῶν πόλεων περιελεῖν τὰ τείχη καὶ μηδεμίαν
κοινωνίαν εἶναι τοῖς Φωκεῦσι τοῦ ἱεροῦ μηδὲ τοῦ
Ἀμφικτυονικοῦ συνεδρίου· μὴ ἐξεῖναι δὲ αὐτοῖς
μήτε ἵππους μήτε ὅπλα κτήσασθαι, μέχρις ἂν οὗ
τὰ χρήματα ἐκτίσωσι τῷ θεῷ τὰ σεσυλημένα· τοὺς
δὲ πεφευγότας τῶν Φωκέων καὶ τῶν ἄλλων τῶν
μετεσχηκότων τῆς ἱεροσυλίας ἐναγεῖς εἶναι καὶ
2ἀγωγίμους πάντοθεν· τὰς δὲ πόλεις ἁπάσας τῶν
Φωκέων κατασκάψαι καὶ μετοικίσαι εἰς κώμας, ὧν
ἑκάστην μὴ πλεῖον ἔχειν οἰκιῶν πεντήκοντα, μηδ᾿
ἔλαττον διεστάναι1 σταδίου τὰς κώμας ἀπ᾿ ἀλλήλων·
ἔχειν δὲ Φωκεῖς τὴν χώραν καὶ φέρειν κατ᾿ ἐνιαυτὸν
τῷ θεῷ φόρον τάλαντα ἑξήκοντα μέχρις ἂν
ἐκτίσωσι τὰ ἀπογραφέντα χρήματα κατὰ τὴν
ἱεροσυλίαν· τιθέναι δὲ καὶ τὸν ἀγῶνα τῶν Πυθίων
Φίλιππον μετὰ Βοιωτῶν καὶ Θετταλῶν διὰ τὸ
Κορινθίους2 μετεσχηκέναι τοῖς Φωκεῦσι τῆς εἰς τὸ
3θεῖον παρανομίας· τοὺς δὲ Ἀμφικτύονας καὶ τὸν
Φίλιππον τὰ ὅπλα τῶν Φωκέων καὶ τῶν μισθοφόρων
καταπετροκοπῆσαι καὶ τὰ λείψανα αὐτῶν
κατακαῦσαι καὶ τοὺς ἵππους ἀποδόσθαι. ἀκολούθως
δὲ τούτοις διέταξαν οἱ Ἀμφικτύονες τὰ περὶ τὴν
ἐπιμέλειαν τοῦ μαντείου καὶ τἄλλα πάντα τὰ πρὸς
εὐσέβειαν καὶ κοινὴν εἰρήνην καὶ ὁμόνοιαν τοῖς Ἕλλησιν
4ἀνήκοντα. μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα Φίλιππος μὲν τὰ
δεδογμένα τοῖς Ἀμφικτύοσι συγκαταστήσας καὶ


1So Post: μηδὲ διεστάναι ἔλαττον.2No satisfactory explanation of the MSS. reading Κορινθίους
has been offered. Wesseling suggests a lacuna before
διὰ τὸ Κορινθίους, Fischer after. According to chap. 29. 1 Athenians, Lacedaemonians and “some others of the Peloponnesians” sided with the Phocians.406Book XVI

in the possession of the Phocians should have their 346/5 b.c. walls removed and that the Phocians should have no participation in the shrine of Delphi or in the Council of the Amphictyons; that they should not be permitted to acquire either horses or arms until they should have repaid to the god the monies they had pillaged; that those of the Phocians who had fled and any others who had had a share in robbing the sanctuary were to be under a curse and subject to arrest wherever they might be; that all the cities of the Phocians were to be razed and the men moved to villages, no one of which should have more than fifty houses, and the villages were to be not less than a stade distant from one another; that the Phocians were to possess their territory and to pay each year to the god a tribute of sixty talents until they should have paid back the sums entered in the registers at the time of the pillaging of the sanctuary. Philip, furthermore, was to hold the Pythian games together with the Boeotians and Thessalians,1 since the Corinthians had shared with the Phocians in the sacrilege committed against the god. The Amphictyons and Philip were to hurl the arms of the Phocians and their mercenaries down the crags and burn what remained of them and to sell the horses. In similar tenor the Amphictyons laid down regulations for the custody of the oracle and other matters affecting due respect for the gods and the general peace and concord of the Greeks. Thereafter, when Philip had helped the Amphictyons give effect to their decrees and had dealt courteously



1See Pickard-Cambridge, Cambridge Ancient History, 6. 240 ff.407