Diodorus of Sicily

προῆγεν ἐπὶ Καππαδοκίας καὶ τοὺς ἀφεστηκότας
περὶ τὴν ἄνω Φρυγίαν καὶ Λυκαονίαν ἐπιπορευόμενος
πάλιν εἰς τὴν προϋπάρχουσαν συμμαχίαν
4ἀποκατέστησεν. καθ᾿ ὃν δὴ χρόνον οἱ περὶ τὸν
Λυσίμαχον πυθόμενοι τὴν τῶν πολεμίων παρουσίαν
συνήδρευον, βουλευόμενοι πῶς χρηστέον εἴη τοῖς
5ἐπιφερομένοις κινδύνοις. ἔδοξεν οὖν αὐτοῖς εἰς μὲν
μάχην μὴ συγκαταβαίνειν, ἕως ἂν οἱ περὶ Σέλευκον
ἐκ τῶν ἄνω σατραπειῶν καταβῶσι, τόπους δ᾿1
ὀχυροὺς καταλαβέσθαι καὶ χάρακι καὶ τάφρῳ τὴν
στρατοπεδείαν ἀσφαλισαμένους ὑπομένειν τῶν πολεμίων
τὴν ἔφοδον. οὗτοι μὲν οὖν τὸ δοχθὲν αὐτοῖς
ἐπετέλουν κατὰ σπουδήν· ὁ δ᾿ Ἀντίγονος ἐπεὶ
πλησίον ἐγένετο τῶν πολεμίων, ἐκτάξας τὴν δύναμιν
6προεκαλεῖτο εἰς μάχην. οὐδενὸς δ᾿ ἐπεξιέναι
τολμῶντος αὐτὸς μὲν κατελάβετο τόπους τινάς, δι᾿
ὧν ἀναγκαῖον ἦν τὰς τροφὰς τοῖς ἐναντίοις παρακομίζεσθαι·
οἱ δὲ περὶ τὸν Λυσίμαχον φοβηθέντες
μήποτε τῆς ἀγορᾶς ἀποκοπείσης ὑποχείριοι γένωνται
τοῖς πολεμίοις, νυκτὸς ἀνέζευξαν καὶ διατείναντες
σταδίους τετρακοσίους κατεστρατοπέδευσαν
7περὶ Δορύλαιον· εἶχε γὰρ τὸ χωρίον σίτου τε καὶ
τῆς ἄλλης χορηγίας πλῆθος καὶ ποταμὸν παραρρέοντα
δυνάμενον ἀσφάλειαν παρέχεσθαι τοῖς παρ᾿
αὐτὸν στρατοπεδεύουσι. βαλόμενοι δὲ στρατοπεδείαν
ὠχύρωσαν τὴν παρεμβολὴν βαθείᾳ τάφρῳ
καὶ τριπλῷ χάρακι.
109. Ἀντίγονος δὲ πυθόμενος τὴν τῶν πολεμίων
ἀποχώρησιν εὐθὺς ἐπεδίωκεν αὐτοὺς καὶ πλησίον
γενόμενος τῆς παρεμβολῆς, ἐπεὶ πρὸς παράταξιν οὐ
συγκατέβαινον, ἤρξατο περιταφρεύειν τὴν στρατοπεδείαν
καὶ καταπέλτας καὶ βέλη μετεπέμψατο
1δ᾿ Geer: δέ.430Book XX

Cappadocia; and, advancing upon those who had 302 b.c. deserted him in upper Phrygia and Lycaonia, he restored them again to the former alliance. At this very time Lysimachus, on hearing of the presence of the enemy, held a council considering how he ought to meet the approaching dangers. They decided not to join in battle until Seleucus should come down from the upper satrapies, but to occupy strong positions and, after making their encampment safe with palisade and ditch, to await the onslaught of the enemy. They therefore carried out their decision with vigour; but Antigonus, when he came near the enemy, drew up his army and challenged them to battle. When no one dared to issue forth, he himself occupied certain places through which it was necessary that the provisions for his opponents should be transported; and Lysimachus, fearing that if their food supply should be cut off, they would then be at the mercy of the enemy, broke camp at night, made a forced march of four hundred stades,1 and camped near Dorylaeum; for the stronghold had an ample store of grain and other supplies, and a river ran by it that could give protection to those who camped beside it. Pitching camp, they strengthened their encampment with a deep ditch and a triple stockade.
109. When Antigonus learned of the departure of the enemy he at once pursued them; and, after he had approached their encampment, since they did not come out for battle, he began to surround their camp with a trench, and he sent for catapults



1About 44 miles.431