Diodorus of Sicily

τραυμάτων ἐγίνοντο· οἱ γὰρ Μακεδόνες ταῖς
σαρίσαις ἀναρρήσσοντες τὰς τῶν βαρβάρων πέλτας
τὰς ἀκμὰς τοῦ σιδήρου τοῖς πνεύμοσιν ἐνήρειδον, οἱ
δὲ μισθοφόροι τὰς λόγχας ἀκοντίζοντες εἰς ἀθρόους
τοὺς πολεμίους οὐχ ἡμάρτανον, σύνεγγυς κειμένου
τοῦ σκοποῦ.
5Διὸ καὶ πολλῶν μὲν τραυματιζομένων, οὐκ ὀλίγων
δὲ τελευτώντων αἱ γυναῖκες τὰ τῶν πεσόντων ὅπλα
λαμβάνουσαι συνηγωνίζοντο τοῖς ἀνδράσιν· ἡ γὰρ
ὀξύτης τοῦ κινδύνου καὶ τὸ τῆς ἐνεργείας δεινὸν
ἠνάγκαζεν αὐτὰς παρὰ φύσιν τρέπεσθαι πρὸς ἀλκήν.
διὸ καὶ τινὲς μὲν αὐτῶν καθοπλισθεῖσαι συνήσπιζον
τοῖς ἰδίοις ἀνδράσι, τινὲς δὲ ἄνευ ὅπλων ἐμπίπτουσαι
τῶν ἀσπίδων ἐπελαμβάνοντο καὶ πολλὰ τοὺς
6πολεμίους ἐνεπόδιζον. τέλος δὲ πάντες μετὰ τῶν
γυναικῶν ἀγωνισάμενοι καὶ κατακοπέντες ὑπὸ τοῦ
πλήθους τὸν ἔνδοξον θάνατον τῆς ἀγεννοῦς φιλοζωίας
ἠλλάξαντο. ὁ δὲ Ἀλέξανδρος τόν τε ἀχρεῖον
καὶ ἄνοπλον ὄχλον καὶ τῶν γυναικῶν τὰς ὑπολειφθείσας
ἀπάγων τοὺς ἱππεῖς συνεπέστησεν.
85. Πολλὰς δὲ καὶ ἄλλας πόλεις ἐκπολιορκήσας
καὶ τοὺς ἀντιταττομένους ἀνελὼν προῆγεν ἐπὶ τὴν
πέτραν τὴν Ἄορνον1 καλουμένην· εἰς γὰρ ταύτην οἱ
περιλειφθέντες τῶν ἐγχωρίων διὰ τὴν ὑπερβολὴν
2τῆς ὀχυρότητος καταπεφεύγεισαν. λέγεται γὰρ τὸ
παλαιὸν Ἡρακλέα ταύτην τὴν πέτραν ἐπιβαλόμενον2
πολιορκεῖν ἀποστῆναι διά τινας ἐπιγενομένους
σεισμοὺς μεγάλους καὶ διοσημείας. ὁ δ᾿
1Ἄορνιν F.2ἀπιβαλλόμενον F.364Book XVII

form of death and wounds was to be seen. The Macedonians 327/6 b.c. thrust with their long spears through the light shields of the mercenaries and pressed the iron points on into their lungs, while they in turn flung their javelins into the close ranks of their enemies and could not miss the mark, so near was the target.
As many were wounded and not a few killed, the women caught up the weapons of the fallen and fought beside their men, since the acuteness of the danger and the fierceness of the action forced them to be brave beyond their nature. Some of them, clad in armour, sheltered behind the same shields as their husbands, while others rushed in without armour, grasped the opposing shields, and hindered their use by the enemy. Finally, fighting women and all, they were overborne by numbers and cut down, winning a glorious death in preference to basely saving their lives at any cost. Alexander removed the feeble and unarmed together with the surviving women to another place, and put the cavalry in charge of them.
85. After he had taken a number of other cities1 by storm and had slaughtered their defenders, he came to the “rock” called Aornus.2 Here the surviving natives had taken refuge because of its great strength. It is said that Heracles of old thought to lay siege to this “rock” but refrained because of the occurrence of certain sharp earthquake shocks and





1Curtius, 8. 11. 2.2For the term “rock” see above on chap. 28, p. 195, note 5. For the whole story cp. Curtius, 8.11; Justin, 12. 7.12–13; Plutarch, Alexander, 58. 3; Arrian, 4. 28. 7–30. 4. The location has been identified by Sir A. Stein, On Alexander’s Track to the Indus (1929), chaps, xvi-xxi.365