Diodorus of Sicily

ὁ μὲν Πολυπέρχων ἀνακαλεσάμενος τῇ
σάλπιγγι τοὺς στρατιώτας ἐπανῆλθεν ἐπὶ τὴν ἰδίαν
2στρατοπεδείαν. τῇ δ᾿ ὑστεραίᾳ τὸν τοῦ πτώματος
τόπον ἀνακαθάρας ἐποίησε βάσιμον τοῖς θηρίοις καὶ
διενοεῖτο χρήσασθαι ταῖς τούτων ῥώμαις πρὸς τὴν
ἅλωσιν τῆς πόλεως. οἱ δὲ Μεγαλοπολῖται Δάμιδος
ἡγουμένου καὶ τούτου γεγονότος κατὰ τὴν Ἀσίαν
μετ᾿ Ἀλεξάνδρου καὶ περὶ τὰς φύσεις καὶ χρείας
τῶν ἐλεφάντων ἐμπειρίαν ἔχοντος οὐ μετρίως
3προετέρησαν. οὗτος γὰρ τὴν ἰδίαν ἐπίνοιαν ἀντίταγμα
τῇ τῶν θηρίων βίᾳ κατασκευάσας ἀχρήστους
ἐποίησε τὰς τῶν σωμάτων ῥώμας. θύρας γὰρ
μεγάλας πλείονας ἥλοις ὀξέσι καταπυκνώσας καὶ
ταύτας ἐν ὀρύγμασι ταπεινοῖς καταστρώσας καὶ
τὰς ἐξοχὰς τῶν κέντρων ἐπικρυψάμενος κατέλιπε
διὰ τούτων δίοδον εἰς τὴν πόλιν καὶ κατὰ μέτωπον
μὲν οὐδένα τῶν στρατιωτῶν ἔστησεν, ἐκ δὲ τῶν
πλαγίων ἔταξε πλῆθος ἀκοντιστῶν καὶ τοξοτῶν καὶ
4τῶν καταπελτικῶν βελῶν. τοῦ δὲ Πολυπέρχοντος
ἀνακαθαίροντος πάντα τὸν τόπον τοῦ πτώματος
καὶ τοῖς θηρίοις ἀθρόοις διὰ τούτου τὴν ἔφοδον
ποιουμένου παράδος ἐγένετο πρᾶξις περὶ τοὺς
ἐλέφαντας. οὐδενὸς γὰρ ἀπαντῶντος κατὰ στόμα
τοῖς θηρίοις οἱ μὲν Ἰνδοὶ συνηνάγκαζον εἰσπίπτειν
εἰς τὴν πόλιν, οἱ δ᾿ ἐλέφαντες τῇ ῥώμῃ1 προπίπτοντες
ἐνέπιπτον εἰς τὰς κατακεκεντρωμένας θύρας.
5τραυματιζόμενοι δὲ τοὺς πόδας ὑπὸ τῶν ἥλων καὶ
διὰ τὸ βάρος περιπειρόμενοι τοῖς κέντροις οὔτε
προϊέναι πορρώτερον οὔτε ἀναστρέφειν διὰ τὴν
δυσκινησίαν ἠδύναντο. ἅμα δὲ καὶ βελῶν παντοδαπῶν
ἐκ πλαγίων φερομένων οἱ μὲν ἀπέθνησκον
τῶν Ἰνδῶν, οἱ δὲ κατατραυματιζόμενοι τῆς ἐνδεχομένης
1ῥώμῃ MSS., Fischer in corrigenda, ῥύμῃ Reiske, Dindorf.204Book XVIII

recalled his troops by a trumpet signal and 318 b.c. returned to his own camp. On the next day he cleared the area of the breach, making it passable for the elephants, whose might he planned to use in capturing the city. The Megalopolitans, however, under the leadership of Damis, who had been in Asia with Alexander and knew by experience the nature and the use of these animals, got the better of him completely. Indeed, by pitting his native wit against the brute force of the elephants, Damis rendered their physical strength useless. He studded many great frames with sharp nails and buried them in shallow trenches, concealing the projecting points; over them he left a way into the city, placing none of the troops directly in the face of it, but posting on the flanks a great many javelin throwers, bowmen, and catapults. As Polyperchon was clearing the debris from the whole extent of the breach and making an attack through it with all the elephants in a body, a most unexpected thing befell them. There being no resistance in front, the Indian mahouts did their part in urging them to rush into the city all together; but the animals, as they charged violently, encountered the spike-studded frames. Wounded in their feet by the spikes, their own weight causing the points to penetrate, they could neither go forward any farther nor turn back because it hurt them to move. At the same time some of the mahouts were killed by the missiles of all kinds that poured upon them from the flanks, and others were disabled by wounds and so lost such use of the elephants as the situation permitted.


205