Diodorus of Sicily

καὶ συνεδρεύσας μετὰ τῶν ἡγεμόνων Πτολεμαίῳ
μὲν τῷ Λάγου τὴν Αἴγυπτον ἔδωκεν, Λαομέδοντι
δὲ τῷ Μιτυληναίῳ Συρίαν, Φιλώτᾳ δὲ Κιλικίαν καὶ
Πίθωνι μὲν Μηδίαν, Εὐμενεῖ δὲ Παφλαγονίαν καὶ
Καππαδοκίαν καὶ πάσας τὰς συνοριζούσας ταύταις
χώρας, ἃς Ἀλέξανδρος οὐκ ἐπῆλθεν ἐκκλεισθεὶς
ὑπὸ τῶν καιρῶν, ὅτε διεπολέμει πρὸς Δαρεῖον,
Ἀντιγόνῳ δὲ Παμφυλίαν καὶ Λυκίαν καὶ τὴν
μεγάλην καλουμένην Φρυγίαν, μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα
Ἀσάνδρῳ1 μὲν Καρίαν, Μενάνδρῳ2 δὲ Λυδίαν,
Λεοννάτῳ δὲ τὴν ἐφ᾿ Ἑλλησπόντῳ Φρυγίαν. αὗται
μὲν οὖν αἱ σατραπεῖαι τοῦτον τὸν τρόπον ἐμερίσθησαν.
2κατὰ δὲ τὴν Εὐρώπην Λυσιμάχῳ μὲν
ἐδόθη Θρᾴκη καὶ τὰ συνορίζοντα τῶν ἐθνῶν παρὰ
τὴν Ποντικὴν θάλασσαν, ἡ δὲ Μακεδονία καὶ τὰ
πλησιόχωρα τῶν ἐθνῶν Ἀντιπάτρῳ προσωρίσθη.
τὰς δὲ κατὰ τὴν Ασίαν παραλελειμμένας σατραπείας
ἔδοξε μὴ κινεῖν, ἀλλ᾿ ἐᾶν ὑπὸ τοὺς αὐτοὺς
ἡγεμόνας τεταγμένας· ὁμοίως δὲ καὶ Ταξίλην καὶ
Πῶρον κυρίους εἶναι τῶν ἰδίων βασιλειῶν, καθάπερ
3αὐτὸς Ἀλέξανδρος ἦν τεταχώς.3 Πίθωνι δὲ4
τὴν συνορίζουσαν σατραπείαν τοῖς περὶ Ταξίλην
βασιλεῦσι συνεχώρησε· τὴν δὲ παρὰ τὸν Καύκασον
κειμένην, ὀνομαζομένην δὲ Παροπανισαδῶν προσώρισεν




1Ἀσάνδρῳ Wesseling, cp. Arrian, FGrH, 156. 1. 6, 9. 37,
Dexippus, FGrH, 100. 8. 2, Kaerst in P.-W., Realencyclopädie,
2. 1516: Κασάνδρῳ MSS. followed by Fischer.2Μενάνδρῳ Wesseling, cp. Arrian, FGrH, 156. 1. 6, Dexippus,
FGrH, 100. 8. 2, Curtius, 10. 10. 2, Justin, 13. 4. 15:
Μελεάγρῳ MSS. followed by Fischer.3ὁμοίως δὲ . . . ἦν τεταχώς transferred from end of § 4 by
Kallenberg.4Πίθωνι δὲ (cp. chap. 39. 6 and Dexippus, FGrH, 100. 8. 4),
Πύθωνι δὲ Madvig, τούτων δὲ Πύθωνι μὲν τῷ Ἀγήνορος Hert- lein: τούτων δὲ MSS. followed by Fischer, who in addenda
approves Beloch’s addition of Πίθωνι after βασιλεῦσι.16Book XVIII

and had taken counsel with the chief men, he 323 b.c. gave Egypt to Ptolemy, son of Lagus,1 Syria to Laomedon of Mitylenê, Cilicia to Philotas, and Media2 to Pithon. To Eumenes he gave Paphlagonia and Cappadocia and all the lands bordering on these, which Alexander did not invade, having been prevented from doing so by the urgency of his affairs when he was finishing the war with Darius; to Antigonus he gave Pamphylia, Lycia, and what is called Great Phrygia; then to Asander, Caria; to Menander, Lydia; and to Leonnatus, Hellespontine Phrygia. These satrapies, then, were distributed in that way. In Europe, Thrace and the neighbouring tribes near the Pontic sea were given to Lysimachus, and Macedonia and the adjacent peoples were assigned to Antipater.3 Perdiccas, however, decided not to disturb the remaining satrapies in Asia but to permit them to remain under the same rulers; likewise he determined that Taxiles and Porus should be masters of their own kingdoms as Alexander himself had arranged.4 To Pithon he gave the satrapy next to Taxiles and the other kings; and the satrapy that lies along the Caucasus,5 called that of the Paropanisadae,







1This list of satrapies and satraps agrees, with the exceptions noted below, with that in Dexippus (FGrH, 100. 8). Arrian (FGrH, 156. 1. 5–8) and Curtius (10. 10. 1–6) also agree, but do not include the eastern satrapies. Justin (13. 4. 9–25) is very inaccurate.2Media Maior; cp. on § 3.3Arrian assigns this command jointly to Antipater and Craterus.4Cp. Book 17. 86. 7, 89. 6.5i.e. the Hindu Kush.17