Diodorus of Sicily

προστασίας ὡς οὔσης πατρίου τοῖς Φωκεῦσιν.
ἐπηγγέλλετο δὲ κατορθώσειν τὴν ἐπιβολὴν ἐὰν
αὐτὸν αὐτοκράτορα καταστήσωσι στρατηγὸν τῆς
ὅλης ἐπιβολῆς καὶ κύριον.1
24. Τῶν δὲ Φωκέων διὰ τὸν ἐκ τῆς καταδίκης
φόβον ἑλομένων αὐτὸν αὐτοκράτορα στρατηγὸν ὁ
Φιλόμηλος ἐνεργῶς ἐπετέλει τὰς ἐπαγγελίας. πρῶτον
μὲν γὰρ παρελθὼν εἰς τὴν Σπάρτην ἐν ἀπορρήτοις
διελέχθη τῷ βασιλεῖ τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων
Ἀρχιδάμῳ, ὅτι κοινὸς ὁ ἀγών ἐστιν αὐτῷ περὶ τοῦ
ποιῆσαι τὰς κρίσεις τῶν Ἀμφικτυόνων ἀκύρους·
εἶναι γὰρ καὶ κατὰ τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων μεγάλας
καὶ ἀδίκους ἀποφάσεις τῶν Ἀμφικτυόνων. ἐδήλωσεν
οὖν αὐτῷ διότι τοὺς Δελφοὺς καταλαβέσθαι
διέγνωκε καὶ τῆς προστασίας ἐὰν ἐγκρατὴς γένηται
2τὰ δόγματα τῶν Ἀμφικτυόνων ἀκυρώσει.2 ὁ δ᾿
Ἀρχίδαμος ἀποδεξάμενος τὸν λόγον φανερῶς μὲν
κατὰ τὸ παρὸν οὐκ ἔφησε βοηθήσειν, λάθρᾳ δὲ
πάντα συμπράξειν χορηγῶν καὶ χρήματα καὶ μισθοφόρους.
ὁ δὲ Φιλόμηλος παρὰ μὲν τούτου πεντεκαίδεκα
τάλαντα λαβών, ἰδίᾳ δὲ προσθεὶς οὐκ
ἐλάττω τούτων μισθοφόρους τε ξένους3 ἐμισθώσατο
καὶ τῶν Φωκέων ἐπέλεξε χιλίους, οὓς ὠνόμασε
3πελταστάς. ἀθροίσας δὲ στρατιωτῶν πλῆθος καὶ
καταλαβόμενος τὸ μαντεῖον τούς τε Θρακίδας καλουμένους
τῶν Δελφῶν ἐναντιουμένους ἀνεῖλε καὶ
τὰς οὐσίας αὐτῶν ἐδήμευσε· τοὺς δ᾿ ἄλλους ὁρῶν





1Fischer suggests placing καὶ κύριον after στρατηγὸν.2Wesseling suggests ἀκυρῶσαι.3Hertlein would delete either μισθοφόρους or ξένους.304Book XVI

the guardianship of the oracle on the ground that this 355/4 b.c. belonged to the Phocians as an inheritance from their fathers. He promised that he would succeed with the enterprise if they would appoint him general with absolute power for the entire programme and give him complete authority.1
24. When the Phocians out of fear of the judgement elected him general with absolute power, Philomelus set about energetically to fulfil his promise. First he went to Sparta, where he conversed in private with Archidamus king of the Lacedaemonians, representing that the king had an equal interest in the effort to render null and void the judgements of the Amphictyons, for there existed serious and unjust pronouncements of that Council to the injury of the Lacedaemonians also. He accordingly disclosed to Archidamus that he had decided to seize Delphi and that if he succeeded in obtaining the guardianship of the shrine he would annul the decrees of the Amphictyons. Although Archidamus approved of the proposal, he said he would not for the present give assistance openly, but that he would co-operate secretly in every respect, providing both money and mercenaries. Philomelus, having received from him fifteen talents and having added at least as much on his own account, hired foreign mercenaries and chose a thousand of the Phocians, whom he called peltasts. Then, after he had gathered a multitude of soldiers and had seized the oracle, he slew the group of Delphians called Thracidae2 who sought to oppose him and confiscated their possessions; but, observing that

1See Polyaenus, 5. 45.2Unknown. Wesseling thinks they may be the phians Φοίβου Δελφοὶ θέραπες, noble attendants of the shrine, cp. Euripides, Ion, 94.305