Diodorus of Sicily

ἧς ἦν κύριος διέλαβε πυρσοῖς καὶ βυβλιαφόροις,
δι᾿ ὧν ὀξέως ἤμελλεν ὑπηρετεῖσθαι πάντα.
58. Ἀπὸ δὲ τούτων γενόμενος ἀνέζευξεν ἐπὶ
Φοινίκην, σπεύδων ναυτικὴν δύναμιν συστήσασθαι·
συνέβαινε γὰρ τοὺς μὲν πολεμίους τότε θαλασσοκρατεῖν
ναῦς πολλὰς ἔχοντας, αὐτῷ δὲ τὸ παράπαν
οὐδ᾿ ὀλίγας εἶναι. στρατοπεδεύσας δὲ ἐν
Παλαιτύρῳ1 τῆς Φοινίκης καὶ πολιορκῆσαι διανοούμενος
τὴν Τύρον μετεπέμπετο τοὺς βασιλεῖς
2τῶν Φοινίκων καὶ τοὺς ὑπάρχους τῆς Συρίας. καὶ
τοὺς μὲν βασιλεῖς προετρέψατο συνεπιλαβέσθαι
ναυπηγίας, ἐπειδὴ τὰς ναῦς τὰς ἐκ Φοινίκης ἁπάσας
μετὰ τῶν πληρωμάτων Πτολεμαῖος εἶχεν ἐν Αἰγύπτῳ·
τοῖς δ᾿ ὑπάρχοις ἐκέλευσεν ἑτοιμάσαι κατὰ
τάχος πυρῶν μὲν μεδίμνων μυριάδας τετρακοσίας
πεντήκοντα,2 τοσοῦτο γὰρ εἰς τὸν ἐνιαυτὸν ἐγίνετο
δαπάνημα. αὐτὸς δὲ πανταχόθεν ἀθροίσας ὑλοτόμους
καὶ πρίστας, ἔτι δὲ ναυπηγοὺς κατεκόμιζε τὴν
ὕλην ἐπὶ θάλασσαν ἐκ τοῦ Λιβάνου, τεμνόντων μὲν
αὐτὴν καὶ πριζόντων ἀνδρῶν ὀκτακισχιλίων, κατακομιζόντων
3δὲ ζευγῶν χιλίων. τὸ δ᾿ ὄρος τοῦτο
παρήκει μὲν παρά τε τὴν Τρίπολιν καὶ Βυβλίαν, ἔτι
δὲ Σιδωνίαν, πλῆρες δ᾿ ἐστὶ ξύλων κεδρίνων καὶ
κυπαρισσίνων θαυμαστῶν τό τε κάλλος καὶ μέγεθος.
4ναυπηγεῖα δ᾿ ἀπέδειξε τρία μὲν κατὰ τὴν
Φοινίκην, ἔν τε Τριπόλει καὶ Βύβλῳ καὶ Σιδῶνι,




1Παλαιτύρῳ Geer, cp. chap. 59. 3 and Book 17. 40. 5:
Τύρῳ.2Lacuna indicated by Fischer, who suggests in apparatus
<κριθῶν δὲ . . . >.390Book XIX

Asia of which he was master a system of fire-signals 315 b.c. and dispatch-carriers, by means of which he expected to have quick service in all his business.1
58. After attending to these matters, Antigonus set out for Phoenicia, hastening to organize a naval force; for it so happened that his enemies then ruled the sea with many ships, but that he had, altogether, not even a few. Camping at Old Tyre2 in Phoenicia and intending to besiege Tyre, he called together the kings of the Phoenicians and the viceroys of Syria. He instructed the kings to assist him in building ships, since Ptolemy was holding in Egypt all the ships from Phoenicia with their crews. He ordered the viceroys to prepare quickly four and a half million measures of wheat . . .,3 for such was the annual consumption. He himself collected wood cutters, sawyers, and shipwrights from all sides, and carried wood to the sea from Lebanon. There were eight thousand men employed in cutting and sawing the timber and one thousand pair of draught animals in transporting it. This mountain range extends along the territory of Tripolis, Byblus, and Sidon, and is covered with cedar and cypress trees of wonderful beauty and size. He established three shipyards in Phoenicia—at Tripolis, Byblus, and Sidon—and a



1The Persian king had been served by an elaborate
system of couriers and signal fires. By means of the latter,
news could be sent in a single day from the most distant parts of the empire to Susa and Ecbatana (Aristotle, De Mundo, 398 b 30-35). A different system is described in chap. 17. 7.2Old Tyre, the portion of the city situated on the mainland, had been destroyed by Nebuchadrezzer during his long siege of the island citadel. In occupying Old Tyre before attempting the siege of the island, Antigonus was following the example of Alexander (Book 17. 40. 5).3About 3,375,000 bushels. It is probable that mention of a quantity of barley, needed for feeding the horses, has been lost from the text.391