Diodorus of Sicily

τῆς δυνάμεως παρὰ τὸν ποταμὸν ὡδοιπόρει, προηγουμένου
Κρατεροῦ καὶ Ἡφαιστίωνος.
Ὡς δ᾿ ἦλθον ἐπὶ τὴν Ἀκεσίνου καὶ Ὑδάσπου
συμβολήν, ἐκβιβάσας τοὺς στρατιώτας προῆγεν ἐπὶ
2τοὺς ὀνομαζομένους Σίβους1 τούτους δέ φασιν
ἀπογόνους εἶναι τῶν μεθ᾿ Ἡρακλέους ἐπὶ τὴν
Ἄορνον πέτραν στρατευσάντων καὶ τῆς μὲν πολιορκίας
ἀποτυχόντων, ἐν τούτῳ δὲ τῷ τόπῳ κατοικισθέντων
ὑφ᾿ Ἡρακλέους. τοῦ δ᾿ Ἀλεξάνδρου
καταστρατοπεδεύσαντος πλησίον ἐπιφανεστάτης
πόλεως προῆλθον οἱ δόξῃ πρωτεύοντες τῶν πολιτῶν.
ἐντυχόντες δὲ τῷ βασιλεῖ καὶ τὴν συγγένειαν
ἀνανεωσάμενοι πάντα ποιήσειν ἔφασαν μετὰ προθυμίας
ὡς ἂν συγγενεῖς ὄντες καὶ δῶρα προσεκόμισαν
3μεγαλοπρεπῆ. ὁ δὲ Ἀλέξανδρος ἀποδεξάμενος
αὐτῶν τὴν εὔνοιαν καὶ τὰς πόλεις ἀποδείξας
ἐλευθέρας προῆγεν ἐπὶ τὰ συνορίζοντα τῶν ἐθνῶν.
Καταλαβὼν δὲ τοὺς ὀνομαζομένους Ἀγαλασσεῖς
ἠθροικότας πεζοὺς μὲν τετρακισμυρίους, ἱππεῖς δὲ
τρισχιλίους, συνάψας αὐτοῖς μάχην καὶ νικήσας
τοὺς μὲν πλείστους κατέκοψεν, τοὺς δὲ λοιποὺς
συμφυγόντας εἰς τὰς πλησίον πόλεις ἐκπολιορκήσας
4ἐξηνδραποδίσατο. τῶν δὲ ἄλλων ἐγχωρίων συναθροισθέντων
δισμυρίους μὲν καταφυγόντας εἰς
πόλιν μεγάλην κατὰ κράτος εἷλε, τῶν δ᾿ Ἰνδῶν
διαφραξάντων τοὺς στενωποὺς καὶ ἀπὸ τῶν οἰκιῶν
μαχομένων εὐρώστως βιαζόμενος ἀπέβαλε τῶν Μακεδόνων
5οὐκ ὀλίγους. διὰ δὲ τὴν ὀργὴν ἐμπρήσας



1Ἴβους codd., but cp. Curtius, 9. 4. 1.396Book XVII

river, under the command of Craterus and Hephaestion.1 326/5 b.c.
When they came to the junction of the Acesines and the Hydaspes,2 he disembarked his soldiers and led them against the people called Sibians. They say that these are the descendants of the soldiers who came with Heracles to the rock of Aornus and were unsuccessful in its siege,3 and then were settled in this spot by him. Alexander encamped beside a very fine city, and the leading notables of the citizens came out to see him. They were brought before the king, renewed their ties of kinship, and undertook to help him enthusiastically in every way, as being his relatives. They also brought him magnificent gifts. Alexander accepted their goodwill, declared their cities to be free, and marched on against the next tribes.
He found that the Agalasseis, as they were called, were drawn up in battle formation.4 Their strength was forty thousand infantry and three thousand cavalry. He engaged them and, conquering, cut down most of them. Those who escaped into the neighbouring cities he besieged, captured, and sold as slaves. Other groups of natives had collected also. He took by storm a large city in which twenty thousand persons had taken refuge. The Indians barricaded the streets and fought stoutly from the houses, and he lost not a few Macedonians in pressing his victory home. This made him angry. He set fire to the city



1Craterus was on the right bank, Hephaestion on the left
(Arrian, 6. 2. 2).2Cp. p. 394, note 2, for the river names.3Cp. chap. 85 above. For the story, which is lacking in Arrian, cp. Curtius, 9. 4. 1-3; Justin, 12. 9. 2.4Curtius, 9. 4. 5 (who calls them simply “another nation” but mentions their 40,000 troops); Justin, 12. 9. 2
(“Agensones”).397