Diodorus of Sicily

τὸν Ἀγαθοκλέα τῷ προτερήματι τεθαρρηκότες
καὶ νομίζοντες ἑνὶ κινδύνῳ καταλύσειν πάντα τὸν
πόλεμον ἐνέκειντο τοῖς βαρβάροις.
109. Ὁ δ᾿ Ἀμίλκας ὁρῶν κατισχυομένους τοὺς
ἑαυτοῦ καὶ τῶν Ἑλλήνων ἀεὶ πλείους παρεισπίπτοντας
εἰς τὴν παρεμβολὴν ἐπέστησε τοὺς σφενδονήτας
τοὺς ἐκ τῶν Βαλιαρίδων νήσων, ὄντας οὐκ
2ἐλάττους τῶν χιλίων. οὗτοι δὲ συνεχεῖς καὶ μεγάλους
λίθους ἀφιέντες πολλοὺς μὲν ἐτραυμάτιζον οὐκ
ὀλίγους δὲ καὶ τῶν βιαζομένων ἀπέκτεινον, τῶν δὲ
πλείστων τὰ σκεπάζοντα τῶν ὅπλων συνέτριβον· οἱ
γὰρ ἄνδρες οὗτοι μναιαίους λίθους βάλλειν εἰωθότες
μεγάλα συμβάλλονται πρὸς νίκην ἐν τοῖς κινδύνοις,
ὡς ἂν ἐκ παίδων παρ᾿ αὐτοῖς τῆς ἐν ταῖς
3σφενδόναις γυμνασίας διαπονουμένης. τούτῳ δὲ τῷ
τρόπῳ τοὺς Ἕλληνας ἐκ τῆς παρεμβολῆς ἐκβαλόντες
ἐκράτησαν. πάλιν δὲ οἱ περὶ τὸν Ἀγαθοκλέα
κατ᾿ ἄλλους τόπους προσβολὰς ἐποιοῦντο
καὶ δὴ τῆς παρεμβολῆς ἤδη κατὰ κράτος ἁλισκομένης
κατέπλευσε τοῖς Καρχηδονίοις δύναμις ἐκ
4Λιβύης ἀνέλπιστος. διὸ καὶ ταῖς ψυχαῖς πάλιν
θαρρήσαντες οἱ μὲν ἐκ τῆς παρεμβολῆς κατὰ στόμα
ἐκινδύνευον, οἱ δὲ παρόντες ἐπὶ τὴν βοήθειαν κύκλῳ
περιίσταντο τοὺς Ἕλληνας. ὧν τιτρωσκομένων
παραδόξως ἡ μὲν μάχη ταχὺ παλίντροπος ἐγένετο,
ἔφευγον δ᾿ οἱ μὲν εἰς τὸν Ἱμέραν ποταμόν, οἱ δ᾿ εἰς
τὴν παρεμβολήν. τεσσαράκοντα σταδίους δ᾿1 ἐχούσης
τῆς ἀποχωρήσεως καὶ ταῦτα σχεδὸν πάσης
πεδινῆς οὔσης ἐπεδίωκον οἱ τῶν βαρβάρων ἱππεῖς,
οὐκ ἔλασσον ὄντες πεντακισχιλίων. διὸ καὶ συνέβη
1δ᾿ added by Dindorf.128Book XIX

and the forces of Agathocles, encouraged by the 311 b.c. advantage gained and believing that they would end the whole war by a single battle, pressed hard upon the barbarians.
109. But when Hamilcar saw that his men were being overpowered and that the Greeks in constantly increasing numbers were making their way into the camp, he brought up his slingers, who came from the Baliaric Islands and numbered at least a thousand. By hurling a shower of great stones, they wounded many and even killed not a few of those who were attacking, and they shattered the defensive armour of most of them. For these men, who are accustomed to sling stones weighing a mina,1 contribute a great deal toward victory in battle, since from childhood they practise constantly with the sling. In this way they drove the Greeks from the camp and defeated them. But Agathocles continued to attack at other points, and indeed the camp was already being taken by storm when unexpected reinforcements from Libya arrived by water for the Carthaginians. Thus again gaining heart, those from the camp fought against the Greeks in front, and the reinforcements surrounded them on all sides. Since the Greeks were now receiving wounds from an unexpected quarter, the battle quickly reversed itself; and some of them fled into the Himeras River, others into the camp. The withdrawal was for a distance of forty stades2; and since it was almost entirely over level country, they were hotly pursued by the barbarian cavalry, numbering not less than five thousand.




1Not quite a pound.2About 4½ miles.129