Diodorus of Sicily

ἐξαποστείλας ἐπόρθησε τὴν χώραν ἀδεῶς καὶ πολλῶν
λαφύρων ἐγκρατὴς ἐγένετο.
33. Οἱ δὲ συνόντες τῷ Ἀγησιλάῳ Σπαρτιᾶται
σύμβουλοι καὶ οἱ τὰς ἡγεμονίας ἔχοντες ἐθαύμαζον
πῶς δραστικὸς εἶναι δοκῶν Ἀγησίλαος καὶ μείζονα
καὶ δυναμικωτέραν ἔχων τὴν δύναμιν οὐ διηγωνίσατο
πρὸς τοὺς πολεμίους. πρὸς οὕς ὁ Ἀγησίλαος
ἀπεκρίθη, νῦν μὲν ἀκινδύνως τοὺς Λακεδαιμονίους
νενικηκέναι1· πορθουμένῃ γὰρ τῇ χώρᾳ μὴ τετολμηκέναι
τοὺς Βοιωτοὺς βοηθῆσαι· εἰ δ᾿ αὐτῶν τῶν
πολεμίων παρακεχωρηκότων τῆς νίκης ἐβιάσατο
τοὺς πολεμίους ὑπομένειν τὸ δεινόν, ἴσως ἂν διὰ
τὸ παράλογον τῆς τύχης δύναιντο καὶ πταῖσαι2
2κατὰ τὸν κίνδυνον οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι. τότε μὲν
οὖν διὰ τῆς ἀποκρίσεως3 ταύτης ἔδοξε μετρίως
κατεστοχάσθαι τὸ δυνάμενον ἀποβῆναι, ὕστερον δὲ
διὰ τῶν ἀποτελεσμάτων ἔδοξεν οὐκ ἀνθρωπίνην
ἀπόφασιν, ἀλλὰ θεῖόν4 τινα χρησμὸν εἰρηκέναι. οἱ
γὰρ Λακεδαιμόνιοι μετὰ πολλῆς δυνάμεως στρατεύσαντες
ἐπὶ Θηβαίους καὶ συναναγκάσαντες αὐτοὺς
ὑπὲρ τῆς ἐλευθερίας ἀγωνίσασθαι, μεγάλῃ
3συμφορᾷ περιέπεσον. τὸ μὲν γὰρ πρῶτον ἐν
Λεύκτροις ἡττηθέντες πολλοὺς ἀπώλεσαν τῶν πολιτῶν,
ἐν οἷς καὶ ὁ βασιλεὺς αὐτῶν Κλεόμβροτος
ἔπεσε· μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα περὶ Μαντίνειαν πολεμήσαντες
τοῖς ὅλοις ἐσφάλησαν καὶ τὴν ἡγεμονίαν
ἀνελπίστως ἀπέβαλον. ἀγαθὴ γὰρ ἡ τύχη τοὺς
μέγα φρονοῦντας παραδόξως σφῆλαι καὶ διδάξαι
μηδὲν ἄγαν κατελπίζειν. ὁ γοῦν Ἀγησίλαος ἐχεφρόνως



1ἄν after νενικηκέναι deleted by Dindorf.2πταῖσαι Dindorf: φθᾶσαι.3διὰ τῆς ἀποκρίσεως Wurm: ὑπὸ τῆς διακρίσεως.4θεῖόν Vogel: θεῶν.38Book XV

to plunder the countryside unhampered, and so took 377/6 b.c. a great quantity of spoil.
33. The Spartan advisers, who accompanied Agesilaüs,
and his officers expressed to him their surprise that Agesilaüs, who reputedly was a man of energy and had the larger and more powerful force, should have avoided a decisive contest with the enemy. To them Agesilaüs made answer that, as it was, the Lacedaemonians had won the victory without the risk; for when the countryside was being sacked, the Boeotians had not dared to rally to its defence; but if, when the enemy themselves had conceded the victory, he had forced them to endure the risks of battle, perhaps through the uncertainty of fortune the Lacedaemonians might even have come to grief in the contest. Now at the time he was thought in this reply of his to have estimated the possible outcome fairly well, but later in the light of events he was believed to have uttered no mere human saying but a divinely inspired oracle. For the Lacedaemonians, having taken the field against the Thebans with a mighty army and having compelled them to fight for their freedom, met with a great disaster. They were defeated, namely, at Leuctra first, where they lost many of their citizen soldiers and their king Cleombrotus fell; and later, when they fought at Mantineia, they were utterly routed and hopelessly lost their supremacy.1 For fortune has a knack, when men vaunt themselves too highly, of laying them unexpectedly low and so teaching them to hope for nothing in excess. At any rate



1362.b.c., though the battle of Leuctra, 371, established the supremacy of Thebes.39