Diodorus of Sicily

ἡ χώρα πολλοὺς καὶ παρηλλαγμένους τοῖς μεγέθεσιν
ὄφεις, ὄντας ἑκκαιδεκαπήχεις, πιθήκων τε γένη
πολλὰ καὶ τοῖς μεγέθεσι διαλλάττοντα,1 ὧν τὴν
2τέχνην τῆς θήρας αὐτὸ τὸ ζῷον ὑφηγεῖτο. μιμητικὸν
γὰρ ὑπάρχον πάσης πράξεως βίᾳ μὲν οὐ
ῥᾳδίως χειροῦται διά τε τὴν ἰσχὺν τῶν σωμάτων
καὶ διὰ τὴν τῆς ψυχῆς ἀγχίνοιαν· τῶν δὲ κυνηγῶν
οἱ μὲν μέλιτι τοὺς ὀφθαλμοὺς ἀλείφονται, οἱ δὲ
βλεπόντων τῶν θηρίων ὑποδοῦνται, τινὲς δὲ ταῖς
κεφαλαῖς κάτοπτρα περιτιθέασιν, καὶ τοῖς μὲν
ὑποδήμασι παραθέντες δεσμοὺς ἀπολείπουσιν, ἀντὶ
δὲ τοῦ μέλιτος ἰξὸν ὑποβάλλουσι, τοῖς δὲ κατόπτροις
3ἐπίσπαστρα καθάπτουσι. διόπερ ὅταν
βούλωνται τὰ ζῷα τὰς πράξεις τῶν ὁραθέντων
ἐπιτελεῖν, ἀδυνατεῖ, τῶν μὲν βλεφάρων κεκολλημένων,
τῶν δὲ ποδῶν δεδεμένων, τῶν δὲ σωμάτων
κατεχομένων· ὅθεν εὐχείρωτα πρὸς τὴν θήραν γίνεται.2.
4Ὁ δὲ Ἀλέξανδρος τὸν ὑστερηκότα τῆς τοῦ
Πώρου συμμαχίας βασιλέα ὄνομα Σασιβισάρην
καταπληξάμενος ἠνάγκασε ποιεῖν τὸ προσταττόμενον,
αὐτὸς δὲ μετὰ τῆς δυνάμεως περάσας τὸν
5ποταμὸν προῆγε διὰ χώρας ἀρετῇ διαφερούσης· δένδρων
γὰρ εἶχε γένη διαλλάττοντα καὶ τὸ μὲν ὕψος




1διαλλαττόντων RX.2This last sentence is omitted by RX.380Book XVII

region contained a large number of snakes remarkable 326/5 b.c. for their size; they reached a length of sixteen cubits.1 There were also many varieties of monkey, differing in size, which had themselves taught the Indians the method of their capture. They imitate every action that they see, but cannot well be taken by force because of their strength and cleverness. The hunters, however, in the sight of the beasts, smear their eyes with honey, or fasten sandals about their ankles, or hang mirrors about their necks.2 Then they go away, having attached fastenings to the shoes, having substituted birdlime for honey, and having fastened slip nooses to the mirrors. So when the animals try to imitate what they had seen, they are rendered helpless, their eyes stuck together, their feet bound fast, and their bodies held immovable. That is the way in which they become easy to catch.3
Sasibisares,4 the king who had not moved in time to help Porus in the battle, was frightened, and Alexander forced him to accept his orders. Then Alexander resumed his march to the east, crossed the river, and continued on through a region of remarkable fertility. It possessed strange kinds of trees




1Twenty-four feet, apparently no impossible length for a
python. Their mention is credited to Nearchus (Jacoby,
Fragmente der griechischen Historiker, no. 133, F 10a) and
to Cleitarchus (op. cit. no. 137, F 18). The former reference comes from Arrian (Indica, 15. 10), the latter from Aelian (De Natura Animalium, 17. 2). Many of these and later anecdotes about India appear in Strabo, 15. 1. 20–45. 694–706, from the same sources.2The handles of ancient mirrors are often pierced for cords to carry them by. Such loops could be slipped over one’s head.3This story is from Cleitarchus (Jacoby, op. cit. 137, F 19) and is repeated at greater length in Aelian, De Natura Animalium, 17. 25.4He has previously been called Embisarus (chap. 87. 2) For his surrender cp. Curtius, 9.1. 7–8 (his submission is only implied): Arrian, 5. 20. 5.381