Diodorus of Sicily

πεφευγέναι μακρότερον. ἐπιγενομένης δὲ νυκτὸς
καὶ τῶν περὶ Νικάνορα καταπεφρονηκότως1 καὶ
ῥᾳθύμως ἐχόντων τὰ περὶ τὰς φυλακὰς ἐπιπεσὼν ὁ
Σέλευκος ἄφνω πολλὴν ταραχὴν καὶ κατάπληξιν
4κατεσκεύασε· συναψάντων γὰρ μάχην τῶν Περσῶν
συνέβη τόν τε σατράπην αὐτῶν Εὔαγρον πεσεῖν καί
τινας τῶν ἄλλων ἡγεμόνων. οὗ συμβάντος οἱ
πλείους τῶν στρατιωτῶν τὰ μὲν τὸν κίνδυνον καταπεπληγμένοι,
τὰ δὲ προσκόπτοντες τοῖς ὑπ᾿ Ἀντιγόνου
πραττομένοις μετεβάλοντο πρὸς Σέλευκον.
5ὁ δὲ Νικάνωρ μετ᾿ ὀλίγων ἀπολειφθεὶς καὶ δεδιὼς
μὴ παραδοθῇ τοῖς πολεμίοις, ἔφυγε μετὰ τῶν φίλων
διὰ τῆς ἐρήμου. Σέλευκος δὲ δυνάμεως ἁδρᾶς
κυριεύσας καὶ φιλανθρώπως πᾶσι προσφερόμενος
ῥᾳδίως προσηγάγετο τήν τε Σουσιανὴν καὶ Μηδίαν
καί τινας τῶν σύνεγγυς τόπων· περὶ τε τῶν διῳκημένων
ἔγραψε πρὸς Πτολεμαῖον καὶ τοὺς ἄλλους
φίλους, ἔχων ἤδη βασιλικὸν ἀνάστημα καὶ δόξαν
ἀξίαν ἡγεμονίας.
93. Ἅμα δὲ τούτοις πραττομένοις Πτολεμαῖος
μὲν διέτριβε περὶ Κοίλην Συρίαν, νενικηκὼς Δημήτριον
τὸν Ἀντιγόνου παρατάξει μεγάλῃ. ὃν
πυνθανόμενος ἐκ Κιλικίας ἀνεστραφέναι καὶ στρατοπεδεύειν
περὶ τὴν ἄνω Συρίαν, προεχειρίσατο
2τῶν περὶ αὑτὸν φίλων Κίλλην τὸν Μακεδόνα· τούτῳ
δὲ δοὺς δύναμιν ἱκανὴν προσέταξεν ἐκδιῶξαι τὸν
Δημήτριον τὸ παράπαν ἐκ τῆς Συρίας ἢ περικαταλαβόντα
συντρῖψαι. τούτου δ᾿ ὄντος κατὰ πορείαν
Δημήτριος διὰ τῶν σκοπῶν ἀκούσας τὸν Κίλλην
1καταπεφρονηκότως Stephanus: καταπεφρονηκότων.82Book XIX

believing that they had fled to a greater distance 312 b.c. than was the case. When night was come and the army of Nicanor was keeping a perfunctory and negligent guard, Seleucus fell on them suddenly, causing great confusion and panic; for it happened that when the Persians had joined battle, their satrap Evager1 fell together with some of the other leaders. When this occurred, most of the soldiers went over to Seleucus, in part because they were frightened at the danger but in part because they were offended by the conduct of Antigonus. Nicanor, who was left with only a few men and feared lest he be delivered over to the enemy, took flight with his friends through the desert. But Seleucus, now that he had gained control of a large army and was comporting himself in a way gracious to all, easily won over Susianê, Media, and some of the adjacent lands; and he wrote to Ptolemy and his other friends about his achievements, already possessing a king’s stature and a reputation worthy of royal power.
93. Meanwhile Ptolemy remained in Coelê Syria after having conquered Antigonus’ son Demetrius in a great battle.2 On hearing that Demetrius had returned from Cilicia and was encamped in Upper Syria, he chose from the friends who were with him Cilles the Macedonian; and, giving him an adequate army, he ordered him to drive Demetrius completely out of Syria or to entrap and crush him.3 While Cilles was on the way, Demetrius, hearing from spies that he





1Possibly to be identified with the Evagoras who is mentioned in chap. 48. 2 as satrap of Aria.2For the victory of Ptolemy at Gaza cp. chaps. 83 ff.3Cp. Plutarch, Demetrius, 6. 1–2.83