Diodorus of Sicily

παρέλαβε δὲ καὶ τὰς προϋπαρχούσας δυνάμεις καὶ
πάντων τῶν εἰς πόλεμον εὐθέτων ἐπιμέλειαν ποιησάμενος
ἐν ὑπαίθρῳ συνεῖχε τὰ στρατόπεδα, πεζοὺς
μὲν ἔχων περὶ τοὺς τετρακισμυρίους ἱππεῖς δὲ
σχεδὸν πεντακισχιλίους. ταχὺ δὲ τὴν γεγενημένην
ἀτυχίαν διορθωσάμενος καὶ δόξας ἀγαθὸς στρατηγὸς1
εἶναι τῶν μὲν συμμάχων τὰς ψυχὰς προκαταπεπληγμένας
ἀνεκτήσατο, τοῖς δὲ πολεμίοις οὐ τὴν
τυχοῦσαν ἀγωνίαν ἐπέστησεν.
107. Ἀγαθοκλῆς δὲ τὰς τῶν Καρχηδονίων δυνάμεις
ὁρῶν ὑπερεχούσας τῶν ἑαυτοῦ διέλαβε τῶν
τε φρουρίων οὐκ ὀλίγα μεταθήσεσθαι πρὸς τοὺς
Φοίνικας καὶ τῶν πόλεων ὅσαι προσέκοπτον αὐτῷ.
2μάλιστα δ᾿ εὐλαβεῖτο περὶ τῆς τῶν Γελῴων, πυνθανόμενος
ἐν τῇ τούτων χώρᾳ πάσας εἶναι τὰς τῶν
πολεμίων δυνάμεις. ἐγένετο δ᾿ αὐτῷ περὶ τοῦτον
τὸν χρόνον καὶ περὶ τὸν στόλον οὐ μικρὸν ἐλάσσωμα·
τῶν γὰρ νεῶν εἴκοσιν ἐπὶ τὸν πορθμὸν
ὑποχείριοι τοῖς Καρχηδονίοις κατέστησαν σὺν αὐτοῖς
3ἀνδράσιν. οὐ μὴν ἀλλὰ κρίνας τὴν τῶν
Γελῴων πόλιν ἀσφαλίσασθαι φρουρᾷ, φανερῶς οὐκ
ἐτόλμα δύναμιν εἰσαγαγεῖν, ἵνα μὴ φθάσαι συμβῇ
τοὺς Γελῴους προφάσεως δεομένους καὶ τὴν πόλιν
ἀποβάλῃ μεγάλας ἀφορμὰς αὐτῷ παρεχομένην
4ἀπέστειλεν οὖν κατ᾿ ὀλίγους τῶν στρατιωτῶν ὡς
ἐπί τινας χρείας, ἕως ὅτου συνέβη τῷ πλήθει πολὺ
προτερῆσαι τῶν πολιτικῶν. μετ᾿ ὀλίγον δὲ κα
αὐτὸς παραγενόμενος προδοσίαν ἐνεκάλεσε κα
μετάθεσιν τοῖς Γελῴοις, εἴτε καὶ κατ᾿ ἀλήθειαι
αὐτῶν διανοηθέντων τι πρᾶξαι τοιοῦτον, εἴτε κα
1στρατηγὸς added by Reiske.122Book XIX

who were fit for service. He also took over the forces 311 b.c. that were already in Sicily and, having attended to all things expedient for war, mustered his armies in the open country, about forty thousand foot-soldiers and nearly five thousand mounted men. Since he had quickly rectified the misfortune that he had suffered and won the reputation of being a good general, he revived the shattered spirits of his allies and presented no ordinary problem to his enemies.
107. As Agathocles saw that the forces of the Carthaginians were superior to his own, he surmised that not a few of the strongholds would go over to the Phoenicians, and also those of the cities that were offended with him. He was particularly concerned for the city of the Geloans since he learned that all the forces of the enemy were in their land. At about this time he also suffered a considerable naval loss, for at the straits twenty of his ships with their crews fell into the hands of the Carthaginians. Deciding nevertheless to make the city of Gela secure with a garrison, he did not venture to lead an army in openly lest the result be that the Geloans, who were looking for an excuse, forestall him and he lose the city, which provided him with great resources.1 He therefore sent in his soldiers a few at a time as if for particular needs until his troops far surpassed those of the city in number. Soon he himself also arrived and charged the Geloans with treason and desertion, either because they were actually planning to do something of this sort, or because he was



1Cp. chap. 71. 6 for the treaty between Agathocles and Gela.123