Diodorus of Sicily

Ἐπαμεινώνδας πρὸς τοὺς λέγοντας προσέχειν δεῖν1
τοῖς οἰωνοῖς εἶπεν
εἷς οἰωνὸς ἄριστος ἀμύνεσθαι περὶ πάτρης.
5ταύτῃ δὲ τῇ παρρησίᾳ καταπληξαμένου τοῦ Ἐπαμεινώνδου
τοὺς εὐλαβῶς ἔχοντας, ἕτερος οἰωνὸς
ἐφάνη δυσχερέστερος τοῦ προτέρου. ὁ γὰρ γραμματεὺς
προῆγεν ἔχων δόρυ καὶ ταινίαν ἐπ᾿ αὐτῷ,
καὶ προεσήμαινε τὸ παραγγελλόμενον ὑπὸ τῶν ἡγεμόνων·
πνεύματος δὲ γενομένου συνέβη τὴν ταινίαν
ἀποσπασθεῖσαν περιαμπίσχεσθαι περί2 τινα
στήλην ἐφεστῶσαν τάφῳ· ἦσαν δὲ ἐν τῷ τόπῳ
τούτῳ τεθαμμένοι τινὲς Λακεδαιμόνιοι καὶ Πελοποννήσιοι,
οἳ μετ᾿ Ἀγησιλάου στρατεύσαντες
6ἐτελεύτησαν. τῶν δὲ πρεσβυτέρων τινὲς πάλιν
ἐντυχόντες διεμαρτύραντο μὴ προάγειν τὴν δύναμιν,
φανερῶς τῶν θεῶν κωλυόντων, ὁ δ᾿ οὐδὲν
αὐτοῖς ἀποκριθεὶς προῆγε τὸ στρατόπεδον, ἡγούμενος
τὸν ὑπὲρ τῶν καλῶν λογισμὸν καὶ τὴν ὑπὲρ
τῶν δικαίων μνήμην αἱρετωτέραν εἶναι τῶν παρόντων
7σημείων. ὁ μὲν οὖν Ἐπαμεινώνδας πεφιλοσοφηκὼς
καὶ τοῖς ἐν παιδείᾳ λογισμοῖς ἐμφρόνως
χρησάμενος παραυτίκα μὲν ὑπὸ πολλῶν μέμψεως
ἔτυχεν, ὕστερον δὲ διὰ τῶν κατορθωμάτων δόξας
στρατηγικῇ συνέσει διαφέρειν μεγίστων ἀγαθῶν
αἴτιος ἐγένετο τῇ πατρίδι. εὐθὺς γὰρ προαγαγὼν
τὴν δύναμιν, καὶ προκαταλαβόμενος τὰ περὶ τὴν
Κορώνειαν στενά, κατεστρατοπέδευσεν.
1δεῖν Wesseling: δεῖ.2ἀποσπασθεῖσαν Wurm, περιαμπίσχεσθαι περί Capps: ἀποσπασθῆναι περί.98Book XV

Epameinondas replied to those who told him that he 371/0 b.c. must observe the omens:
“One only omen is best, to fight for the land that
is ours.”1
Though Epameinondas astounded the cautious by his forthright answer, a second omen appeared more unfavourable than the previous one. For as the clerk advanced with a spear and a ribbon attached to it and signalled the orders from headquarters, a breeze came up and, as it happened, the ribbon was torn from the spear and wrapped itself around a slab that stood over a grave, and there were buried in this spot some Lacedaemonians and Peloponnesians who had died in the expedition under Agesilaüs. Some of the older folk who again chanced to be there protested earnestly against leading the force out in the face of the patent opposition of the gods; but Epameinondas, deigning them no reply, led forth his army, thinking that considerations of nobility and regard for justice should be preferred as motives to the omens in question. Epameinondas accordingly, who was trained in philosophy and applied sensibly the principles of his training, was at the moment widely criticized, but later in the light of his successes was considered to have excelled in military shrewdness and did contribute the greatest benefits to his country. For he immediately led forth his army, seized in advance the pass at Coroneia, and encamped there.
1Homer, Iliad. 12. 243.99