Diodorus of Sicily

ἀπροσδοκήτως προσέπεσε ταῖς Συρακούσσαις,
καταταχήσας τοὺς ἀπὸ τῆς τροπῆς φεύγοντας.
Ταῦτα μὲν οὖν ἐπράχθη κατὰ τοῦτον τὸν ἐνιαυτόν.
69. Ἐπ᾿ ἄρχοντος δ᾿ Ἀθήνησι Λυκίσκου Ῥωμαῖοι
κατέστησαν ὑπάτους Μάρκον Οὐαλέριον καὶ
Μάρκον Πόπλιον,1 ὀλυμπιὰς δ᾿ ἤχθη ἑκατοστὴ καὶ
ἐνάτη, καθ᾿ ἣν ἐνίκα στάδιον Ἀριστόλοχος Ἀθηναῖος.
ἐπὶ δὲ τούτων Ῥωμαίοις μὲν πρὸς Καρχηδονίους
2πρῶτον συνθῆκαι ἐγένοντο. κατὰ δὲ τὴν
Καρίαν Ἰδριεὺς ὁ δυνάστης τῶν Καρῶν ἐτελεύτησεν
ἄρξας ἔτη ἑπτά, τὴν δὲ ἀρχὴν διαδεξαμένη Ἄδα ἡ
ἀδελφὴ καὶ γυνὴ ἐδυνάστευσεν ἔτη τέσσαρα.
3Κατὰ δὲ τὴν Σικελίαν Τιμολέων μὲν Ἀδρανίτας
καὶ Τυνδαρίτας εἰς συμμαχίαν προσλαβόμενος
στρατιώτας οὐκ ὀλίγους παρ᾿ αὐτῶν παρέλαβεν, ἐν
δὲ ταῖς Συρακούσσαις πολλὴ ταραχὴ κατεῖχε τὴν
πόλιν Διονυσίου μὲν τὴν Νῆσον ἔχοντος, Ἱκέτα δὲ
τῆς Ἀχραδινῆς καὶ Νέας πόλεως κυριεύοντος,
Τιμολέοντος δὲ τὰ λοιπὰ τῆς πόλεως παρειληφότος,
καὶ Καρχηδονίων τριήρεσι μὲν ἑκατὸν καὶ πεντήκοντα
καταπεπλευκότων εἰς τὸν μέγαν λιμένα,
πεζοῖς δὲ στρατιώταις πεντακισμυρίοις κατεστρατοπεδευκότων.
διόπερ τῶν περὶ τὸν Τιμολέοντα
καταπεπληγμένων τὸ πλῆθος τῶν πολεμίων ἄλογός
4τις καὶ παράδοξος ἐγένετο μεταβολή· πρῶτον μὲν




1Πομπίλλιον P; Πομπίλιον X.32Book XVI

warning, having made better time than those who 345/4 b.c. were routed and fleeing.1
Such were the events that took place in this year.
69. When Lyciscus was archon at Athens, the 344/3 b.c. Romans elected as consuls Marcus Valerius and Marcus Publius, and the one hundred and ninth Olympiad was celebrated, in which Aristolochus the Athenian won the foot-race.2 In this year the first treaty was concluded between the Romans and the Carthaginians.3 In Caria, Idrieus, the ruler of the Carians, died after ruling seven years, and Ada, his sister and wife, succeeding him, ruled for four years.4
In Sicily, Timoleon took the Adranitae and the Tyndaritae into his alliance and received not a few reinforcements from them. Great confusion reigned in Syracuse, where Dionysius held the Island, Hicetas Achradina and Neapolis, and Timoleon the rest of the city, while the Carthaginians had put in to the Great Harbour with a hundred and fifty triremes and encamped with fifty thousand men on the shore.5 Timoleon and his men viewed the odds against them with dismay, but the prospect took a sudden and surprising change for the better. First Marcus,6 the




1According to Plutarch, Timoleon, 13. 2–3, Timoleon got
his first foothold in Syracuse only when Dionysius voluntarily
surrendered his holdings to him.2Lyciscus was archon at Athens from July 344 to June
343 b.c. The Olympic Games were celebrated in midsummer
of 344 b.c. M. Valerius Corvus and M. Popilius
Laenas were consuls in 348 b.c. (Broughton, 1. 129).3This treaty is mentioned also by Livy, 7. 27. 2, and Polybius, 3. 24. Diodorus does not know of the earlier treaty given by Polybius, 3. 22 (cp. H. M. Last, Cambridge Ancient History, 7 (1928), 859 f.; A. Aymard, Revue des Études Anciennes, 59 (1957), 277–293).4Continued from chap. 45. 7.5Plutarch, Timoleon, 17. 2, gives the same number of ships, but 60,000 men. Tyndaris was a city on the north coast of Sicily thirty miles from Tauromenium.6Plutarch, Timoleon, 13. 1, and elsewhere, calls him “Mamercus,” and Diodorus’s name may be due to a scribal error. On the other hand, as an Italian, Mamercus may well have borne the praenomen Marcus.33