Diodorus of Sicily
73. Κατὰ δὲ τὴν Σικελίαν Διονύσιος ὁ τύραννος
ἔχων δυνάμεις ἀξιολόγους, καὶ τοὺς Καρχηδονίους
ὁρῶν οὐκ εὖ διακειμένους πρὸς τὸν πόλεμον διά τε
τὴν γεγενημένην παρ᾿ αὐτοῖς λοιμικὴν νόσον καὶ
τὴν ἀπόστασιν τῶν Λιβύων, ἔγνω στρατεύειν ἐπ᾿
αὐτούς. οὐκ ἔχων δὲ πρόφασιν ἀξιόλογον τῆς
διαφορᾶς, προσεποιήθη τοὺς κατὰ τὴν ἐπικράτειαν
2Φοίνικας ἐπιβεβηκέναι τῆς ὑπ᾿ αὐτὸν χώρας. παρασκευασάμενος
οὖν πεζοὺς μὲν τρισμυρίους, ἱππεῖς
δὲ τρισχιλίους, τριήρεις δὲ τριακοσίας καὶ τὴν
ἁρμόζουσαν τῇ δυνάμει ταύτῃ παρασκευήν, ἐνέβαλεν
εἰς τὴν ὑπὸ Καρχηδονίους χώραν. καὶ
Σελινοῦντα μὲν καὶ Ἔντελλαν εὐθὺς προσηγάγετο,
καὶ τὴν χώραν πᾶσαν πορθήσας καὶ τῆς πόλεως
τῶν Ἐρυκίνων ἐγκρατὴς γενόμενος ἐπολιόρκησε
Λιλύβαιον· πολλῶν δ᾿ ὄντων ἐν αὐτῷ στρατιωτῶν
3τὴν πολιορκίαν ἔλυσεν. ἀκούσας δὲ τὰ νεώρια τῶν
Καρχηδονίων ἐμπεπρῆσθαι, καὶ δόξας πάντα τὸν
στόλον αὐτῶν διεφθάρθαι κατεφρόνησε, καὶ τῶν
ἰδίων τριήρων ἑκατὸν μὲν καὶ τριάκοντα τὰς ἀρίστας
ἀπέστειλεν εἰς τὸν τῶν Ἐρυκίνων λιμένα,
τὰς δ᾿ ἄλλας ἁπάσας ἐξέπεμψεν εἰς τὰς Συρακούσας.
4οἱ δὲ Καρχηδόνιοι παραδόξως διακοσίας ναῦς
πληρώσαντες ἐπέπλευσαν ταῖς ὁρμούσαις ἐν τῷ
λιμένι τῶν Ἐρυκίνων· ἀνελπίστου δὲ τῆς ἐπιθέσεως
γενομένης ἀπήγαγον τῶν τριήρων τὰς πλείστας.
μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα τοῦ χειμῶνος ἐνστάντος ἀνοχὰς
ποιησάμενοι διεχωρίσθησαν εἰς τὰς οἰκείας ἑκάτεροι1
5πόλεις. μετ᾿ ὀλίγον δὲ χρόνον Διονύσιος

1So Reiske: ἑκάτεραι.154Book XV
73. In Sicily, Dionysius the tyrant having large 306/7 b.c. armies, and perceiving that the Carthaginians were in no condition for war because of the plague which had raged in their midst1 and the defection of the Libyans, decided to take the field against them. Not having a reasonable excuse for strife, he alleged that the Phoenicians in the empire of Carthage had violated the territory subject to him. He therefore got ready an armament of thirty thousand foot, three thousand horse, three hundred triremes and the supply train appropriate for that force, and invaded Carthaginian territory in Sicily. He immediately won Selinus and Entella, laid waste the whole countryside, and, having captured the city of Eryx, besieged Lilybaeum,2 but there were so many soldiers in the place that he abandoned the siege. Hearing that the Carthaginians’ dockyards had been burned and thinking their whole fleet had been destroyed, he conceived a contempt for them and dispatched only one hundred thirty of his best triremes to the harbour of Eryx, sending all the rest back to Syracuse. But the Carthaginians, having unexpectedly manned two hundred ships, sailed against the fleet at anchor in the harbour of Eryx, and, as the attack was unforeseen, they made off with most of the triremes. Later when winter had set in, the two states agreed to an armistice and separated, each going to its own cities. A little later


1For previous Sicilian passages see chaps. 6–7, 13, 14, 15–17, 24 (plague and revolt). For a discussion of this Third Carthaginian War see Beloch, Griechische Geschichte2, 2. 2. 375 and Bury, Cambridge Ancient History, 6. 131.2Selinus is on the south coast of Sicily near the west end, Entella is inland from it, while Eryx is in the extreme northwest corner, the modern harbour of which is Trapani, and Lilybaeum is to the south on the coast.155