Diodorus of Sicily

τὰς πόλεις ἀσφαλισάμενος μέρος τῆς δυνάμεως
ἐξέπεμψε καὶ στρατηγὸν ἐπ᾿ αὐτῆς. τούτῳ δὲ
προσέταξε συνάπτειν τοῖς περὶ τὸν Εὐμενῆ καὶ
λύειν τὴν πολιορκίαν τοῦ φρουρίου καὶ τὸν Εὐμενῆ
τῶν κινδύνων ἀπαλλάξαντα ποιήσασθαι σύμμαχον.
5Ἀντίγονος δὲ σπεύδων ἀμύνασθαι τὸν Ἀρριδαῖον
ἐξέπεμψεν ἐπ᾿ αὐτὸν δύναμιν τὴν διαπολεμήσουσαν,
αὐτὸς δὲ τὴν ἱκανὴν στρατιὰν ἀναλαβὼν προῆγεν
ἐπὶ Λυδίας, βουλόμενος ἐκβαλεῖν τὸν ἐν αὐτῇ
6σατράπην Κλεῖτον. ὁ δὲ προϊδόμενος τὴν ἔφοδον
αὐτοῦ τὰς μὲν ἀξιολογωτάτας πόλεις φρουραῖς
ἠσφαλίσατο, αὐτὸς δὲ εἰς Μακεδονίαν ἐξέπλευσε,
δηλώσων τοῖς τε βασιλεῦσι καὶ Πολυπέρχοντι τὴν
Ἀντιγόνου τόλμαν καὶ ἀπόστασιν καὶ ἀξιώσων
7ἑαυτῷ βοηθεῖν. ὁ δ᾿ Ἀντίγονος τὴν μὲν Ἔφεσον
ἐξ ἐφόδου παρέλαβε συνεργησάντων αὐτῷ τινων
ἐκ τῆς πόλεως· μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα καταπλεύσαντος εἰς
Ἔφεσον Αἰσχύλου τοῦ Ῥοδίου καὶ κομίζοντος ἐκ
Κιλικίας ἐν τέσσαρσι ναυσὶν ἀργυρίου τάλαντα
ἑξακόσια ἀπεσταλμένα εἰς Μακεδονίαν πρὸς τοὺς
βασιλεῖς παρείλετο, φάσκων ἑαυτῷ χρείαν ἔχειν
8πρὸς τὰς τῶν ξένων μισθοφορίας. τοῦτο δὲ πράξας
φανερὸς ἐγένετο πρὸς ἰδιοπραγίαν ὡρμημένος καὶ
τοῖς βασιλεῦσιν ἐναντιούμενος. μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα
Σύμην πολιορκήσας1 ἐπῄει τὰς ἑξῆς πόλεις, ἃς μὲν
βίᾳ χειρούμενος, ἃς δὲ πειθοῖ προσαγόμενος.
53. Ἡμεῖς δὲ διεληλυθότες τὰ περὶ Ἀντίγονον
μεταβιβάσομεν τὴν ἀναγραφὴν ἐπὶ τὰ συμβάντα
περὶ Εὐμενῆ. οὗτος γὰρ μεγάλαις καὶ παραδόξοις
μεταβολαῖς χρώμενος διετέλεσεν ἀεὶ παρ᾿ ἐλπίδας
2ἀγαθῶν τε καὶ κακῶν μεταλαμβάνων. πρὸ μὲν
γὰρ τούτων τῶν καιρῶν συναγωνιζόμενος Περδίκκᾳ
1Σύμην πολιορκήσας Capps, Κύμην ἐκπολιορκήσας Madvig: συμπολιορκήσας RX, Fischer, συμπολιορκήσασθαι F.156Book XVIII

secure, he sent away a part of his army and a general 319 b.c. in command of it. He ordered the latter to get in touch with Eumenes,1 relieve the fortress from siege, and when he had freed Eumenes from danger, make him an ally. Antigonus, who was anxious to retaliate upon Arrhidaeus, sent a force to carry on the war against him, but he himself with a sufficient army set out for Lydia, from which province he wished to expel the satrap, Cleitus. The latter, foreseeing the attack, secured the more important cities with garrisons, but he himself went by ship to
Macedonia to reveal to the kings and to Polyperchon the bold revolt of Antigonus and to beg for aid. Antigonus took Ephesus by assault with the aid of certain confederates within the city. After this, when Aeschylus of Rhodes sailed to Ephesus conveying from Cilicia in four ships six hundred talents of silver that were being sent to Macedonia for the kings, Antigonus laid hands on it, saying that he needed it to pay his mercenaries. By doing this he made it clear that he had begun to act for his own ends and was opposing the kings. Then after storming Symê, he advanced against the cities in order, taking some of them by force and winning others by persuasion.
53. Now that we have finished the activities of Antigonus, we shall turn our narrative to the
fortunes of Eumenes. This man experienced great and incredible reversals of fortune, continually having a share in good and evil beyond expectation. For example, in the period preceding these events, when



1Cp. chap. 41.157