Diodorus of Sicily

μουσουργῶν εἰς τὸν πότον παρειλημμένων
μετ᾿ ᾠδῆς καὶ αὐλῶν καὶ συρίγγων προῆγεν ὁ βασιλεὺς
ἐπὶ τὸν κῶμον, καθηγουμένης τῆς πράξεως
6Θαΐδος τῆς ἑταίρας. αὕτη δὲ μετὰ τὸν βασιλέα
πρώτη τὴν δᾷδα καιομένην ἠκόντισεν εἰς τὰ βασίλεια·
καὶ τῶν ἄλλων ταὐτὰ πραξάντων ταχὺ πᾶς
ὁ περὶ τὰ βασίλεια τόπος κατεφλέχθη διὰ τὸ μέγεθος
τῆς φλογὸς καὶ τὸ πάντων παραδοξότατον,
τὸ Ξέρξου τοῦ Περσῶν βασιλέως γενόμενον ἀσέβημα
περὶ τὴν ἀκρόπολιν τῶν Ἀθηναίων μία γυνὴ
πολῖτις τῶν ἀδικηθέντων ἐν παιδιᾷ πολλοῖς ὕστερον
ἔτεσι μετῆλθε τοῖς αὐτοῖς πάθεσιν.
73. Ἀλέξανδρος δὲ ἀπὸ τούτων γενόμενος τὰς
κατὰ τὴν Περσίδα πόλεις ἐπῆλθεν καὶ τὰς μὲν
βίᾳ χειρωσάμενος, τὰς δὲ διὰ τὴν ἰδίαν ἐπιείκειαν
2προσαγόμενος ἀνέζευξεν ἐπὶ τὸν Δαρεῖον. οὗτος δ᾿
ἐπεβάλετο μὲν ἀθροίζειν τὰς ἐκ τῆς Βακτριανῆς καὶ
τῶν ἄλλων1 σατραπειῶν δυνάμεις, καταταχούμενος
δὲ καὶ μετὰ τρισμυρίων Περσῶν τε καὶ μισθοφόρων
Ἑλλήνων τὴν φυγὴν εἰς Βάκτρα ποιούμενος ὑπὸ
Βήσσου τοῦ Βάκτρων σατράπου κατὰ τὴν ἀναχώρησιν
3συλληφθεὶς ἐδολοφονήθη. ἄρτι δ᾿ αὐτοῦ τετελευτηκότος
Ἀλέξανδρος μετὰ τῶν ἱππέων ἐπιδιώκων
καὶ τὸν Δαρεῖον τετελευτηκότα καταλαβὼν
4τῆς βασιλικῆς ταφῆς ἠξίωσεν. ὡς δ᾿ ἔνιοι γεγράφασιν,
ἔμπνουν ἔτι καταλαβὼν τοῖς μὲν ἀτυχήμασιν
αὐτοῦ συνήλγησε, παρακληθεὶς δὲ ὑπὸ τοῦ Δαρείου
μετελθεῖν τὸ φόνον καὶ καθομολογήσας ἐδίωξε τὸν
Βῆσσον. ἐκείνου δὲ πολὺ προειληφότος καὶ συμφυγόντος
1ἄλλων codd.; ἄνω Dindorf. Bactria itself was one of the Upper Satrapies.326Book XVII

musicians were present at the banquet, so the king 330/29 b.c. led them all out for the comus to the sound of voices and flutes and pipes, Thaïs the courtesan leading the whole performance. She was the first, after the king, to hurl her blazing torch into the palace. As the others all did the same, immediately the entire palace area was consumed, so great was the conflagration. It was most remarkable that the impious act of Xerxes, king of the Persians, against the acropolis at Athens should have been repaid in kind after many years by one woman, a citizen of the land which had suffered it, and in sport.
73. When all this was over, Alexander visited the cities of Persis, capturing some by storm and winning over others by his own fair dealing.1 Then he set out after Dareius. The Persian king had planned to bring together the armed forces of Bactria and the other satrapies, but Alexander was too quick for him. Dareius directed his flight toward the city of Bactra with thirty thousand Persians2 and Greek mercenaries, but in the course of this retirement he was seized and murdered by Bessus, the satrap of Bactria. Just after his death, Alexander rode up in hot pursuit with his cavalry, and, finding him dead, gave him a royal funeral. Some, however, have written that Alexander found him still breathing and commiserated with him on his disasters. Dareius urged him to avenge his death, and Alexander, agreeing, set out after Bessus, but the satrap had a long start and




1Curtius, 5. 6. 11–10, reports what must have been a substantial campaign. It is ignored by Arrian.2The same figure in Curtius, 5. 8. 3.327