Diodorus of Sicily
3φρουρίων. ταῦτα δὲ διαρπάσας καὶ διαβὰς τὸν
ποταμὸν ἤρξατο κόπτειν τὴν ὕλην, δι᾿ ἧς ἀναγκαῖον
ἦν ἐλθεῖν ἐπὶ τὰ βασίλεια. τούτων δὲ ἐνεργῶς
συντελουμένων Ἀριφάρνης ὁ βασιλεὺς ἀγωνιάσας
μὴ κατὰ κράτος ἁλῶναι συμβῇ τὴν ἀκρόπολιν,
διηγωνίζετο τολμηρότερον, ὡς ἐν μόνῳ τῷ νικᾶν
4κειμένης τῆς σωτηρίας. διείλετο δὲ καὶ τοὺς τοξότας
ἐπ᾿ ἀμφότερα τὰ μέρη τῆς παρόδου, δι᾿ ὧν
ῥᾳδίως κατετίτρωσκε τοὺς τὴν ὕλην κόπτοντας, μὴ
δυναμένους μήτε προορᾶσθαι τὰ βέλη μήτ᾿ ἀμύνεσθαι
τοὺς βάλλοντας διὰ τὴν πυκνότητα τῶν
5δένδρων. οἱ δὲ περὶ τὸν Σάτυρον ἐπὶ τρεῖς μὲν
ἡμέρας ἔτεμνον τὴν ὕλην, ὁδοποιούμενοι καὶ διακαρτεροῦντες
ἐπιπόνως· τῇ δὲ τετάρτῃ συνήγγισαν
μὲν τῷ τείχει, νικώμενοι δὲ τῷ πλήθει τῶν βελῶν
καὶ τῇ τῶν τόπων στενοχωρίᾳ μεγάλοις ἐλαττώμασι
6περιέπιπτον. Μενίσκος μὲν γὰρ ὁ τῶν μισθοφόρων
ἡγεμών, ἀνὴρ καὶ συνέσει καὶ τόλμῃ διαφέρων,
προσπεσὼν διὰ τῆς διόδου πρὸς τὸ τεῖχος καὶ μετὰ
τῶν περὶ ἑαυτὸν λαμπρῶς ἀγωνισάμενος ἐξεβιάσθη,
7πολλαπλασίων ἐπ᾿ αὐτὸν ἐπεξελθόντων. ὃν ἰδὼν
ὁ Σάτυρος κινδυνεύοντα ταχέως παρεβοήθει καὶ τὴν
ἐπιφορὰν τῶν πολεμίων ὑποστὰς ἐτρώθη λόγχῃ διὰ
τοῦ βραχίονος καὶ κακῶς ἀπαλλάττων ὑπὸ τοῦ
τραύματος ἐπανῆλθεν εἰς τὴν παρεμβολὴν καὶ νυκτὸς
ἐπιγενομένης ἐξέλιπε τὸν βίον, ἐννέα μόνον
μῆνας βασιλεύσας μετὰ τὴν τοῦ πατρὸς τελευτὴν
8Παρυσάδου. Μενίσκος δ᾿ ὁ τῶν μισθοφόρων ἡγεμὼν
λύσας τὴν πολιορκίαν ἀπήγαγε τὴν δύναμιν
εἰς Γάργαζαν πόλιν κἀκεῖθεν τὸ τοῦ βασιλέως
202Book XX

barricades. After destroying these and crossing the 310 b.c. river, he began to cut down the woods through which it was necessary to advance to reach the palace. While this was being energetically carried on, King Aripharnes, alarmed lest his citadel should be taken by storm, fought against him with great boldness since he believed that in victory alone lay hope of safety. He stationed archers on both sides of the passage, by whose aid he easily inflicted mortal wounds on the men who were cutting down the woods, for because of the density of the trees they could neither see the missiles in time nor strike back at the archers. The men of Satyrus for three days went on cutting down the woods and making a roadway, bearing up amid hardship; on the fourth day they drew near to the wall but they were overcome by the great number of missiles and by the confined space, and sustained great losses. Indeed, Meniscus, the leader of the mercenaries, a man excelling in sagacity and boldness, after pushing forward through the passage to the wall and fighting brilliantly together with his men, was forced to withdraw when a much stronger force came out against him. Seeing him in danger, Satyrus quickly came to his aid; but, while with-standing the onrush of the enemy, he was wounded with a spear through the upper arm. Grievously disabled because of the wound, he returned to the camp and when night came on he died, having reigned only nine months after the death of his father Parysades. But Meniscus, the leader of the mercenaries, giving up the siege, led the army back to the city Gargaza,1 whence he conveyed the king’s body by

1Probably the same as the city called Gerousa by Ptolemy, Geography, 5. 8. 2.203