Diodorus of Sicily
26. Ὁ δὲ δῆμος τῶν Ἀθηναίων διακούσας τῶν
πρέσβεων ἐψηφίσατο παραχρῆμα δύναμιν ὡς πλείστην
ἀποστεῖλαι τὴν ἐλευθερώσουσαν τὰς Θήβας,
ἅμα μὲν τῆς εὐεργεσίας ἀποδιδοὺς τὰς χάριτας ἅμα
δὲ βουλόμενος τοὺς Βοιωτοὺς ἐξιδιώσασθαι καὶ
συναγωνιστὰς ἰσχυροὺς ἔχειν κατὰ τῆς Λακεδαιμονίων
ὑπεροχῆς· τὸ γὰρ ἔθνος τοῦτο καὶ πλήθει
τῶν ἀνδρῶν καὶ ἀνδρείᾳ κατὰ πόλεμον οὐδενὸς
2τῶν Ἑλληνικῶν1 ἐδόκει λείπεσθαι. τέλος δὲ Δημοφῶν
κατασταθεὶς στρατηγός, καὶ παραχρῆμα πεντακισχιλίους
ὁπλίτας καὶ πεντακοσίους ἱππεῖς
καταλέξας, τῇ ὑστεραίᾳ τὴν δύναμιν ἅμ᾿ ἡμέρᾳ
προήγαγεν ἐκ τῆς πόλεως, καὶ δρομαῖος ἠπείγετο,
φθάσαι σπεύδων τοὺς Λακεδαιμονίους· οὐδὲν δ᾿
ἧττον ὁ δῆμος παρεσκευάζετο πανδημεὶ στρατεύειν
3εἰς τὴν Βοιωτίαν, ἐὰν ᾖ χρεία. ὁ δὲ Δημοφῶν
συντόμοις2 ταῖς ὁδοῖς χρησάμενος παραδόξως ἐπεφάνη
τοῖς Θηβαίοις. ὁμοίως δὲ καὶ ἐκ τῶν ἄλλων
πόλεων τῶν κατὰ τὴν Βοιωτίαν πολλῶν στρατιωτῶν
συνδραμόντων, ταχὺ μεγάλη δύναμις ἠθροίσθη
4τοῖς Θηβαίοις. ὁπλῖται μὲν γὰρ συνῆλθον οὐκ
ἐλάττους τῶν μυρίων καὶ δισχιλίων, ἱππεῖς δὲ




1So Dindorf: Ἑλλήνων.2συντόμοις Dindorf: συντόμως.16Book XV
26. The Athenian people heard the ambassadors 378/7 b.c through to the end and voted1 to dispatch immediately as large a force as possible for the liberation of Thebes, thus repaying their obligation for the former service and at the same time moved by a desire to win the Boeotians to their side and to have in them a powerful partner in the contest against the superiority of the Lacedaemonians. For the Boeotian was reputed to be inferior to none of the Greek nations in the number of its men and in military valour. Finally Demophon, who had been made general, and had immediately raised a levy of five thousand hoplites and five hundred horse, on the following day at dawn led forth his troops from the city, and pressed on at full speed in an effort to outstrip the Lacedaemonians; but the Athenians none the less went on with their preparations for an expedition into Boeotia with all their forces in case of need. Demophon by taking cross-country paths appeared unexpectedly before Thebes. And since many soldiers likewise came hurriedly together from the other cities of Boeotia, there was quickly assembled a great army for the support of the Thebans. For not less than twelve thousand hoplites and more than

1Only Deinarchus, Against Demosthenes, 39, mentions a vote of the Athenians. Most modern historians (Beloch, Griechische Geschichte2, 3. 1. 146, Meyer, Geschichte des
Altertums, 5. 924, notes, and Cary, Cambridge Ancient
History, 6. 67) accept the account in Xenophon, Hell. 5. 4.
19, which insists on the private nature of the assistance
afforded Thebes by Athens and the punishment by the
people of the two generals who were rash enough to give that assistance, one of whom was executed and the other exiled. Glotz in his Hist. gr., though generally inclined to give more weight to Diodorus, here speaks of “volontaires
athéniens.” In the same vein von Stern, Gesch. d. spartan. u. theban. Hegemonie, 44 ff., Xenophons Hellenika und die boiotische Geschichtsüberlieferung. For the contrary view see E. Fabricius, “Die Befreiung Thebens” in Rheinisches Museum 48 (1893), 448 ff., and W. Judeich,
“Athen und Theben vom Königsfrieden bis zur Schlacht bei Leuktra” in Rheinisches Museum 76 (1927), 171 ff. Cp. also A. O. Prickard, The Return of the Theban Exiles (379/8 b.c).17