Diodorus of Sicily

τῆς ὥρας οὔσης περὶ χειμερινὰς τροπάς.
4κατὰ δὲ τὰς στρατοπεδείας παρήγγειλε τῆς ἡμέρας
μὲν τὰ πυρὰ κάειν, τῆς δὲ νυκτὸς κατασβεννύναι
τελέως, ὅπως μή τινες ἐκ τῶν μετεώρων κατανοήσαντες
ἀπαγγείλωσι τὸ γινόμενον τοῖς πολεμίοις·
5ἦν γὰρ ἡ μὲν ἔρημος πᾶσα σχεδὸν πεδιάς, περιείχετο
δὲ ὑπὸ λόφων ὑψηλῶν, ἀφ᾿ ὧν ῥᾴδιον ἦν ἐκ
πολλοῦ διαστήματος συνορᾶν τὴν αὐγὴν τοῦ πυρός.
ἐπιπόνως δὲ τῆς δυνάμεως πένθ᾿ ἡμέρας ὁδοιπορούσης
οἱ μὲν στρατιῶται διά τε τὸ ψῦχος καὶ τὰς
ἀναγκαίας χρείας ἔκαον πῦρ μεθ᾿ ἡμέραν τε καὶ
6νύκτωρ ἐν ταῖς στρατοπεδείαις. ὃ δὴ συνιδόντες
τινὲς τῶν παρὰ τὴν ἔρημον οἰκούντων ἔπεμψαν
τοὺς ἀπαγγελοῦντας αὐθημερὸν τοῖς περὶ Εὐμενῆ
καὶ Πευκέστην, δόντες δρομάδας καμήλους· διατείνει
γὰρ τὸ ζῷον τοῦτο σταδίους οὐ πολὺ ἐλάττους
χιλίων πεντακοσίων.
38. Οἱ δὲ περὶ τὸν Πευκέστην πυθόμενοι κατὰ
μέσην τὴν ὁδὸν ἑωρᾶσθαι τὴν στρατοπεδείαν,
διέγνωσαν ἀναχωρεῖν εἰς τοὺς ἐσχάτους τόπους τῆς
χειμασίας, φοβούμενοι μὴ καταληφθῶσιν ὑπὸ τῶν
πολεμίων πρὶν ἢ συνελθεῖν πανταχόθεν τὴν συμμαχοῦσαν
2δύναμιν. ὧν ὁρῶν τὴν ἀθυμίαν Εὐμενὴς
θαρρεῖν παρεκελεύετο καὶ μένειν ἐπὶ τῶν ὅρων τῆς
ἐρήμου· εὑρηκέναι γὰρ τρόπον δι᾿ οὗ ποιήσει τὸν
Ἀντίγονον ὕστερον ἡμέραις τρισὶν ἢ τέτταρσι
παραγενέσθαι· τούτου δὲ γενομένου τὴν μὲν ἑαυτῶν
δύναμιν ῥᾳδίως ἀθροισθήσεσθαι, τοὺς δὲ πολεμίους
καταπεπονημένους καὶ πάντων ἐνδεεῖς ὄντας ὑποχειρίους
3γενήσεσθαι. πάντων δὲ θαυμασάντων τὸ
332Book XIX

desert, it being about the time of the winter solstice.1 317/16 b.c. He gave orders to build the fires in the camps by day, but to extinguish them completely at night, so that no one seeing them from the higher ground might take word to the enemy of what was happening; for almost the entire desert was a plain, but it was surrounded by high hills from which it was easy to see the gleam of fire from a great distance. After the army had been marching five days with great suffering, the soldiers because of the cold and to satisfy their urgent needs burned fires in the camps both by day and by night. On seeing this, certain of those who lived near the desert sent men to report it on the same day to Eumenes and Peucestes, giving them dromedaries, for this animal can travel continuously for almost fifteen hundred stades.2
38. When Peucestes learned that a camp had been seen in the middle of the route, he made up his mind to withdraw to the most distant part of the territory in which they were wintering, for he was afraid that they might be overtaken by the enemy before the allied force assembled from all directions. Seeing his lack of spirit, Eumenes urged him to take courage and to remain on the borders of the desert; for, he said, he had found a way through which he would delay Antigonus’ arrival by three or four days. If this took place, he added, their own force would easily be assembled, and the enemy would be delivered over into their hands when utterly worn out and lacking everything. While all were wondering at this strange


1December, 317.2About 170 miles. For the speed of these dromedaries (literally, running camels) cp, Strabo, 15. 2. 10; Tarn, Hellenistic Military and Naval Developments, 160–161.333