Diodorus of Sicily

τὸν Δημάδην καὶ βοώντων τοῦτον ἐκπέμπειν πρεσβευτὴν
πρὸς Ἀντίπατρον ὑπὲρ τῆς εἰρήνης, οὗτος
2μὲν καλούμενος σύμβουλος οὐχ ὑπήκουσεν· ἦν γὰρ
τρὶς ἡλωκὼς παρανόμων καὶ διὰ τοῦτο γεγονὼς
ἄτιμος καὶ κωλυόμενος ὑπὸ τῶν νόμων συμβουλεύειν·
ἀπολαβὼν δὲ τὴν ἐπιτιμίαν ὑπὸ τοῦ δήμου
παραχρῆμα ἐξεπέμφθη πρεσβευτὴς μετὰ Φωκίωνος
3καί τινων ἑτέρων. τοῦ δ᾿ Ἀντιπάτρου διακούσαντος
τῶν λόγων καὶ δόντος ἀπόκρισιν ὡς ἄλλως
οὐ μὴ συλλύσηται τὸν πρὸς Ἀθηναίους πόλεμον,
ἐὰν μὴ τὰ καθ᾿ ἑαυτοὺς ἐπιτρέψωσιν αὐτῷ (καὶ
γὰρ ἐκείνους συγκλείσαντας εἰς Λαμίαν τὸν Ἀντίπατρον
τὰς αὐτὰς ἀποκρίσεις πεποιῆσθαι πρεσβεύσαντος
αὐτοῦ περὶ τῆς εἰρήνης) ὁ δῆμος οὐκ ὢν
ἀξιόμαχος ἠναγκάσθη τὴν ἐπιτροπὴν καὶ τὴν ἐξουσίαν
πᾶσαν Ἀντιπάτρῳ δοῦναι περὶ τῆς πόλεως.
4ὁ δὲ φιλανθρώπως αὐτοῖς προσενεχθεὶς συνεχώρησεν
ἔχειν τήν τε πόλιν καὶ τὰς κτήσεις καὶ τἄλλα
πάντα· τὴν δὲ πολιτείαν μετέστησεν ἐκ τῆς δημοκρατίας
καὶ προσέταξεν ἀπὸ τιμήσεως εἶναι τὸ
πολίτευμα καὶ τοὺς μὲν κεκτημένους πλείω δραχμῶν
δισχιλίων κυρίους εἶναι τοῦ πολιτεύματος καὶ
τῆς χειροτονίας, τοὺς δὲ κατωτέρω τῆς τιμήσεως
ἅπαντας ὡς ταραχώδεις ὄντας καὶ πολεμικοὺς
ἀπήλασε τῆς πολιτείας καὶ τοῖς βουλομένοις χώραν
5ἔδωκεν εἰς κατοίκησιν ἐν τῇ Θρᾴκῃ. οὗτοι μὲν οὖν
ὄντες πλείους τῶν μυρίων καὶ δισχιλίων1 μετεστάθησαν
ἐκ τῆς πατρίδος, οἱ δὲ τὴν ὡρισμένην τίμησιν
ἔχοντες περὶ ἐννακισχιλίους ἀπεδείχθησαν κύριοι

1μυρίων καὶ δισχιλίων Wesseling, μυρίων καὶ χιλίων Bergk:
δισμυρίων καὶ δισχιλίων. See Plutarch, Phocion, 28. 4.64Book XVIII

Demades and shouted that he must be sent as envoy 322 b.c. to Antipater to sue for peace; but, although he was called on by name to give advice, he did not respond. He had been convicted three times1 of introducing illegal decrees, and for this reason he had been deprived of his rights as a citizen and was prevented by the laws from advising; yet, on being restored to full rights by the people, he was at once sent as envoy along with Phocion and some others. When Antipater had heard what they had to say, he made answer that he would end the war against the Athenians on no other condition than that they surrender all their interests to his discretion; for, after they had shut Antipater up in Lamia, they had made that same reply to him when he had sent envoys about peace. The people, not being in position to fight, were forced to grant to Antipater such discretion and complete authority over the city. He dealt humanely with them and permitted them to retain their city and their possessions and everything else; but he changed the government from a democracy, ordering that political power should depend on a census of wealth, and that those possessing more than two thousand drachmas should be in control of the government and of the elections. He removed from the body of citizens all who possessed less than this amount on the ground that they were disturbers of the peace and warmongers, offering to those who wished it a place for settlement in Thrace. These men, more than twelve thousand in number, were removed from their fatherland; but those who possessed the stated rating, being about nine thousand,

1The number of convictions is given as seven by Plutarch (Phocion, 26. 2) and as two by Suidas (s.v. Demades).65