Diodorus of Sicily

εἰς τὴν Ἀττικὴν καὶ πλησίον τοῦ Πειραιῶς κατεστρατοπέδευσεν.
3εἶχεν δὲ μεθ᾿ ἑαυτοῦ στρατιώτας
πεζοὺς μὲν Μακεδόνας δισμυρίους, τῶν δ᾿ ἄλλων
συμμάχων περὶ τετρακισχιλίους, ἱππεῖς δὲ χιλίους,
ἐλέφαντας δὲ ἑξήκοντα πέντε. ἐπεβάλετο μὲν οὖν
πολιορκεῖν τοὺς περὶ τὸν Κάσανδρον, σπανίζων1
δὲ τροφῆς καὶ τὴν πολιορκίαν ὑπολαμβάνων ἔσεσθαι
πολυχρόνιον ἠναγκάσθη μέρος τῆς δυνάμεως ἀπολιπεῖν
κατὰ τὴν Ἀττικὴν τὸ δυνάμενον ἔχειν τὴν
τοῦ σίτου χορηγίαν, ἡγουμένου τοῦ υἱοῦ Ἀλεξάνδρου,
αὐτὸς δὲ τὸ πλεῖστον τῆς δυνάμεως ἀναλαβὼν
παρῆλθεν εἰς Πελοπόννησον, συναναγκάσων
τοὺς Μεγαλοπολίτας πειθαρχεῖν τοῖς βασιλεῦσιν,
οἳ ἐτύγχανον μὲν τὰ Κασάνδρου φρονοῦντες καὶ
διὰ τῆς ὑπ᾿ Ἀντιπάτρου καθεσταμένης ὀλιγαρχίας
διοικούμενοι.
69. Τοῦ δὲ Πολυπέρχοντος περὶ ταῦτα διατρίβοντος
ὁ Κάσανδρος ἀναλαβὼν τὸν στόλον Αἰγινήτας
μὲν προσηγάγετο, τοὺς δὲ Σαλαμινίους
ἀλλότρια φρονοῦντας εἰς πολιορκίαν συνέκλεισε.
καθ᾿ ἡμέραν δὲ συνεχεῖς ποιούμενος προσβολὰς καὶ
βελῶν καὶ στρατιωτῶν εὐπορῶν εἰς τοὺς ἐσχάτους
2κινδύνους ἤγαγε τοὺς Σαλαμινίους. κινδυνευούσης
δὲ τῆς πόλεως ἁλῶναι κατὰ κράτος ὁ Πολυπέρχων
ἐξέπεμψε δύναμιν ἀξιόλογον πεζικήν τε καὶ ναυτικὴν
τὴν ἐπιθησομένην τοῖς πολιορκοῦσι. διόπερ
ὁ Κάσανδρος καταπλαγεὶς καὶ λύσας τὴν πολιορκίαν
3ἀπέπλευσεν εἰς τὸν Πειραιᾶ. Πολυπέρχων δὲ
βουλόμενος τὰ κατὰ τὴν Πελοπόννησον διοικῆσαι
συμφερόντως παρῆλθε καὶ συναγαγὼν ἐκ τῶν
πόλεων συνέδρους διελέχθη περὶ τῆς πρὸς αὑτὸν
συμμαχίας. ἐξέπεμψε δὲ καὶ πρὸς τὰς πόλεις
1σπανίζων editors: σπανιζόντων.198Book XVIII

he moved into Attica and camped near the Piraeus. 318 b.c. He had with him twenty thousand Macedonian infantry and about four thousand of the other allies, a thousand cavalry, and sixty-five elephants. It was his intention to besiege Cassander; but since he was short of supplies and supposed that the siege would be long, he was forced to leave in Attica under the command of his son Alexander the part of the army that could be supplied with food, while he himself with the larger part of the forces moved into the Peloponnesus to enforce obedience to the kings upon the people of Megalopolis, who were in sympathy with Cassander and were governed by the oligarchy that had been established by Antipater.
69. While Polyperchon was busy with these affairs, Cassander with the fleet secured the allegiance of the people of Aegina and closely invested the Salaminians, who were hostile to him. Since he made continuous onslaughts day after day and was well supplied with both missiles and men, he reduced the Salaminians to the most desperate straits. The city was already in danger of being taken by storm when Polyperchon sent a considerable force of infantry and ships to attack the besiegers. At this Cassander was alarmed, abandoned the siege, and sailed back to the Piraeus. But Polyperchon, in his anxiety to settle affairs in the Peloponnesus to his own advantage, went there and discussed with delegates, whom he had gathered from the cities, the question of their alliance with himself. He also sent envoys to the cities, ordering that those


199