Diodorus of Sicily

Δεινοκράτους ὡς διακωλύοντος αὐτοῦ τυχεῖν αὐτοὺς
τῆς αὐτονομίας, πρὸς δὲ Καρχηδονίους πρεσβευτὰς
ἀποστείλας συνέθετο τὴν εἰρήνην ἐφ᾿ οἷς τὰς πόλεις
κομίσασθαι τοὺς Φοίνικας πάσας τὰς πρότερον ὑπ᾿
αὐτοὺς γεγενημένας· ἀντὶ δὲ τούτων ἔλαβε παρὰ
Καρχηδονίων χρυσίον μὲν εἰς ἀργυρίου λόγον ἀναγόμενον1
τριακοσίων ταλάντων, ὡς δὲ Τίμαιός
φησιν, ἑκατὸν πεντήκοντα, σίτου δὲ μεδίμνων εἴκοσι
μυριάδας.
Καὶ τὰ μὲν περὶ Σικελίαν ἐν τούτοις ἦν.
80. Κατὰ δὲ τὴν Ἰταλίαν Σαμνῖται μὲν Σώραν
καὶ Καλατίαν2 πόλεις Ῥωμαίοις συμμαχούσας
ἐκπολιορκήσαντες ἐξηνδραποδίσαντο· οἱ δ᾿ ὕπατοι
δυνάμεσιν ἁδραῖς εἰς τὴν Ἰαπυγίαν ἐμβαλόντες πλησίον
2Σιλβίου πόλεως κατεστρατοπέδευσαν. φρουρουμένης
δὲ αὐτῆς ὑπὸ Σαμνιτῶν συνεστήσαντο
πολιορκίαν ἐφ᾿ ἱκανὰς ἡμέρας καὶ κατὰ κράτος
ἑλόντες αἰχμάλωτα σώματα πλείω τῶν πεντακισχιλίων
ἔλαβον καὶ τῶν ἄλλων λαφύρων ἱκανόν τι
3πλῆθος. ἀπὸ δὲ τούτων γενόμενοι3 τὴν τῶν Σαμνιτῶν
χώραν ἐπῆλθον δενδροτομοῦντες καὶ πάντα
τόπον καταφθείροντες· πολλὰ γὰρ ἔτη τῆς Ῥώμης
πρὸς τοῦτο τὸ ἔθνος διαπολεμούσης ὑπὲρ τῆς ἡγεμονίας
ἤλπιζον τῶν ἐπὶ τῆς χώρας κτήσεως στερήσαντες
τοὺς πολεμίους ἀναγκάσειν εἶξαι τοῖς
4ὑπερέχουσιν. διὸ καὶ πέντε μῆνας καταναλώσαντες

1ἀναγόμενον added by Fischer, cp. Books 16. 56. 6;
17. 71. 1.2καὶ Καλατίαν Wesseling, καὶ Καιατίαν or καὶ Ἀτίναν Mommsen: καὶ Ἀτίαν RX, καὶ Ἀττίαν F.3γενόμενοι added by Kallenberg.352Book XX

of hindering them from gaining their independence, 306 b.c. and to the Carthaginians he sent envoys and made peace with them on terms such that the Phoenicians should regain all the cities which had formerly been subject to them, and in return for them he received from the Carthaginians gold to the value of three hundred talents of silver (or, as Timaeus says, one hundred and fifty), and two hundred thousand measures of grain.1
And affairs in Sicily were in this condition.
80. In Italy the Samnites took Sora and Calatia, cities that were allied to the Romans, and enslaved the inhabitants2; and the consuls with strong armies invaded Iapygia and camped near Silvium.3 This city was garrisoned by the Samnites, and the Romans began a siege which lasted a considerable number of days. Capturing the city by storm, they took prisoner more than five thousand persons and collected a considerable amount of booty besides. When they had finished with this, they invaded the country of the Samnites, cutting down the trees and destroying every district. For the Romans, who had for many years been fighting the Samnites for the primacy, hoped that if they deprived the enemy of their property in the country, it would force them to submit to the stronger. For this reason they devoted






1Cp. Justin, 22. 8. 15. The narrative is continued in chap. 89.2Cp. Livy 9. 43. 1. The narrative is continued from chap. 44. 9.3Strabo, 6. 3. 8 (p. 283), places Silvium on the frontier between Apulia and Iapygia.353