Diodorus of Sicily

τῆς δυνάμεως. οὐ μακρὰν δὲ τῶν παρεμβολῶν
ἀπεχουσῶν ἀλλήλων καὶ τῶν Μακεδόνων οὐκ ἀηδῶς
ὁρώντων τὴν κάθοδον τοῦ βασιλέως, δείσας ὁ
Κάσανδρος μήποτε φύσει πρὸς μεταβολὴν ὄντες
ὀξεῖς οἱ Μακεδόνες αὐτομολήσωσι πρὸς τὸν Ἡρακλέα,
2διεπρεσβεύσατο πρὸς Πολυπέρχοντα. καὶ
περὶ μὲν τοῦ βασιλέως ἐπειρᾶτο διδάσκειν αὐτὸν
ὅτι γινομένης τῆς καθόδου ποιήσει τὸ προσταττόμενον
ὑφ᾿ ἑτέρων, συναγωνισάμενος δὲ αὐτῷ καὶ
τὸν νεανίσκον ἀνελὼν παραχρῆμα μὲν ἀπολήψεται
τὰς προγεγενημένας κατὰ Μακεδονίαν δωρεάς, εἶτα
καὶ δύναμιν ἀναλαβὼν στρατηγὸς ἀποδειχθήσεται
περὶ Πελοπόννησον καὶ πάντων τῶν ἐν τῇ δυναστείᾳ
τῇ Κασάνδρου κοινωνὸς ἔσται, τιμώμενος
διαφόρως. πέρας δὲ πολλαῖς καὶ μεγάλαις ἐπαγγελίαις
πείσας τὸν Πολυπέρχοντα καὶ συνθήκας ἐν
ἀπορρήτοις συνθέμενος προετρέψατο δολοφονῆσαι
3τὸν βασιλέα. ὁ δὲ Πολυπέρχων ἀνελὼν τὸν νεανίσκον
καὶ φανερῶς κοινοπραγῶν τοῖς περὶ τὸν
Κάσανδρον τάς τ᾿ ἐν τῇ Μακεδονίᾳ δωρεὰς ἐκομίσατο
καὶ κατὰ τὰς ὁμολογίας παρέλαβε στρατιώτας
πεζοὺς μὲν Μακεδόνας τετρακισχιλίους, ἱππεῖς δὲ
4Θετταλοὺς πεντακοσίους. προσλαβόμενος δὲ καὶ
τῶν ἄλλων τοὺς βουλομένους ἐπεχείρησε μὲν διὰ
τῆς Βοιωτίας προάγειν εἰς Πελοπόννησον, ὑπὸ δὲ
Βοιωτῶν καὶ Πελοποννησίων κωλυθεὶς ἀνέστρεψε
καὶ προελθὼν εἰς Λοκροὺς ἐνταῦθα τὴν παραχειμασίαν
ἐποιεῖτο.
29. Ἅμα δὲ τούτοις πραττομένοις Λυσίμαχος


214Book XX

Cassander arrived with his army. As the camps were 309 b.c. not far distant from each other and the Macedonians regarded the restoration of the king without disfavour, Cassander, since he feared lest the Macedonians, being by nature prone to change sides easily, should sometime desert to Heracles, sent an embassy to Polyperchon. As for the king, Cassander tried to show Polyperchon that if the restoration should take place he would do what was ordered by others; but, he said, if Polyperchon joined with him and slew the stripling, he would at once recover what had formerly been granted him throughout Macedonia, and then, after receiving an army, he would be appointed general in the Peloponnesus and would be partner in everything in Cassander’s realm, being honoured above all. Finally he won Polyperchon over by many great promises, made a secret compact with him, and induced him to murder the king.1 When Polyperchon had slain the youth and was openly co-operating with Cassander, he recovered the grants in Macedonia and also, according to the agreement, received four thousand Macedonian foot-soldiers and five hundred Thessalian horse. Enrolling also those of the others who wished, he attempted to lead them through Boeotia into the Peloponnesus; but, when he was prevented by Boeotians and Peloponnesians, he turned aside, advanced into Locris, and there passed the winter.2
29. While these events were taking place, Lysimachus


1For further details of the murder cp. Plutarch, De falsa pudicitia, 4 (p. 530); Justin, 15. 2. 3. According to Justin, 15. 1. 1, Polyperchon was already dead at the time of the murder.2The winter of 309/8 b.c. Henceforth Polyperchon plays a very minor part; in 303 b.c. he is mentioned as a supporter of Cassander (chap. 103. 6–7).215