Diodorus of Sicily

παράδοξον τῆς τύχης θαυμάσαντος οὗτος μὲν φίλος
γενόμενος Ἀλεξάνδρῳ τὴν βασιλείαν ἔσχε παράδειγμα
τοῖς ἀγνοοῦσι τὴν τῆς τύχης παράδοξον
μεταβολήν.
Ἡμεῖς δ᾿ ἐπεὶ τὰ περὶ τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον διήλθομεν,
μεταληψόμεθα τὴν διήγησιν.
48. Κατὰ γὰρ τὴν Εὐρώπην Ἄγις μὲν ὁ τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων
βασιλεὺς τῶν ἐκ τῆς ἐν Ἰσσῷ μάχης
διασωθέντων μισθοφόρων ἀναλαβὼν ὀκτακισχιλίους
νεωτέρων πραγμάτων ἀντείχετο, χαριζόμενος Δαρείῳ.
2προσλαβὼν δὲ παρὰ τούτου καὶ ναῦς καὶ χρημάτων
πλῆθος ἔπλευσεν εἰς Κρήτην καὶ τῶν πόλεων
τὰς πλείους χειρωσάμενος ἠνάγκασε τὰ Περσῶν
αἱρεῖσθαι.
Ἀμύντας δ᾿ ὁ φυγὼν ἐκ Μακεδονίας καὶ πρὸς
Δαρεῖον ἀναβὰς συνηγωνίσατο μὲν τοῖς Πέρσαις ἐν
τῇ Κιλικίᾳ, διασωθεὶς δ᾿ ἐκ τῆς ἐν Ἰσσῷ παρατάξεως
μετὰ τετρακισχιλίων1 μισθοφόρων καὶ πρὸ
τῆς Ἀλεξάνδρου παρουσίας διανύσας εἰς Τρίπολιν
τῆς Φοινίκης ἐπέλεξεν ἐκ τοῦ παντὸς στόλου τὰς
ἀρκούσας ναῦς εἰς τὸν πλοῦν τοῖς ἰδίοις στρατιώταις,
3τὰς δ᾿ ἄλλας ἐνέπρησε. διαπλεύσας δ᾿ εἰς τὴν
Κύπρον καὶ προσλαβόμενος στρατιώτας καὶ ναῦς
διέπλευσεν εἰς τὸ Πηλούσιον. τῆς δὲ πόλεως ἐγκρατὴς
γενόμενος ἀπέφαινεν ἑαυτὸν ὑπὸ Δαρείου
τοῦ βασιλέως ἀπεστάλθαι στρατηγὸν διὰ τὸ τὸν
ἡγούμενον τῆς Αἰγύπτου σατράπην συναγωνιζόμενον
1τρισχιλίων Q.254Book XVII

marvelled at the vicissitudes of Fortune. Thus he 332/1 b.c. became a Friend of Alexander’s and took over the kingdom, an instructive example to those who do not know the incredible changes which Fortune can effect.
Now that we have described Alexander’s activity, we shall turn our narrative in another direction.
48. In Europe, Agis king of Sparta engaged the services of those mercenaries who had escaped from the battle at Issus, eight thousand in number, and sought to change the political situation in Greece in favour of Dareius. He received from the Persian king ships and money and sailed to Crete, where he captured most of the cities and forced them to take the Persian side.1
That Amyntas who had fled from Macedonia and had gone up to Dareius had fought on the Persian side in Cilicia. He escaped, however, from the battle at Issus with four thousand mercenaries2 and got to Tripolis in Phoenicia before Alexander’s arrival. Here he chose from the whole Persian fleet enough ships to transport his soldiers, and burned the rest. He sailed over to Cyprus, took on additional soldiers and ships, and continued on down to Pelusium. Becoming master of that city, he proclaimed that he had been sent by King Dareius as military commander because the satrap of Egypt had been killed fighting




1The narrative is continued later, chaps. 62. 6–63. 4; 73. 5–6. Cp. Curtius, 4. 1. 38–40; Arrian, 2. 13. 4–6; 3. 6. 3.2A prominent Macedonian, son of Antiochus, suspected of hostility to Alexander because of his association with Alexander’s cousin Amyntas (SIG3 258). Amyntas had deserted to the Persians about 335 b.c. (Berve, Alexanderreich 2, no. 58). Curtius (4. 1. 27–33) also gives him 4000 troops, Arrian (2. 13. 2–3) 8000.255