Diodorus of Sicily
Τὸν δὲ τύπον ἀποτελῶν χλαμύδι παραπλήσιον
ἔχει πλατεῖαν μέσην σχεδὸν τὴν πόλιν τέμνουσαν
καὶ τῷ τε μεγέθει καὶ κάλλει θαυμαστήν· ἀπὸ
γὰρ πύλης ἐπὶ πύλην διήκουσα τεσσαράκοντα μὲν
σταδίων ἔχει τὸ μῆκος, πλέθρου δὲ τὸ πλάτος,
οἰκιῶν δὲ καὶ ἱερῶν πολυτελέσι κατασκευαῖς πᾶσα
4κεκόσμηται. προσέταξεν δ᾿ ὁ Ἀλέξανδρος καὶ βασίλεια
κατασκευάσαι θαυμαστὰ κατὰ τὸ μέγεθος
καὶ βάρος τῶν ἔργων. οὐ μόνον δ᾿ ὁ Ἀλέξανδρος,
ἀλλὰ καὶ οἱ μετ᾿ αὐτὸν βασιλεύσαντες Αἰγύπτου
μέχρι τοῦ καθ᾿ ἡμᾶς βίου σχεδὸν ἅπαντες πολυτελέσι
5κατασκευαῖς ηὔξησαν τὰ βασίλεια. καθόλου
δ᾿ ἡ πόλις τοσαύτην ἐπίδοσιν ἔλαβεν ἐν τοῖς ὕστερον
χρόνοις ὥστε παρὰ πολλοῖς αὐτὴν πρώτην ἀριθμεῖσθαι
τῶν κατὰ τὴν οἰκουμένην· καὶ γὰρ κάλλει καὶ
μεγέθει καὶ προσόδων πλήθει καὶ τῶν πρὸς τρυφὴν
6ἀνηκόντων πολὺ διαφέρει τῶν ἄλλων. τὸ δὲ τῶν
κατοικούντων οἰκητόρων αὐτὴν πλῆθος ὑπερβάλλει
τοὺς ἐν ταῖς ἄλλαις πόλεσιν οἰκήτορας· καθ᾿ ὃν γὰρ
ἡμεῖς παρεβάλομεν χρόνον εἰς Αἴγυπτον, ἔφασαν οἱ
τὰς ἀναγραφὰς ἔχοντες τῶν κατοικούντων εἶναι
τοὺς ἐν αὐτῇ διατρίβοντας ἐλευθέρους πλείους τῶν
τριάκοντα μυριάδων, ἐκ δὲ τῶν προσόδων τῶν κατ᾿
Αἴγυπτον λαμβάνειν τὸν βασιλέα πλείω τῶν ἑξακισχιλίων
ταλάντων.
7Ὁ δ᾿ οὖν βασιλεὺς Ἀλέξανδρος ἐπιστήσας τινὰς
τῶν φίλων ἐπὶ τὴν κατασκευὴν τῆς Ἀλεξανδρείας
καὶ διοικήσας ἅπαντα τὰ κατὰ τὴν Αἴγυπτον
ἐπανῆλθε μετὰ τῆς δυνάμεως εἰς τὴν Συρίαν.
53. Δαρεῖος δὲ πυθόμενος αὐτοῦ τὴν παρουσίαν


268Book XVII
In shape, it is similar to a chlamys, and it is approximately 331/0 b.c. bisected by an avenue remarkable for its size and beauty. From gate to gate it runs a distance of forty furlongs1; it is a plethron2 in width, and is bordered throughout its length with rich façades of houses and temples. Alexander gave orders to build a palace notable for its size and massiveness. And not only Alexander, but those who after him ruled Egypt down to our own time, with few exceptions have enlarged this with lavish additions. The city in general has grown so much in later times that many reckon it to be the first city of the civilized world, and it is certainly far ahead of all the rest in elegance and extent and riches and luxury. The number of its inhabitants surpasses that of those in other cities. At the time when we were in Egypt, those who kept the census returns of the population said that its free residents were more than three hundred thousand,3 and that the king received from the revenues of the country more than six thousand talents.
However that may be, King Alexander charged certain of his Friends with the construction of Alexandria, settled all the affairs of Egypt, and returned with his army to Syria.4
53. By the time he heard of his arrival, Dareius




1The contemporary description of Strabo (17. 1. 7–10) says thirty furlongs. The ancient circuit of the walls has not been traced.2One hundred feet.3A papyrus of later date has been interpreted as stating that the citizens of Alexandria numbered 180,000, but this is very uncertain (H. A. Musurillo, The Acts of the Pagan Martyrs, 1954, no. III, col. i. 15).4Further details are given by Curtius, 4. 8. 4–9; Arrian, 3. 5. 2–7. Alexander reached Thapsacus in the Attic month Hecatombaeon (Arrian, 3. 7. 1; about July/August 331; see below, p. 278, note 2).269