Diodorus of Sicily
7βραχέως ἐπιψαῦσαι. κατὰ δὲ τὴν αὐτὴν διαίρεσιν
ἐπιφέροντος ἄλλην πληγὴν τοῦ Ῥωσάκου Κλεῖτος
ὁ μέλας ἐπικαλούμενος προσελάσας τὸν ἵππον
ἀπέκοψε τὴν χεῖρα τοῦ βαρβάρου.
21. Περὶ δ᾿ ἀμφοτέρων τῶν πεσόντων οἱ συγγενεῖς
ἀθρόοι συστραφέντες τὸ μὲν πρῶτον ἠκόντιζον
ἐπὶ τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον, ἔπειτα δὲ καὶ συστάδην
μαχόμενοι πάντα κίνδυνον ὑπέμενον ὑπὲρ τοῦ φονεῦσαι
2τὸν βασιλέα. ὁ δὲ καίπερ πολλοῖς καὶ
μεγάλοις κινδύνοις συνεχόμενος ὅμως οὐκ ἐνικᾶτο
τοῖς πλήθεσι τῶν πολεμίων, ἀλλὰ δύο μὲν ἔχων εἰς
τὸν θώρακα πληγάς, μίαν δὲ εἰς τὸ κράνος, τρεῖς
δ᾿ εἰς τὸ καθαιρεθὲν ὅπλον ἐκ τοῦ νεὼ τῆς Ἀθηνᾶς
ὅμως οὐκ ἐνεδίδου, ἀλλὰ τῷ παραστήματι τῆς
ψυχῆς ἐπαιρόμενος παντὸς δεινοῦ κατεξανίστατο.
3μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα καὶ τῶν ἄλλων ἐπιφανῶν ἡγεμόνων
παρ᾿ αὐτὸν ἐν τοῖς Πέρσαις ἔπεσον πλείους, ὧν
ἦσαν ἐπιφανέστατοι Ἀτιζύης1 καὶ Φαρνάκης ὁ τῆς
Δαρείου γυναικὸς ἀδελφός, ἔτι δὲ Μιθροβουζάνης ὁ
Καππαδοκῶν ἡγούμενος.
4Διὸ καὶ πολλῶν ἡγεμόνων ἀναιρεθέντων καὶ τῶν
Περσικῶν τάξεων ἁπασῶν ὑπὸ τῶν Μακεδόνων
ἡττωμένων πρῶτον μὲν οἱ κατὰ τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον
τεταγμένοι φυγεῖν ἠναγκάσθησαν, μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα
καὶ τῶν ἄλλων τραπέντων ὁ μὲν βασιλεὺς ὁμολογούμενον



1Ἀτιζύης RX; Ἀτυζύης F.176Book XVII

inflicted a slight scalp wound. As Rhosaces aimed 334/3 b.c. another blow at the same break, Cleitus, surnamed the Black, dashed up on his horse and cut off the Persian’s arm.
21. The Relatives now pressed in a solid body about the two fallen men1; at first they rained their javelins on Alexander, and then closing went all out to slay the king. But exposed as he was to many and fierce attacks he nevertheless was not overborne by the numbers of the foe. Though he took two blows on the breastplate, one on the helmet, and three on the shield2 which he had brought from the temple of Athena, he still did not give in, but borne up by an exaltation of spirit surmounted every danger. After this, several of the other noble Persians fighting against him fell, of whom the most illustrious were Atizyes and Pharnaces, brother of Dareius’s queen, and also Mithrobuzanes who commanded the Cappadocians.3
Now that many of their commanders had been slain and all the Persian squadrons were worsted by the Macedonians, those facing Alexander were put to flight first, and then the others also. Thus the



1That is, Spithridates and Rhosaces. This incident is
variously reported. In Plutarch, Alexander, 16. 4–5, Rhosaces
and Spithridates attacked Alexander simultaneously;
the king killed the former, while the latter cracked his helmet
and was run through by Cleitus’s spear. In Plutarch, De
Fortuna aut Virtute Alexandri, l. 1. 326 f, the antagonists
are Spithridates and Mithridates. In Arrian, 1. 15. 7–8, Mithridates is Dareius’s son-in-law. Alexander dismounted him with his lance. Rhosaces cracked Alexander’s helmet but was overborne by the king, while it was Spithridates whose arm was severed by Cleitus. The text of Diodorus here might allow one to suppose that Alexander also was thrown to the ground, and a figure appearing in two of the reliefs of the Alexander Sarcophagus in Constantinople, with cracked helmet and broken spear, has been thought to be Alexander at the Battle of the Granicus, but this is all very uncertain.2Cp. chap. 18. 1 above.3Arrian, 1. 16. 3, gives a longer list of Persian casualties, but omits the name of Atizyes. Diodorus gives this name also among the Persians who fell at Issus (chap. 34. 5).177