Diodorus of Sicily

φιλανθρώπως παρεκάλεσε τοὺς Ἕλληνας
τηρεῖν τὴν πρὸς αὐτὸν πατροπαράδοτον εὔνοιαν.
3τῶν δὲ στρατιωτῶν πυκνὰς ποιησάμενος ἐξοπλισίας
μελέτας τε καὶ γυμνασίας πολεμικὰς εὐπειθῆ κατεσκεύασε
τὴν δύναμιν.
Ἔχων δὲ τῆς βασιλείας ἔφεδρον Ἄτταλον τὸν
ἀδελφὸν Κλεοπάτρας τῆς ἐπιγαμηθείσης ὑπὸ Φιλίππου
τοῦτον ἔκρινεν ἐκ τοῦ ζῆν μεταστῆσαι· καὶ
γὰρ ἐτύγχανε παιδίον ἐκ τῆς Κλεοπάτρας γεγονὸς
τῷ Φιλίππῳ τῆς τελευτῆς τοῦ βασιλέως ὀλίγαις
4πρότερον ἡμέραις. ὁ δ᾿ Ἄτταλος προαπεσταλμένος
ἦν εἰς τὴν Ἀσίαν στρατηγὸς τῶν δυνάμεων
μετὰ Παρμενίωνος, εὐεργετικὸς δ᾿ ὢν καὶ ταῖς
ὁμιλίαις ἐκθεραπεύων τοὺς στρατιώτας μεγάλης
ἐτύγχανεν ἀποδοχῆς ἐν τῷ στρατοπέδῳ. εὐλόγως
οὖν τοῦτον εὐλαβεῖτο μήποτε τῆς ἀρχῆς ἀντιποιήσηται
συνεργοὺς λαβὼν τῶν Ἑλλήνων τοὺς ἐναντιουμένους
5ἑαυτῷ. διόπερ τῶν φίλων προχειρισάμενος
Ἑκαταῖον ἐξαπέστειλεν εἰς τὴν Ἀσίαν μετὰ
τῶν ἱκανῶν στρατιωτῶν, δοὺς ἐντολὰς μάλιστα
μὲν ἀγαγεῖν ζῶντα τὸν Ἄτταλον, ἐὰν δὲ τοῦτο μὴ
δύνηται κατεργάσασθαι, δολοφονῆσαι τὸν ἄνδρα
6τὴν ταχίστην. οὗτος μὲν οὖν διαβὰς εἰς τὴν Ἀσίαν
καὶ συμμίξας τοῖς περὶ τὸν Παρμενίωνα καὶ Ἄτταλον
ἐπετήρει τὸν καιρὸν τῆς προκεχειρισμένης
πράξεως.
3. Ἀλέξανδρος δὲ πυθόμενος πολλοὺς τῶν Ἑλλήνων
μετεώρους εἶναι πρὸς καινοτομίαν εἰς πολλὴν
2ἀγωνίαν ἐνέπιπτεν. Ἀθηναῖοι μὲν γὰρ Δημοσθένους
δημαγωγοῦντος κατὰ τῶν Μακεδόνων τήν τε


122Book XVII

present and in affable fashion bade the Greeks maintain 335/4 b.c. towards him the loyalty which they had shown to his father. He busied his soldiers with constant training in the use of their weapons and with tactical exercises, and established discipline in the army.
A possible rival for the throne remained in Attalus, who was the brother of Cleopatra, the last wife of Philip, and Alexander determined to kill him. As a matter of fact, Cleopatra had borne a child to Philip a few days before his death.1 Attalus had been sent on ahead into Asia to share the command of the forces with Parmenion and had acquired great popularity in the army by his readiness to do favours and his easy bearing with the soldiers. Alexander had good reason to fear that he might challenge his rule, making common cause with those of the Greeks who opposed him, and selected from among his friends a certain Hecataeus and sent him off to Asia with a number of soldiers, under orders to bring back Attalus alive if he could, but if not, to assassinate him as quickly as possible. So he crossed over into Asia, joined Parmenion and Attalus and awaited an opportunity to carry out his mission.
3. Alexander knew that many of the Greeks were anxious to revolt, and was seriously worried. In Athens, where Demosthenes kept agitating against

1In Book 16. 93. 9, Attalus was called Cleopatra’s nephew,
but he was apparently her uncle and guardian (Berve, Alex- anderreich, 2.94). He may well have been disaffected because of the murder of Cleopatra and her daughter, but he had no known claim upon the throne of Macedonia. He was, at all events, loyal to Philip and hostile to Philip’s assassin (Book 16. 93. 5–9).123