Diodorus of Sicily

ἀποκυλίεσθαι καὶ πίπτειν εἴς τι χάσμα πλῆρες
πυρός. εἰκὸς δὲ καὶ τὸν Εὐριπίδην ἐντεῦθεν εἰληφέναι
τὰ μυθολογούμενα παρ᾿ αὐτῷ1 περὶ τὴν ἐν
Ταύροις θυσίαν, ἐν οἷς εἰσάγει τὴν Ἰφιγένειαν ὑπὸ
Ὀρέστου διερωτωμένην
τάφος δὲ ποῖος δέξεταί μ᾿, ὅταν θάνω;
πῦρ ἱερὸν ἔνδον χάσμα τ᾿ εὐρωπὸν χθονός.2
7καὶ ὁ παρὰ τοῖς Ἕλλησι δὲ μῦθος ἐκ παλαιᾶς φήμης
παραδεδομένος ὅτι Κρόνος ἠφάνιζε τοὺς ἰδίους
παῖδας παρὰ Καρχηδονίοις φαίνεται διὰ τούτου τοῦ
νομίμου τετηρημένος.
15. Οὐ μὴν ἀλλὰ τοιαύτης ἐν τῇ Λιβύῃ γεγενημένης
μεταβολῆς οἱ μὲν Καρχηδόνιοι διεπέμποντο
πρὸς Ἀμίλκαν εἰς τὴν Σικελίαν, ἀξιοῦντες κατὰ
τάχος πέμψαι βοήθειαν, καὶ τὰ ληφθέντα χαλκώματα
τῶν Ἀγαθοκλέους νεῶν ἀπέστειλαν αὐτῷ.
ὁ δὲ τοῖς καταπλεύσασι παρεκελεύσατο σιωπᾶν
μὲν τὴν γεγενημένην ἧτταν, διαδιδόναι δὲ λόγον εἰς
τοὺς στρατιώτας ὡς Ἀγαθοκλῆς ἄρδην ἀπώλεσε
2καὶ τὰς ναῦς καὶ τὴν δύναμιν ἅπασαν. αὐτὸς δὲ
πέμψας τινὰς τῶν παρόντων ἐκ Καρχηδόνος εἰς
τὰς Συρακούσσας πρεσβευτὰς καὶ τὰ χαλκώματα
συναποστείλας ἠξίου παραδιδόναι τὴν πόλιν· τὴν
μὲν γὰρ δύναμιν τῶν Συρακοσίων ὑπὸ Καρχηδονίων
κατακεκόφθαι, τὰς δὲ ναῦς ἐμπεπυρίσθαι· τοῖς δ᾿
ἀπιστοῦσιν ἀπόδειξιν παρέχεσθαι τὴν τῶν ἐμβόλων
3κομιδήν. τῶν δ᾿ ἐν τῇ πόλει πυθομένων τὴν περὶ
τὸν Ἀγαθοκλέα προσηγγελμένην συμφορὰν οἱ πολλοὶ
μὲν ἐπίστευσαν, οἱ προεστηκότες δὲ διστάζοντες


1αὐτῷ Rhodoman: αὐτοῖς.2For χθονός the MSS. of Euripides give πέτρας.180Book XX

thereon rolled down and fell into a sort of gaping pit 310 b.c. filled with fire. It is probable that it was from this that Euripides has drawn the mythical story found in his works about the sacrifice in Tauris, in which he presents Iphigeneia being asked by Orestes:

But what tomb shall receive me when I die?
A sacred fire within, and earth’s broad rift.1
Also the story passed down among the Greeks from ancient myth that Cronus did away with his own children appears to have been kept in mind among the Carthaginians through this observance.
15. However this may be, after such a reversal in Libya, the Carthaginians sent messengers into Sicily to Hamilcar, begging him to send aid as soon as possible; and they dispatched to him the captured bronze beaks of Agathocles’ ships. Hamilcar ordered those who had sailed across to keep silent about the defeat that had been sustained, but to spread abroad to the soldiers word that Agathocles had utterly lost his fleet and his whole army. Hamilcar himself, dispatching into Syracuse as envoys some of those who had come from Carthage and sending with them the beaks, demanded the surrender of the city; for, he said, the army of the Syracusans had been cut to pieces by the Carthaginians and their ships had been burned, and the production of the beaks offered proof to those who disbelieved. When the inhabitants of the city heard the reported misfortune of Agathocles, the common people believed; the magistrates,

1Euripides, Iphigeneia among the Taurians, 625–626. The second line is Iphigeneia’s answer to Orestes; and the sense seems to demand the insertion between the tines of some such phrase as “and answering.”181