Diodorus of Sicily

μεγάλων προτερημάτων. ὃ καὶ τότε συνέβη γενέσθαι·
ἐμπεσόντος γὰρ εἰς τὰ πλήθη θάρσους καὶ
διαδοθέντων λόγων ὡς τὸ θεῖον αὐτοῖς φανερῶς
προσημαίνει νίκην, παραστατικώτερον τὸν κίνδυνον
ὑπέμειναν.
12. Προεμβαλόντων γὰρ εἰς αὐτοὺς τῶν ἁρμάτων
ἃ μὲν κατηκόντισαν, ἃ δ᾿ εἴασαν διεκπεσεῖν, τὰ δὲ
πλεῖστα συνηνάγκασαν στρέψαι πρὸς τὴν τῶν πεζῶν
2τάξιν. παραπλησίως δὲ καὶ τὴν τῶν ἱππέων1
ἐπιφορὰν ὑποστάντες καὶ πολλοὺς αὐτῶν κατατιτρώσκοντες
ἐποίησαν φυγεῖν εἰς τοὐπίσω. προαγωνιζομένων
δ᾿ αὐτῶν ἐν τούτοις λαμπρῶς ἡ
πεζὴ δύναμις τῶν βαρβάρων ἅπασα συνῆψεν εἰς
3χεῖρας. γενναίας δὲ μάχης γιγνομένης Ἄννων μὲν
ἔχων συναγωνιζόμενον τὸν ἱερὸν λόχον ἐπιλέκτων
ἀνδρῶν καὶ σπεύδων ποιῆσαι δι᾿ αὑτοῦ τὴν νίκην
ἐνέκειτο βαρὺς τοῖς Ἕλλησι καὶ συχνοὺς ἀνῄρει.
φερομένων δ᾿ ἐπ᾿ αὐτὸν παντοδαπῶν βελῶν οὐκ
εἶκεν, ἀλλὰ καίπερ πολλοῖς τραύμασι περιπίπτων
ἐβιάζετο, μέχρις ὅτου καταπονηθεὶς ἐτελεύτησε.
4τούτου δὲ πεσόντος οἱ μὲν ταύτῃ τεταγμένοι τῶν
Καρχηδονίων ἀνετράπησαν ταῖς ψυχαῖς, οἱ δὲ περὶ
τὸν Ἀγαθοκλέα μετεωρισθέντες πολὺ μᾶλλον ἐπερρώσθησαν.
5ἃ δὴ πυθόμενός τινων Βορμίλκας, ὁ
ἕτερος στρατηγός, καὶ νομίσας παρὰ θεῶν αὐτῷ
δεδόσθαι τὸν καιρὸν τοῦ λαβεῖν ἀφορμὰς πρὸς τὴν
ἐπίθεσιν τῆς τυραννίδος, διελογίζετο πρὸς αὑτόν,
εἰ μὲν ἡ μετὰ Ἀγαθοκλέους διαφθαρείη δύναμις,
μὴ δυνήσεσθαι τὴν ἐπίθεσιν ποιήσασθαι τῇ δυναστείᾳ,
τῶν πολιτῶν ἰσχυόντων, εἰ δὲ ἐκεῖνος νικήσας
1ἱππέων Dindorf: ἴππων.172Book XX

for great successes. And so it happened on this 310 b.c. occasion also; for when courage inspired the common soldiers and word was passed along that the deity was clearly foretelling victory for them, they awaited the battle with greater steadfastness.
12. Indeed, when the chariots charged against them, they shot down some, and allowed others to pass through, but most of them they forced to turn back against the line of their own infantry. In the same way they withstood also the charge of the cavalry; and by bringing down many of them, they made them flee to the rear. While they were distinguishing themselves in these preliminary contests, the infantry force of the barbarians had all come to close quarters. A gallant battle developed, and Hanno, who had fighting under him the Sacred Band of selected men and was intent upon gaining the victory by himself, pressed heavily upon the Greeks and slew many of them. Even when all kinds of missiles were hurled against him, he would not yield but pushed on though suffering many wounds until he died from exhaustion. When he had fallen, the Carthaginians who were drawn up in that part of the line were disheartened, but Agathocles and his men were elated and became much bolder than before. When Bormilcar, the other general, heard of this from certain persons, thinking the gods had given him the opportunity for gaining a position from which to make a bid for the tyranny, he reasoned thus with himself: If the army of Agathocles should be destroyed, he himself would not be able to make his attempt at supremacy since the citizens would be strong; but if the former should win the victory and


173