Diodorus of Sicily

μὲν πρῶτον τὸ ἀληθὲς ἀγνοῶν, ὑπολαβὼν δὲ τὸν
ἀποστάτην τοῦ Δατάμου1 παλιμπροδοσίαν2 ποιεῖσθαι,
παρήγγειλε τοῖς ἰδίοις κτείνειν τοὺς προσιόντας
ἱππεῖς. ὁ δὲ Μιθροβαρζάνης ἐν μέσοις
ἀποληφθεὶς καὶ τῶν μὲν ὡς προδότην ἀμυνομένων
τῶν δὲ ὡς παλιμπροδότην3 τιμωρουμένων, ἐν
ἀπορίᾳ καθειστήκει· τῆς δ᾿ ἀπορίας οὐκ ἐώσης
βουλεύσασθαι, πρὸς ἀλκὴν ἐτρέπετο, καὶ πρὸς ἀμφοτέρους
διαμαχόμενος πολὺν ἐποίει φόνον. τέλος
δὲ πλειόνων ἢ μυρίων ἀναιρεθέντων, τοὺς ὑπολειφθέντας
ὁ Δατάμης τρεψάμενος καὶ πολλοὺς
φονεύσας ἀνεκαλέσατο τῇ σάλπιγγι τοὺς διώκοντας
6στρατιώτας. τῶν δ᾿ ἱππέων τῶν ὑπολειφθέντων
οἱ μὲν πρὸς τὸν Δατάμην ἀποχωρήσαντες ἠξίουν
τυχεῖν συγγνώμης, οἱ δὲ λοιποὶ τὴν ἡσυχίαν ἦγον,
οὐκ ἔχοντες ὅποι τράπωνται, καὶ τέλος εἰς πεντακοσίους
ὄντες κυκλωθέντες ὑπὸ Δατάμου κατηκοντίσθησαν.
7Δατάμης μὲν οὖν καὶ πρότερον ἐπὶ
στρατηγίᾳ θαυμαζόμενος, πολλῷ τότε4 μᾶλλον ἔσχε
περιβόητον τήν τε ἀνδρείαν καὶ τὴν ἐν τῷ στρατηγεῖν
σύνεσιν· ὁ δὲ βασιλεὺς Ἀρταξέρξης πυθόμενος
τὴν στρατηγίαν τοῦ Δατάμου, καὶ σπεύδων
ἄρασθαι τοῦτον, δι᾿ ἐπιβουλῆς αὐτὸν ἐδολοφόνησεν.
92. Ἅμα δὲ τούτοις πραττομένοις Ῥεομίθρης,5
ὑπὸ τῶν ἀποστατῶν πεμφθεὶς εἰς Αἴγυπτον πρὸς
Ταχὼ τὸν βασιλέα καὶ λαβὼν ἀργυρίου μὲν τάλαντα







1Schäfer deletes πρῶτον after Δατάμου. Post suggests
πρότερον ὄντα.2So Reiske: πάλιν προδοσίαν.3παλιμπροδότην] πάλιν προδότην PALf: πάλιν ὡς προδότην cet.4τότε Reiske: τε.5So Dindorf (cp. Xenophon, Education of Cyrus, 8. 8. 4):
Ῥεωμίθρης.208Book XV

Artabazus, at first unaware of the truth and suspecting 362/1 b.c. that the man who had deserted Datames was effecting a counter-betrayal, ordered his own men to slay all the horsemen who approached. And Mithro-barzanes,1 caught between the two parties—one group seeking revenge against him as a traitor; the other trying to punish him for counter-betrayal—was in a predicament, but since the situation allowed no time to deliberate, he had recourse to force, and fighting against both parties caused grievous slaughter. When, finally, more than ten thousand had been slain, Datames, having put the rest of Mithrobarzanes’ men to flight and slain many of them, recalled with the trumpet his soldiers who had gone in pursuit. Amongst the survivors in the cavalry some went back to Datames and asked for pardon; the rest did nothing, having nowhere to turn, and finally, being about five hundred in number, were surrounded and shot down by Datames. As for Datames, though even before this he was admired for his generalship, at that time he won far greater acclaim for both his courage and his sagacity in the art of war; but King Artaxerxes, when he learned about Datames’ exploit as general, because he was impatient to be rid of him, instigated his assassination.2
92. While these things were going on, Rheomi-thres,3 who had been sent by the insurgents to King Tachôs in Egypt, received from him five hundred



1This was the name of the traitor. For different versions of this story see Nepos. Datames, 6; Polyaenus, 7. 21. 7; and Frontinus, Strategemata, 2. 7. 9.2See note 2, p. 207.3Mentioned in Xenophon, Education of Cyrus, 8. 8. 4 as leaving his wife and children and the children of his friends as hostages in the power of Tachôs. Fought at Granicus and Issus (see Book 17. 19. 4 and 34. 5).209