Diodorus of Sicily

τῆς ἀνδραγαθίας τὸ πρωτεῖον1 ἀπηνέγκατο
καὶ τῆς ὅλης νίκης ἔδοξε μάλιστ᾿ αἴτιος γεγονέναι,
μετὰ δὲ τοῦτον οἱ τῶν Θετταλῶν ἱππεῖς ἄριστα
ταῖς εἴλαις χρώμενοι καὶ διαφόρως ἀγωνισάμενοι
5μεγάλην ἐπ᾿ ἀνδρείᾳ δόξαν ἔσχον. μετὰ δὲ τὴν
τῶν ἱππέων τροπὴν οἱ πεζοὶ συμβαλόντες ἀλλήλοις
ὀλίγον χρόνον ἠγωνίσαντο· οἱ γὰρ βάρβαροι διὰ τὴν
τῶν ἱππέων τροπὴν καταπλαγέντες καὶ ταῖς ψυχαῖς
6ἐνδόντες πρὸς φυγὴν ὥρμησαν. ἀνῃρέθησαν δὲ τῶν
Περσῶν οἱ πάντες πεζοὶ μὲν πλείους τῶν μυρίων,
ἱππεῖς δὲ οὐκ ἐλάττους δισχιλίων, ἐζωγρήθησαν δ᾿
ὑπὲρ τοὺς δισμυρίους. μετὰ δὲ τὴν μάχην ὁ βασιλεὺς
τοὺς τετελευτηκότας ἔθαψε μεγαλοπρεπῶς,
σπεύδων διὰ ταύτης τῆς τιμῆς τοὺς στρατιώτας
προθυμοτέρους κατασκευάσαι πρὸς τοὺς ἐν ταῖς
μάχαις κινδύνους.
7Αὐτὸς δ᾿ ἀναλαβὼν τὴν δύναμιν προῆγε διὰ τῆς
Λυδίας, καὶ τὴν μὲν τῶν Σαρδιανῶν πόλιν καὶ τὰς
ἀκροπόλεις ἔτι δὲ τοὺς ἐν αὐταῖς θησαυροὺς παρέλαβε
Μιθρίνους2 τοῦ σατράπου παραδόντος ἑκουσίως.
22. Εἰς δὲ τὴν Μίλητον συμπεφευγότων τῶν διασωθέντων
ἐκ τῆς μάχης Περσῶν μετὰ Μέμνονος




1So Stephanus: πρώτιστον.2So X: Μιθρίννους R, Μιθρήνους F; cp. chap. 64. 6;
Arrian, 1. 17. 3, 3. 16. 5.178Book XVII

king by common consent won the palm for bravery 334/3 b.c. and was regarded as the chief author of the victory, and next to him the Thessalian cavalry won a great reputation for valour because of the skilful handling of their squadrons and their unmatched fighting quality. After the rout of the cavalry, the foot soldiers engaged one another in a contest that was soon ended. For the Persians, dismayed by the rout of the cavalry and shaken in spirit, were quick to flee.1 The total of the Persian infantry killed was more than ten thousand; of the cavalry not less than two thousand; and there were taken alive upwards of twenty thousand.2 After the battle the king gave magnificent obsequies to the dead,3 for he thought it important by this sort of honour to create in his men greater enthusiasm to face the hazards of battle.
Recovering his forces, Alexander led them down through Lydia and took over the city of the Sardians with its citadels and, what is more, the treasures stored therein, for Mithrines the satrap surrendered them without resistance.4
22. Since the Persian survivors of the battle together with the general Memnon had taken refuge




1By allowing their entire cavalry force to be first contained
and then routed by the Macedonians, the Persian commanders
left their infantry without protection from the flanks and
rear, and with little chance of withdrawal. Arrian (1. 16. 2)
speaks only of the annihilation of the Greek mercenary
phalanx. According to Diodorus, the Persian infantry would have got away with a loss of some thirty per cent of its effectives.2Plutarch, Alexander, 16. 7, drives the Persian casualties as 2500 horse and 20,000 foot; Arrian as 1000 horse and the most of the Greek phalanx, except for 2000 who were captured.3The Macedonian casualties were 9 foot and 120 horse (Justin, 11. 6. 12), 9 foot and 25 horse (Plutarch, Alexander, 16. 7), or 30 foot and 60 horse (including 25 “Companions,” Arrian, 1.16. 4). These were honoured with statues (Justin, Plutarch, Arrian, ll. cc.; Velleius Paterculus, 1. 11. 3–4).4Plutarch, Alexander, 17. 1. The account of Arrian, 1. 17–18. 2, is fuller.179