Diodorus of Sicily
2οὐκ ἔχων1 δὲ στρατηγὸν ἀξιόχρεων, μετεπέμψατο
Χαβρίαν τὸν Ἀθηναῖον, ἄνδρα καὶ
φρονήσει2 καὶ συνέσει στρατηγικῇ διάφορον καὶ
δόξαν ἐπ᾿ ἀρετῇ μεγάλην περιπεποιημένον.3 οὗτος
μὲν οὖν ἄνευ τῆς τοῦ δήμου γνώμης προσδεξάμενος
τὴν στρατηγίαν ἀφηγεῖτο τῶν κατ᾿ Αἴγυπτον δυνάμεων,
καὶ μετὰ πολλῆς σπουδῆς παρεσκευάζετο
3πολεμεῖν πρὸς τοὺς Πέρσας. Φαρνάβαζος δ᾿ ὑπὸ
τοῦ βασιλέως ἀναδεδειγμένος στρατηγὸς ἐπὶ4 τῆς
Περσικῆς δυνάμεως παρασκευὰς μεγάλας ἐποιήσατο
τῶν πρὸς τὸν πόλεμον χρησίμων· ἐξέπεμψε δὲ καὶ
πρὸς Ἀθηναίους πρέσβεις, κατηγορῶν μὲν Χαβρίου,
ὅτι τῶν Αἰγυπτίων ἡγούμενος ἀπαλλοτριοῖ τὴν τοῦ
βασιλέως εὔνοιαν ἀπὸ τοῦ δήμου, παρακαλῶν δὲ
4στρατηγὸν Ἰφικράτην αὑτῷ δοῦναι. οἱ δ᾿ Ἀθηναῖοι,
σπεύδοντες τὸν βασιλέα τῶν Περσῶν εἰς εὔνοιαν
προσαγαγέσθαι καὶ τὸν Φαρνάβαζον ἰδιοποιήσασθαι,
ταχέως τόν τε Χαβρίαν ἐξ Αἰγύπτου μετεπέμψαντο
καὶ τὸν Ἰφικράτην στρατηγὸν ἐξαπέστειλαν συμμαχήσοντα
τοῖς Πέρσαις.
1ἔχων P, Vogel: ἐχόντων.2καὶ φρονήσει P, Vogel: Vulgate omits.3περιπεποιημένον P, Vogel: πεποιημένον.4ἐπὶ Schäfer: ἀπὸ (Reiske omits).24Book XV

campaign.1 But having no capable general, he sent 377/6 b.c. for Chabrias the Athenian, a man distinguished both for his prudence as general and his shrewdness in the art of war, who had also won great repute for personal prowess. Now Chabrias, without first securing the permission of the Athenian people, accepted the appointment and took command of the forces in Egypt and with great dispatch made preparations to fight the Persians.2 But Pharnabazus, who had been appointed by the King general of the Persian armies, prepared large supplies of war material, and also sent ambassadors to Athens, first to denounce Chabrias, who by becoming general of the Egyptians was alienating, so he said, the King’s affection from the people of Athens, and, secondly, to urge them to give him Iphicrates as general. The Athenians, being eager to gain the favour of the Persian King and to incline Pharnabazus to themselves, quickly recalled Chabrias from Egypt3 and dispatched Iphicrates4 as general to act in alliance with the Persians.
1This war between the Persians and the Egyptians (cp.
Isocrates, Panegyricus, 140 f.; Demosthenes, 20. 76; Nepos,
Chabrias, 2. 1) belongs to an earlier period (according to
Hall, Cambridge Ancient History, 6. 145 f., to the years
385–383). Nectanebôs became king of Egypt in succession
to Acoris by 378 (ibid. 148). Olmstead, A. T., History of
the Persian Empire, p. 399, gives 385–383 as dates of the
war.2This must have been c. 386–384 when Chabrias was in
charge of the Athenian army which was recalled from Cyprus (Hall, l.c. 146). Chabrias went shortly afterward to Egypt. Hall (l.c. 148), on the other hand, says that he went to Egypt in 377 and was soon recalled. See my note 3 below. Hall on the dates for Chabrias is at variance with other historians and Greek evidence. A good discussion of dates is found in Parke, Greek Mercenary Soldiers, 59–62. See recent treatment in Olmstead, op. cit. pp. 397 ff. Complete data in Kirchner, Pros. Att. no. 15086.4Iphicrates, 2. 4) about the time Chabrias was elected general.
Since the Corinthian War Iphicrates had been in Thrace,
restored to King Cotys his rule over the Odrysians, and
married Cotys’ daughter. He returned from Persian service
to Athens in 373. He was a self-made man, great organizer
and master of light-armed tactics, one of the most able of
the condottieri (see chap. 44 and Nepos, Iphicrates). Iphicrates was probably sent out to Persia (see Nepos,3The recall of Chabrias probably occurred in the winter 380/79, since in the next winter he held the Athenian frontier against Cleombrotus (Xenophon, Hell. 5. 4. 14) and in the early summer 378 helped defend Thebes against Agesilaüs. He was probably elected general in the spring of 379 (see Beloch, Griechische Geschichte2, 3. 2. 229–230). Chabrias was of good family, lived on a generous scale, kept a racing stable, and was an able condottiere.25