Diodorus of Sicily

Λύκιοι δὲ καὶ Παμφύλιοι χίλιοι, μισθοφόροι
δ᾿ ὀκτακισχίλιοι. ἐπὶ δὲ τὸ δεξιὸν κέρας ἔταξε
τοὺς λοιποὺς ἱππεῖς χιλίους πεντακοσίους, ὧν Ἀνδρόνικος
ἡγεῖτο. τούτῳ δ᾿ ἦν συντεταγμένον λοξὴν
φυλάττειν τὴν στάσιν καὶ φυγομαχεῖν, καραδοκοῦντα
τὴν δι᾿ αὐτοῦ γινομένην κρίσιν. τοὺς δὲ
λοιποὺς τῶν ἐλεφάντων τρεισκαίδεκα ἔστησε πρὸ
τῆς τῶν πεζῶν φάλαγγος, μίξας εἰς τὰ1 διαστήματα
τῶν ψιλῶν τοὺς ἱκανούς. Δημήτριος μὲν οὖν διεκόσμησε
τὴν ἰδίαν δύναμιν τὸν τρόπον τοῦτον.
83. Οἱ δὲ περὶ τὸν Πτολεμαῖον καὶ Σέλευκον τὸ
μὲν πρῶτον ἔταξαν ἰσχυρὰν τὴν εὐώνυμον τάξιν,
ἀγνοοῦντες τῶν ἐναντίων τὴν ἐπιβολήν· μαθόντες
δὲ παρὰ τῶν κατασκόπων τὸ γεγονὸς ταχέως ἐξέταξαν
τὴν δύναμιν ὅπως τὸ δεξιὸν κέρας ἰσχὺν ἔχον
καὶ δύναμιν τὴν κρατίστην διαγωνίσηται πρὸς τοὺς
μετὰ Δημητρίου τεταγμένους ἐν τοῖς εὐωνύμοις
μέρεσιν. ἔταξαν δὲ ἐπὶ τοῦ κέρατος τούτου2 τῶν
ἱππέων τοὺς κρατίστους τρισχιλίους, ἐν οἷς καὶ
2αὐτοὶ διεγνώκεισαν ἀγωνίσασθαι. προέταξαν δὲ
τῆς στάσεως ταύτης τοὺς κομίζοντας χάρακα σεσιδηρωμένον
καὶ δεδεμένον ἁλύσεσιν, ὃν παρεσκευάσαντο
πρὸς τὴν τῶν ἐλεφάντων ἔφοδον·
ταθέντος γὰρ τούτου ῥᾴδιον ἦν εἴργειν τὰ θηρία




1εἰς τὰ Dindorf: εἴς τινα.2τούτου second hand in R: τοῦ.60Book XIX

one thousand were Lycians and Pamphylians, and 312 b.c. eight thousand were mercenaries. On the right wing he drew up the rest of his cavalry, fifteen hundred men commanded by Andronicus. This officer was ordered to hold his line back at an angle and avoid fighting, awaiting the outcome of the conflict fought by Demetrius. The thirteen other elephants he stationed in front of the phalanx of the infantry with the normal complement of light troops in the intervals. In this manner, then, Demetrius arrayed his army.
83. Ptolemy and Seleucus at first made strong the left part of their line, not knowing the intention of the enemy; but when they learned from scouts the formation he had adopted, they quickly reformed their army in such a way that their right wing should have the greatest strength and power and be matched against those arrayed with Demetrius on his left. They drew up on this wing the three thousand strongest of their cavalry, along with whom they themselves had decided to fight. In front of this position they placed the men who were to handle the spiked devices1 made of iron and connected by chains that they had prepared against the onset of the elephants; for when this contrivance had been stretched out, it was easy to prevent the beasts

1As a military term χάραξ elsewhere means either a pointed
stake to be used in making a palisade or the palisade itself,
and this passage is cited in L.S.J. as an example of the latter
meaning. However, here it is certainly a device with upright
spikes on which the elephants step (chap. 84). In the defence
of Megalopolis, knowing that Polyperchon would send his elephants through a breach in the wall, Damis (who had served with Alexander and knew the nature of the elephant) studded many frames with sharp nails and, after placing them with their points upwards in the way the elephants would necessarily follow, covered them with loose earth (Book 18. 71. 2–6). In the present battle, since the point of attack would not be known long in advance, a portable device was needed. Perhaps we should think of planks with spikes driven through them, connected by chains. Kromayer, referring to our passages, speaks of “Fuszangeln,” i.e. caltrops or crowfeet (Kromayer and Veith, Heerwesen u. Kriegsführung, 141).61