Diodorus of Sicily

πρὸς μὲν γὰρ τὰ καταπελτικὰ βέλη τροχοὺς κατεσκεύασαν
διειλημμένους πυκνοῖς διαφράγμασι,
τούτους δὲ διά τινος μηχανῆς δινεύοντες τὰ μὲν
συνέτριβον, τὰ δὲ παρέσυρον τῶν βελῶν, πάντων
δὲ τὴν ἐκ τῆς βίας φορὰν ἐξέλυον· τοὺς δ᾿ ἐκ τῶν
πετροβόλων φερομένους λίθους δεχόμενοι μαλακαῖς
τισι καὶ συνενδιδούσαις κατασκευαῖς ἐπράυνον τὴν
2ἐκ τῆς ὀργανικῆς βίας δύναμιν. ὁ δὲ βασιλεὺς ἅμα
τῇ κατὰ τὸ χῶμα προσβολῇ παντὶ τῷ στόλῳ περιέπλει
τὴν πόλιν καὶ τὰ τείχη περιεσκέπτετο καὶ
φανερὸς ἦν πολιορκήσων τὴν πόλιν κατὰ γῆν ἅμα
καὶ κατὰ θάλατταν.
3Τῶν δὲ Τυρίων ἀνταναχθῆναι μὲν τῷ στόλῳ
μηκέτι τολμώντων, τρισὶ δὲ ναυσὶν ὁρμούντων πρὸ
τοῦ λιμένος ὁ βασιλεὺς ἐπιπλεύσας αὐταῖς καὶ
πάσας συντρίψας ἐπανῆλθεν ἐπὶ τὴν ἰδίαν στρατοπεδείαν.
οἱ δὲ Τύριοι βουλόμενοι διπλασιάσαι τὴν
ἀπὸ τῶν τειχῶν ἀσφάλειαν, ἀποστήσαντες πέντε
πήχεις ἕτερον τεῖχος ᾠκοδόμουν δέκα πηχῶν τὸ
πλάτος καὶ τὴν ἀνὰ μέσον τῶν τειχῶν σύριγγα λίθων
4καὶ χώματος ἐπλήρουν. ὁ δ᾿ Ἀλέξανδρος τὰς
τριήρεις ζευγνύων καὶ μηχανὰς παντοδαπὰς αὐταῖς
ἐπιστήσας κατέβαλεν ἐπὶ πλέθρον τοῦ τείχους· καὶ
5διὰ τοῦ πτώματος εἰσέπιπτον εἰς τὴν πόλιν. οἱ δὲ
Τύριοι τοὺς εἰσβιαζομένους πυκνοῖς βέλεσι βάλλοντες
μόγις ἀπεστρέψαντο1 καὶ τὸ πεπτωκὸς μέρος
τοῦ τείχους ἀνῳκοδόμησαν νυκτὸς ἐπιλαβούσης.
Μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα τοῦ χώματος συνάψαντος τῷ



1ἀπεστρέψαντο RF; ἀπετρέψαντο X; ἀπετρίψαντο Wesseling.240Book XVII

Against the projectiles from the catapults they 332/1 b.c. made wheels with many spokes, and, setting these to rotate by a certain device, they destroyed some of the missiles and deflected others, and broke the force of all. They caught the balls from the stone throwers in soft and yielding materials and so weakened their force. While this attack was going on from the mole, the king sailed around the city with his whole fleet and inspected the walls, and made it clear that he was about to attack the city alike by land and sea.
The Tyrians did not dare to put to sea again with their whole fleet but kept three ships moored at the harbour mouth.1 The king, however, sailed up to these, sank them all, and so returned to his camp. Wanting to double the security of their walls, the Tyrians built a second one at a distance of five cubits within the first; this was ten cubits in thickness, and the passage between the walls they filled with stones and earth, but Alexander lashed triremes together, mounted his various siege engines upon them, and overthrew the wall for the space of a plethron.2 Through this breach the Macedonians burst into the city, but the Tyrians rained on them a shower of missiles and managed to turn them back,3 and when night came, they rebuilt the fallen part of the wall.
Now the causeway had reached the wall and made




1Curtius, 4. 3. 12; Arrian, 2. 20. 9.2The distances are seven and one-half feet, fifteen feet, and one hundred feet respectively.3Arrian. 2. 22. 7.241