Diodorus of Sicily

πρότερον σωθεὶς ὑπ᾿ αὐτοῦ περὶ Νῶρα τῆς Φρυγίας
οὐδὲν ἧττον τοῖς βασιλεῦσι προθυμότατα
συνηγωνίσατο. ὁρῶν δὲ καὶ τὴν τῶν Μακεδόνων
ὁρμὴν ἀπαραίτητον οὖσαν πρὸς τὴν κατ᾿ Εὐμενοῦς
τιμωρίαν ἀνεῖλε τὸν ἄνδρα· διὰ δὲ τὴν προγεγενημένην
φιλίαν καύσας τὸ σῶμα καὶ καταθέμενος
εἰς ἀγγεῖον τὰ ὀστᾶ πρὸς τοὺς οἰκείους ἀπέστειλεν.
3ἀνήχθη δ᾿ ἐν τοῖς τραυματίαις αἰχμάλωτος
καὶ ὁ τὰς ἱστορίας συνταξάμενος Ἱερώνυμος ὁ
Καρδιανός, ὃς τὸν μὲν ἔμπροσθεν χρόνον ὑπ᾿ Εὐμενοῦς
τιμώμενος διετέλεσεν, μετὰ δὲ τὸν ἐκείνου
θάνατον ὑπ᾿ Ἀντιγόνου ἐτύγχανε φιλανθρωπίας καὶ
πίστεως.
4Ὁ δ᾿ Ἀντίγονος τὴν δύναμιν ἅπασαν ἀναλαβὼν
εἰς Μηδίαν αὐτὸς μὲν ἔν τινι κώμῃ παρεχείμασεν
οὔσῃ πλησίον Ἐκβατάνων, ἐν ᾗ τῆς χώρας ἐκείνης
ἐστὶ τὰ βασίλεια, τοὺς δὲ στρατιώτας ἐπιδιεῖλεν
εἰς ἅπασαν τὴν σατραπείαν καὶ μάλιστα εἰς τὴν
ἐπαρχίαν τὴν προσαγορευομένην Ῥάγας, ἣ ταύτην
τὴν προσηγορίαν ἔσχεν ἀπὸ τῶν γενομένων περὶ
αὐτὴν ἀτυχημάτων ἐν τοῖς ἔμπροσθεν χρόνοις·
5πλείστας γὰρ ἔχουσα πόλεις τῶν ἐν ἐκείνοις τοῖς
τόποις καὶ μάλιστ᾿ εὐδαιμονούσας τηλικούτους
ἔσχε σεισμοὺς ὥστε καὶ τὰς πόλεις καὶ τοὺς
ἐνοικοῦντας ἅπαντας ἀφανισθῆναι, καθόλου δὲ
τὴν χώραν ἀλλοιωθῆναι καὶ ποταμοὺς ἀντὶ τῶν
προϋπαρχόντων ἄλλους φανῆναι καὶ λίμνας.
45. Κατὰ δὲ τούτους τοὺς χρόνους συνέβη γενέσθαι
περὶ τὴν Ῥοδίων πόλιν τὸν τρίτον κατακλυσμόν,




350Book XIX

on the previous occasion, after Eumenes had been 17/16 b.c. spared by Antigonus at Nora in Phrygia, he had none the less supported the kings most whole-heartedly.1 When Antigonus saw also that the ardent desire of the Macedonians for the punishment of Eumenes was not to be turned aside, he put him to death; but because of his former friendship for him, he burned his body, and after placing his bones in an urn, he sent them to his relatives. Among the wounded there was also brought in as a captive the historian Hieronymus of Cardia,2 who hitherto always had been held in honour by Eumenes, but after Eumenes’ death enjoyed the favour and confidence of Antigonus.
After Antigonus had taken his entire army into Media, he himself spent the winter3 in a village that is near Ecbatana, where the capital of this country is situated, but he distributed the soldiers throughout the entire satrapy and particularly in the eparchy called Rhagae, which had received this name from a catastrophe that had occurred there in former times.4 Of all the lands in that part of the world, its cities had been the most numerous and the most prosperous, but it had experienced so violent an earthquake that both the cities and all their inhabitants vanished, and, in general, the land was altered and new rivers and marshy lakes appeared in place of the former ones.5
45. At this time occurred the third inundation of the city of Rhodes, which destroyed many of its


1Cp. Book 18. 53. 5, 58. 4.2For Hieroymus cp. Introduction to this volume.3The rest of the winter of 317/16.4This etymology (Rhagae, “breaks” or “clefts”), given also by Duris (Strabo, 1. 3. 19) and Posidonius (Strabo, 11. 9. 1), is false, but the catastrophe may be a fact since this region suffered severe earthquakes at a later date.5Continued in chap. 46. 1. The winter is that of 317/16 b.c.351