Diodorus of Sicily
2Μάλλιον, Λεύκιον καὶ Ποστούμιον.1 ἐπὶ δὲ τούτων
Λακεδαιμόνιοι μὲν στρατηγὸν προχειρισάμενοι
Ἀγησίπολιν τὸν βασιλέα, καὶ δύναμιν ἱκανὴν
παραδόντες, ἐψηφίσαντο πρὸς Ὀλυνθίους πολεμεῖν.2
οὗτος δὲ καταντήσας εἰς τὴν τῶν Ὀλυνθίων χώραν
καὶ παραλαβὼν τοὺς προϋπάρχοντας ἐν τῇ παρεμβολῇ
στρατιώτας διεπολέμει πρὸς τοὺς ἐγχωρίους.
οἱ δ᾿ Ὀλύνθιοι μεγάλην μὲν μάχην οὐδεμίαν κατὰ
τοῦτον τὸν ἐνιαυτὸν συνεστήσαντο, ἀκροβολισμοὺς
δὲ καὶ βραχείας συμπλοκὰς ποιούμενοι διετέλεσαν,
καταπεπληγμένοι τὴν μετὰ τοῦ βασιλέως δύναμιν.
23. Τοῦ δ᾿ ἐνιαυσίου χρόνου διεληλυθότος Ἀθήνησι
μὲν ἦν ἄρχων3 Πυθέας, ἐν Ῥώμῃ δ᾿ ἀντὶ τῶν ὑπάτων
χιλίαρχοι ἓξ κατεστάθησαν, Τίτος Κοΐνκτιος,4
Λεύκιος Σερουίλιος, Λεύκιος Ἰούλιος, Ἀκύλλιος,4
Λεύκιος5 Λοκρήτιος,6 Σερούιος7 Σουλπίκιος, παρὰ
δὲ Ἠλείοις ὀλυμπιὰς ἤχθη ἑκατοστή, καθ᾿ ἣν ἐνίκα
2στάδιον Διονυσόδωρος Ταραντῖνος. ἐπὶ δὲ τούτων
Ἀγησίπολις ὁ τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων βασιλεὺς ἐτελεύτησε
νόσῳ, βασιλεύσας ἔτη δεκατέσσαρα· τὴν
δὲ ἀρχὴν διαδεξάμενος Κλεόμβροτος ὁ ἀδελφὸς
ἐβασίλευσεν ἔτη ἐννέα. Λακεδαιμόνιοι δὲ Πολυβιάδαν3
στρατηγὸν καταστήσαντες ἐξαπέστειλαν
3εἰς τὸν πρὸς Ὀλυνθίους πόλεμον. οὗτος δὲ παραλαβὼν
τὰς δυνάμεις, καὶ τὸν πόλεμον ἐνεργῶς ἅμα
καὶ στρατηγικῶς διοικῶν, ἐποίει πολλὰ προτερήματα.
αἰεὶ δὲ μᾶλλον εὐημερῶν καὶ πλείοσι μάχαις




1Οὐαλέριον . . . Ποστούμιον Vogel: οὐαλλέριον . . . ποστόμιον
P, Μάρκον . . . Οὐαλέριον and Λεύκιον . . . Ποστούμιον
omitted by A, the other MSS. add Κόιντον (see Livy, 6. 1).2πολεμεῖν Unger, Vogel: πόλεμον.3ἦν ἄρχων Vogel: ἦρχε LJ.4Κοΐνκτος for MSS. Κόιντιος, Ἀκύλλιος for Ἀκύλιος Vogel.5Λεύκιος P] Δέκιος cet.6Λοκρήτιος Vogel: Λουκρήτιος.7Σερούιος Rhodoman (cp. Livy, 6. 4): Σερουίλιος P, omitted by A, Ἄγκος καὶ Σερουίλιος cet8Πολυβιάδαν Wesseling (cp. Xenophon, Hell. 5. 3. 20): Πολυκίδαν A, Πολυβίδαν cet8Book XV

Lucius and Postumius. During their term of office 381/0 b.c. the Lacedaemonians appointed as general Agesipolis their king, gave him an adequate army, and voted to make war on the Olynthians.1 On his arrival in Olynthian territory, he took under his command the soldiers previously encamped there and continued the war against the inhabitants. The Olynthians, however, engaged in no important battle this year, but to the end fought only by exchanges of missiles and short engagements, being in awe of the strength of the king’s army.
23. At the close of the year Pythias was archon 380/79 b.c. at Athens, and at Rome six military tribunes with consular power were elected, Titus Quinctius, Lucius Servilius, Lucius Julius, Aquilius, Lucius Lucretius, and Servius Sulpicius; and in this year the Eleians celebrated the hundredth Olympiad, at which Dionysodorus
of Tarentum won the stadium race. During their term of office Agesipolis, king of the Lacedaemonians, died of illness2 after a reign of fourteen years; Cleombrotus his brother succeeded to the throne and reigned for nine years.3 The Lacedaemonians appointed Polybiadas general and sent him to the war against the Olynthians. He took over the forces, and, prosecuting the war vigorously and with able generalship, was often superior. With ever-increasing
success, after several victories, he reduced








1See Xenophon, Hell. 5. 3. 8, 9.2See Xenophon, Hell. 5. 3. 18–20.3Cp. infra, chap. 55. 5.9