Diodorus of Sicily

ταχὺ δὲ τῆς πόλεως ἐπίδοσιν λαμβανούσης
οἱ μὲν οἰκήτορες μεγάλους περιεποιήσαντο πλούτους,
ἡ δὲ πόλις ἀξιόλογον ἀξίωμα περιποιησαμένη
τὸ τελευταῖον ἐν τῷ καθ᾿ ἡμᾶς βίῳ Καίσαρος
ἀναστήσαντος τοὺς Ταυρομενίτας ἐκ τῆς πατρίδος
τῶν Ῥωμαίων ἀποικίαν ἐδέξατο.
2Ἅμα δὲ τούτοις πραττομένοις οἱ τὴν Εὔβοιαν
κατοικοῦντες ἐστασίασαν πρὸς ἀλλήλους καὶ τῶν
μὲν τοὺς Βοιωτοὺς τῶν δὲ τοὺς Ἀθηναίους ἐπικαλεσαμένων
συνέστη πόλεμος κατὰ τὴν Εὔβοιαν.
γενομένων δὲ πλειόνων συμπλοκῶν καὶ ἀκροβολισμῶν
ὁτὲ μὲν οἱ Θηβαῖοι προετέρουν ὁτὲ δ᾿ οἱ
Ἀθηναῖοι τὴν νίκην ἀπεφέροντο. μεγάλη μὲν οὖν
παράταξις οὐδεμία συνετελέσθη· τῆς δὲ νήσου διὰ
τὸν ἐμφύλιον πόλεμον καταφθαρείσης καὶ πολλῶν
ἀνθρώπων παρ᾿ ἀμφοτέρων διαφθαρέντων μόγις
ταῖς συμφοραῖς νουθετηθέντες εἰς ὁμόνοιαν ἦλθον
καὶ τὴν εἰρήνην συνέθεντο πρὸς ἀλλήλους.
Οἱ μὲν οὖν Βοιωτοὶ τὴν εἰς οἶκον ἐπάνοδον ποιησάμενοι
3τὴν ἡσυχίαν ἦγον· οἱ δ᾿ Ἀθηναῖοι Χίων



254Book XVI

Tauros.”1 And as the city made quick progress, the 358/7 b.c. inhabitants laid up great wealth, and the city, which had won considerable repute, finally in our own lifetime, after Caesar2 had expelled the inhabitants of Tauromenium from their native land, received a colony of Roman citizens.
While these things were going on, the inhabitants of Euboea fell into strife among themselves, and when one party summoned the Boeotians to its assistance and the other the Athenians, war broke out over all Euboea. A good many close combats and skirmishes occurred in which sometimes the Thebans were superior and sometimes the Athenians carried off the victory. Although no important pitched battle was fought to a finish, yet when the island had been devastated by the intestinal warfare and many men had been slain on both sides, at long last admonished by the disasters, the parties came to an agreement and made peace with one another.3
Now the Boeotians returned home and remained quiet, but the Athenians, who had suffered the revolt


1For a different story see Book 14. 59. 2. Naxos (three
miles from Tauromenium) was destroyed by Dionysius in
403 (Book 14. 15. 2) and its territory assigned to neighbouring
Siculi (ibid. 3). These occupied the hill of Taurus to the
north of Naxos and gave it the name Tauromenium. The
Siculi in 394 warded off a surprise winter attack of Dionysius
(Book 14. 87–88). By the peace of 392 Dionysius regained
Tauromenium, expelled the Siculi, and settled his mercenaries
on the spot (Book 14. 96. 4). Probably this present
settlement by Andromachus is to be regarded as a new
foundation. See Wesseling’s note on Book 14. 59.2Since Tauromenium had been a stronghold of Sextus
Pompey, Augustus, as a precautionary measure and because
of its strong position commanding the coast road between
Syracuse and Messenê, expelled the former inhabitants to make room for new colonists. It may have been one of the Sicilian cities colonized by Augustus in Dio Cassius, 54. 7. 1 (21 b.c.).3Diodorus has placed the Euboean war wrongly in the archonship of Cephisodotus (358/7). The war lasted only thirty days according to Aeschines, In Ctesiphonta, 85 and occurred under Agathocles (357/6). Diocles was the Athenian commander (Demosthenes, 21. 174) and he was general in 357/6 (Dittenberger, Syllogê, 13, 190. 23 and note 9). The treaty of peace is also dated under the archonship of Agathocles (ibid. 20= 1G, 22. 124). That the Social War had already begun is proved by the intentional erasure of Chabrias’ (chap. 7. 3) name from this inscription. He was no longer general when the treaty was signed since he had fallen at Chios. For discussion see Beloch, Griechische Geschichte2 3. 2. 258 and 3. 1. 238, note 2.255