Diodorus of Sicily

ἀλλήλοις βοηθεῖν καὶ πρὸς τὰς ἀπροσδοκήτους τῶν
πολεμίων ἐπιθέσεις δυσχερῶς1 ἀθροίζωνται. πεισθέντων
δὲ τῶν Ἀκαρνάνων οἱ πλεῖστοι μὲν εἰς
Στράτον πόλιν συνῴκησαν, ὀχυρωτάτην οὖσαν καὶ
μεγίστην, Οἰνιάδαι δὲ καί τινες ἄλλοι συνῆλθον ἐπὶ
5Σαυρίαν, Δεριεῖς δὲ μεθ᾿ ἑτέρων εἰς Ἀγρίνιον. ὁ
δὲ Κάσανδρος ἀπολιπὼν στρατηγὸν Λυκίσκον μετὰ
τῶν ἱκανῶν στρατιωτῶν τούτῳ μὲν παρήγγειλε
βοηθεῖν Ἀκαρνᾶσιν, αὐτὸς δὲ μετὰ δυνάμεως παρελθὼν
ἐπὶ Λευκάδος τὴν πόλιν διὰ πρεσβείας
6προσηγάγετο. μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα τὴν ὁρμὴν ἐπὶ τὸν
Ἀδρίαν ποιησάμενος Ἀπολλωνίαν ἐξ ἐφόδου παρέλαβεν.
εἰς δὲ τὴν Ἰλλυρίδα προελθὼν καὶ διαβὰς
τὸν Ἕβρον ποταμὸν παρετάξατο πρὸς Γλαυκίαν
7τὸν Ἰλλυριῶν βασιλέα. περιγενόμενος δὲ τῇ μάχῃ
πρὸς μὲν τοῦτον συνθήκας ἐποιήσατο, καθ᾿ ἃς οὐκ
ἐξῆν τῷ Γλαυκίᾳ στρατεύειν ἐπὶ τοὺς Κασάνδρου
συμμάχους, τὴν δὲ τῶν Ἐπιδαμνίων πόλιν προσαγαγόμενος
καὶ φρουρὰν ἐγκαταστήσας ἐπανῆλθεν
εἰς Μακεδονίαν.
68. Ἀπαλλαγέντος δὲ ἐκ τῆς Αἰτωλίας τοῦ
Κασάνδρου συστραφέντες τῶν Αἰτωλῶν εἰς τρισχιλίους
καὶ περιχαρακώσαντες Ἀγρίνιον ἐπολιόρκουν,
τῶν δὲ κατοικούντων τὸ χωρίον ὁμολογίας ποιησαμένων
ὥστε τὴν μὲν πόλιν παραδοῦναι, τῆς δ᾿
ἀσφαλείας τυχόντας αὐτοὺς ἀπαλλαγῆναι, οὗτοι μὲν
πιστεύοντες ταῖς σπονδαῖς ἀπῄεσαν, οἱ δ᾿ Αἰτωλοὶ
παραβάντες τὰς συνθήκας καὶ καταδιώξαντες τοὺς
οὐδὲν ἐλπίζοντας πείσεσθαι δεινὸν πλὴν ὀλίγων
2πάντας ἀπέσφαξαν. ὁ δὲ Κάσανδρος παραγενόμενος
εἰς Μακεδονίαν καὶ πυθόμενος πολεμεῖσθαι

1εὐχερῶς or μὴ δυσχερῶς Reiske.14Book XIX

were scattered, be powerless to aid each other and 314 b.c. find difficulty in assembling to meet the unexpected raids of their enemies. The Acarnanians were persuaded, and most of them came to live together in Stratus, since this was their strongest and largest city; but the Oeniadae and some others gathered at Sauria, and the Derians and the rest settled at Agrinium. Cassander left Lyciscus in command with adequate troops, ordering him to aid the Acarnanians; but he himself moved upon Leucas with an army and secured the allegiance of the city through an embassy. Thereafter, directing his campaign to the Adriatic, he took Apollonia at the first assault. Advancing into Illyria and crossing the Hebrus River, he drew up his army against Glaucias, the king of the Illyrians.1 Being successful in the battle, he made a treaty with the king according to which Glaucias was not to wage war on Cassander’s allies; then he himself, after securing the city of Epidamnus and establishing a garrison therein, returned to Macedonia.2
68. When Cassander had departed from Aetolia, the Aetolians, gathering together to the number of three thousand, invested Agrinium and began a siege. The inhabitants of the place came to terms with them, agreeing to surrender the city and depart under safe conduct; but when, trusting in the treaty, they were leaving, the Aetolians violated the terms, pursued hotly after these men while they were anticipating no danger, and slaughtered all but a few of them. When Cassander had arrived in Macedonia and heard that war was being waged on


1Justin, 15. 2. 1–2, gives a different account of this campaign. The Hebrus River in Illyria seems otherwise unknown.2Continued in chap. 78.15