Diodorus of Sicily

Πύθων. οὗτος γὰρ διαβεβοημένος ἐπὶ
τῇ τοῦ λόγου δεινότητι καὶ συγκριθεὶς παρὰ τοῖς
Βοιωτοῖς κατὰ τὴν περὶ τῆς συμμαχίας δημηγορίαν
πρὸς Δημοσθένην τῶν μὲν ἄλλων ἐπρώτευσεν, τούτου
4δὲ ἐφάνη καταδεέστερος. καὶ ὁ Δημοσθένης
δὲ αὐτὸς ὡς μέγα τι κατειργασμένος ἐν τοῖς συγγεγραμμένοις
ὑπ᾿ αὐτοῦ λόγοις σεμνύνεται τῇ πρὸς
τὸν ῥήτορα τοῦτον δημηγορίᾳ ἐν οἷς λέγει, Τότ᾿
ἐγὼ μὲν τῷ Πύθωνι θρασυνομένῳ καὶ πολλῷ
ῥέοντι καθ᾿ ὑμῶν οὐχ ὑπεχώρησα.
5Μετὰ δὲ ταῦθ᾿ ὁ Φίλιππος ἀποτυχὼν τῆς τῶν
Βοιωτῶν συμμαχίας οὐδὲν ἧττον ἔκρινε πρὸς ἀμφοτέρους
διαγωνίσασθαι· διὸ καὶ προσαναμείνας
τοὺς ἀφυστεροῦντας τῶν συμμάχων ἧκεν εἰς τὴν
Βοιωτίαν, ἔχων πεζοὺς μὲν πλείους τῶν τρισμυρίων,
6ἱππεῖς δὲ οὐκ ἔλαττον τῶν δισχιλίων. ἀμφοτέρων
δὲ πρὸς τὴν μάχην εὐτρεπῶν γενομένων τοῖς
μὲν φρονήμασι καὶ ταῖς προθυμίαις, ἔτι δὲ ταῖς
ἀνδραγαθίαις ἐφάμιλλοι καθειστήκεισαν, τῷ δὲ πλήθει
καὶ τῇ κατὰ τὴν στρατηγίαν ἀρετῇ προεῖχεν
7ὁ βασιλεύς. πολλὰς γὰρ καὶ ποικίλας παρατάξεις
ἠγωνισμένος καὶ ἐν ταῖς πλείσταις μάχαις νενικηκὼς
μεγάλην εἶχεν ἐμπειρίαν τῶν κατὰ πόλεμον
ἔργων. παρὰ δὲ τοῖς Ἀθηναίοις οἱ μὲν ἀγαθώτατοι
τῶν στρατηγῶν ἐτετελευτήκεισαν, Ἰφικράτης
καὶ Χαβρίας, ἔτι δὲ Τιμόθεος, τῶν δ᾿ ὑπολελειμμένων
Χάρης πρωτεύων οὐδὲν διέφερε τῶν τυχόντων
ἰδιωτῶν κατὰ τὴν ἐν τῷ στρατηγεῖν ἐνέργειαν
καὶ βουλήν.
76Book XVI

League, the most eminent of whom was Pytho.1 He 838/7 b.c. was celebrated for his eloquence, but judged by the Boeotians in this contest for their allegiance against Demosthenes, he surpassed all the other speakers, to be sure, but was clearly inferior to him. And Demosthenes himself in his speeches parades his success against this orator as a great accomplishment, where he says: “I did not then give ground before Pytho in spite of his confidence and his torrent of words against you.”2
So Philip failed to get the support of the Boeotians, but nevertheless decided to fight both of the allies together. He waited for the last of his laggard confederates to arrive, and then marched into Boeotia. His forces came to more than thirty thousand infantry and no less than two thousand cavalry. Both sides were on edge for the battle, high-spirited and eager, and were well matched in courage, but the king had the advantage in numbers and in generalship. He had fought many battles of different sorts and had been victorious in most cases, so that he had a wide experience in military operations. On the Athenian side, the best of their generals were dead—Iphicrates, Chabrias, and Timotheüs too—and the best of those who were left, Chares, was no better than any average soldier in the energy and discretion required of a commander.3
1The famous orator, a native of Byzantium, had long been in the service of Philip. Strabo (9. 2. 37) states that the Corinthians also sent troops.2Demosthenes (De Corona, 136) refers to an earlier encounter between the two, which took place in Athens in 343 b.c.; cp. also De Halonneso, 20.3Diodorus writes disparagingly of Chares also in Book 15. 95. 3. Here he has much compressed the narrative, since ten or eleven months elapsed between the occupation of Elateia and the battle of Chaeroneia.77