Diodorus of Sicily

σπουδῆς τὴν ἐπιμέλειαν ἐποιήσατο τῆς πόλεως.
3τοὺς μὲν οὖν πρεσβυτάτους τῶν παίδων καὶ τοὺς
γεγηρακότας ἐπὶ τὰ στέγη1 τῶν οἰκιῶν ἀνεβίβασε
καὶ προσέταξεν ἀπὸ τούτων ἀμύνασθαι τοὺς εἰς
τὴν πόλιν βιαζομένους, αὐτὸς δὲ τοὺς ἀκμάζοντας
ταῖς ἡλικίαις συντάξας διεμέρισεν εἰς τὰς πρὸ τῆς
πόλεως δυσχωρίας καὶ παρόδους, καὶ πάντας τοὺς
δυναμένους τόπους δέξασθαι δίοδον ἐμφράξας ἀνέμενε
4τὴν τῶν πολεμίων ἔφοδον. Ἐπαμεινώνδας
δ᾿ εἰς πλείω μέρη διελόμενος τοὺς στρατιώτας καὶ
πάντῃ προσπίπτων κατὰ τὸν αὐτὸν καιρόν, ὡς
εἶδε τὴν τῶν Σπαρτιατῶν σύνταξιν, εὐθὺς ἔγνω
μεμηνυμένην τὴν πρᾶξιν· ὅμως δὲ προσμαχόμενος
πᾶσι κατὰ μέρος καὶ ταῖς δυσχωρίαις ἐλαττούμενος
5συνῆπτεν εἰς χεῖρας. πολλὰ δὲ παθὼν καὶ δράσας
οὐκ ἀπέστη τῆς φιλοτιμίας, ἕως τὸ στράτευμα2
τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων ἐπανῆλθεν εἰς τὴν Σπάρτην·
πολλῶν δὲ βοηθούντων τοῖς πολιορκουμένοις καὶ
τῆς νυκτὸς καταλαβούσης, ἔλυσε τὴν πολιορκίαν.
84. Πυθόμενος δὲ παρὰ τῶν αἰχμαλώτων ὅτι
Μαντινεῖς πανδημεὶ πάρεισι βοηθοῦντες τοῖς Λακεδαιμονίοις,
τότε μὲν ἀναχωρήσας μικρὸν ἀπὸ
τῆς πόλεως κατεστρατοπέδευσεν· παραγγείλας δὲ
δειπνοποιεῖσθαι, καταλιπὼν τῶν ἱππέων τινάς, τούτοις
μὲν παρήγγειλεν ἕως3 ἑωθινῆς φυλακῆς πυρὰ
καίειν ἐν τῇ παρεμβολῇ, αὐτὸς δὲ μετὰ τῆς δυνάμεως
ἀφορμήσας ἔσπευσεν ἄφνω προσπεσεῖν4
2τοῖς ἀπολελειμμένοις ἐν τῇ Μαντινείᾳ. τῇ δ᾿
ὑστεραίᾳ πολλὴν διανύσας ὁδὸν ἄφνω τοῖς Μαντινεῦσιν
ἀνελπίστως ἐπέρραξεν, οὐ μὴν ἐκράτησε



1τέγη AFK.2Dindorf: στρατοπέδευμα.3ἕως added by Wurm.4So Vogel; ἐπιπεσεῖν Reiske: περιπεσεῖν.184Book XV

devoted his utmost energy to the care of the city’s 363/2 b.c. defence. He placed the oldest children and the aged on the roofs of the houses and instructed them from there to defend themselves against the enemy if he forced a way into the city, while he himself lined up the men in the prime of life and apportioned them to the obstacles in front of the city and to the approaches, and, having blocked all places that could offer passage, he awaited the attack of the enemy. Epameinondas, after dividing his soldiers into several columns, attacked everywhere at once, but when he saw the disposition of the Spartans, he knew immediately that his move had been revealed. Nevertheless he made the assault on all the positions one after the other, and, though he was at a disadvantage because of the obstacles, closed in a hand-to-hand combat. Many a blow he received and dealt and did not call off the zealous rivalry until the army of the Lacedaemonians re-entered Sparta. Then as many came to the assistance of the besieged and night intervened, he desisted from the siege.
84. Having learned from his captives that the Mantineians had come in full force to assist the Lacedaemonians, Epameinondas then withdrew a short distance from the city and encamped, and having given orders to prepare mess, he left some of the horsemen and ordered them to burn fires in the camp until the morning watch, while he himself set out with his army and hurried to fall suddenly on those who had been left in Mantineia. Having covered much ground on the next day, he suddenly broke in on the Mantineians when they were not expecting it. However,


185