Diodorus of Sicily
6ἀγωνιῶν οὖν ὑπὲρ αὑτοῦ καὶ τῆς στρατηγίας μᾶλλον
τεύξεσθαι νομίζων ὡς πλείστους ἔχων στρατιώτας
προσήγαγεν, καθάπερ ἠξίουν, τοξότας μυρίους.
ἀπέχοντες δ᾿ ἔνιοι τῶν Περσῶν ὁδὸν ἡμερῶν τριάκοντα
τὸ παραγγελθὲν αὐθημερὸν ἤκουον διὰ τὸ
φιλοτεχνηθὲν περὶ τὰς φυλακάς· ὅπερ οὐ καλῶς
7ἔχει παραδραμεῖν. τῆς γὰρ Περσίδος οὔσης αὐλωνοειδοῦς
καὶ σκοπὰς ἐχούσης ὑψηλὰς καὶ πυκνὰς
ἐπὶ τούτων ἐφειστήκεισαν οἱ μέγιστον φθεγγόμενοι
τῶν ἐγχωρίων· διῃρημένων γὰρ τῶν τόπων εἰς
φωνῆς ἀκοὴν1 οἱ παραλαμβάνοντες τὸ παραγγελθὲν
ὁμοίως ἑτέροις παρεδίδοσαν, εἶτ᾿ ἐκεῖνοι πάλιν
ἄλλοις, ἕως εἰς τὸ τέρμα τῆς σατραπείας τὸ δοθὲν
παραδοθῇ.
18. Τῶν δὲ περὶ τὸν Εὐμενῆ καὶ Πευκέστην
ταῦτα διοικούντων Ἀντίγονος, ἐπειδὴ προάγων
μετὰ τῆς δυνάμεως ἧκεν εἰς Σοῦσα τὸ βασίλειον,
Σέλευκον μὲν ἀπέδειξε τῆς χώρας σατράπην καὶ
δοὺς αὐτῷ στρατιώτας προσέταξε πολιορκεῖν τὴν
ἄκραν ἀπειθοῦντος2 Ξενοφίλου τοῦ θησαυροφύλακος,
αὐτὸς δὲ3 μετὰ τῆς στρατιᾶς ἀνέζευξεν ἐπὶ
τοὺς πολεμίους, οὔσης τῆς ὁδοῦ καυματώδους καὶ
παντελῶς ἐπικινδύνου ξενικαῖς δυνάμεσι διελθεῖν.
διὸ καὶ τὰς πορείας ἠναγκάζοντο νυκτὸς ποιεῖσθαι
καὶ στρατοπεδεύεσθαι περὶ τὸν ποταμὸν πρὶν ἥλιον
2ἀνατέλλειν. οὐ μὴν ἠδυνήθη γε κατὰ πάντα ἄθικτος
γενέσθαι τῶν κατὰ τὴν χώραν κακῶν, ἀλλὰ
καίπερ ἐνδεχομένως ἅπαντα πράξας συχνοὺς ἀπέβαλε





1εἰς φωνῆς ἀκοὴν Reiske: εἰς ἀκοῆς φωνὴν.2δὲ after ἀπειθοῦντος deleted by Reiske.3δὲ added by Reiske.278Book XIX

of his life. In his anxiety, therefore, about himself, 317 b.c. and thinking also that he would be more likely to gain the command if he had as many soldiers as possible, he brought up ten thousand bowmen as they requested. Although some of the Persians were distant a thirty days’ journey, they all received the order on that very day, thanks to the skilful arrangement of the posts of the guard, a matter that it is not well to pass over in silence. Persia is cut by many narrow valleys and has many lookout posts that are high and close together, on which those of the inhabitants who had the loudest voices had been stationed. Since these posts were separated from each other by the distance at which a man’s voice can be heard, those who received the order passed it on in the same way to the next, and then these in turn to others until the message had been delivered at the border of the satrapy.1
18. While Eumenes and Peucestes were engaged in these matters, Antigonus advanced with his army and came to Susa, the capital. He appointed Seleucus satrap of that country, gave him troops, and ordered him to lay siege to the citadel, since the treasurer, Xenophilus, refused to accept his orders.2 He himself with his army broke camp and set out against the enemy although the road was very hot and very dangerous for a foreign army to traverse. For this reason they were forced to march at night and make camp near the river before sunrise. Nevertheless, he was not able to escape altogether untouched by the hardships characteristic of the country; although he did everything in his power, he lost a large number


1Wesseling cites from Cleomedes (2, p. 169) the use by Xerxes of a similar means by which a message was sent from Athens to Susa in two days and nihgts. Another system is described in chap. 57. 5.2Cp. chap. 17. 3.279