Diodorus of Sicily

βουλόμενος αὐτὴν πολιορκῆσαι. συντελουμένων δ᾿
ἀκροβολισμῶν περὶ τὴν ταφρείαν καὶ τῶν περὶ τὸν
Λυσίμαχον πειρωμένων ἀνείργειν τοῖς βέλεσι τοὺς
ἐργαζομένους ἐν πᾶσιν προετέρουν οἱ περὶ τὸν
2Ἀντίγονον. ἔπειτα χρόνου γενομένου καὶ τῶν ἔργων
ἤδη συντέλειαν λαμβανόντων, τῆς δὲ τροφῆς
ὑπολιπούσης τοὺς πολιορκουμένους οἱ περὶ Λυσίμαχον,
τηρήσαντες νύκτα χειμέριον, ἀναζεύξαντες
ἐκ τῆς παρεμβολῆς διὰ τῶν ὑπερδεξίων τόπων
ἀπεχώρησαν εἰς παραχειμασίαν. ὁ δ᾿ Ἀντίγονος
ἡμέρας γενομένης ὡς εἶδε τὴν τῶν πολεμίων ἀπαλλαγήν,
3ἀντιπαρῆγεν αὐτὸς διὰ τῶν πεδίων. ἐπιγενομένων
δὲ ὄμβρων μεγάλων καὶ τῆς χώρας
οὔσης βαθυγείου καὶ πηλώδους τῶν τε ὑποζυγίων
οὐκ ὀλίγα συνέβη καὶ τῶν σωμάτων τινὰ διαφθαρῆναι
καὶ τὸ σύνολον ἐπιπόνως ἅπασαν τὴν δύναμιν
4διατεθῆναι. διόπερ ὁ βασιλεὺς ἅμα μὲν ἀναλαβεῖν
βουλόμενος ἐκ τῆς κακοπαθίας τοὺς στρατιώτας,
ἅμα δὲ τὴν χειμερινὴν ὥραν ὁρῶν περιλαμβάνουσαν
τοῦ μὲν καταδιώκειν ἀπέστη, πρὸς δὲ τὴν χειμασίαν
ἐπιλεξάμενος τοὺς εὐθετωτάτους τόπους διεῖλε κατὰ
5μέρη τὴν δύναμιν. πυνθανόμενος δὲ Σέλευκον καταβαίνειν
ἐκ τῶν ἄνω σατραπειῶν μετὰ μεγάλης
δυνάμεως, ἔπεμψέ τινας τῶν φίλων εἰς τὴν Ἑλλάδα
πρὸς Δημήτριον, παρακελευόμενος ἥκειν πρὸς
αὐτὸν μετὰ τῆς δυνάμεως τὴν ταχίστην· σφόδρα
γὰρ εὐλαβεῖτο μὴ πάντων τῶν βασιλέων ἐπ᾿ αὐτὸν
συνδραμόντων ἀναγκασθῇ παρατάξει κρῖναι τὸν
ὅλον πόλεμον πρὶν ἢ συνελθεῖν εἰς ταὐτὸν τὴν ἐκ
6τῆς Εὐρώπης δύναμιν. παραπλησίως δὲ καὶ Λυσίμαχος
διεῖλε τὴν δύναμιν εἰς χειμασίαν ἐν τῷ καλουμένῳ
Σαλωνίας1 πεδίῳ. ἀγορὰν δὲ πολλὴν ἐξ
1Σαλωνίας Wesseling (cp. Strabo, 12. 5. 7): Σαλμωνίας.432Book XX

and missiles, intending to storm it. When shots were 302 b.c. exchanged about the excavation and Lysimachus’ men tried to drive away with missiles those who were working, in every case Antigonus had the better of it. Then as time passed and the work was already nearing completion, since food was growing scarce for the besieged, Lysimachus, after waiting for a stormy night, set out from the camp and departed through the higher land to go into winter quarters. But when at daybreak Antigonus saw the departure of the enemy, he himself marched parallel with them through the plains. Great rainstorms occurred, with the result that, as the country had deep soil and became very muddy, he lost a considerable number of his pack animals and a few of his men, and in general the whole army was in serious difficulty. Therefore the king, both because he wished to restore his soldiers after their sufferings and because he saw that the winter season was at hand, gave up the pursuit; and selecting the places best suited for wintering, he divided his army into sections. But when he learned that Seleucus was coming down from the upper satrapies with a great force, he sent some of his friends into Greece to Demetrius, bidding him come to him with his army as soon as possible; for, since all the kings had united against him, he was taking every precaution not to be forced to decide the whole war in battle before the army in Europe came to join him. Similarly Lysimachus also divided his army in order to go into winter quarters in the plain called that of Salonia. He obtained ample


433