Diodorus of Sicily

σκάφος ἐντὸς βέλους γενόμενον καὶ τῶν Συρακοσίων
προσβοηθησάντων ἐξέφυγε τὸν κίνδυνον.
7Ἀμίλκας δ᾿ ὁρῶν τοὺς ἐκ τῆς πόλεως διὰ τὴν
ἀγωνίαν καὶ τὸ παράδοξον τῆς προσδοκωμένης
ἀγγελίας ἐπὶ τὸν λιμένα συνδεδραμηκότας, ὑπολαβὼν
εἶναι μέρος τι τοῦ τείχους ἀφύλακτον, ἔπεμψε
τῶν στρατιωτῶν τοὺς κρατίστους μετὰ κλιμάκων.
οὗτοι δ᾿ εὑρόντες ἐκλελειμμένας τὰς φυλακὰς ἔλαθον
προσαναβάντες· καὶ σχεδὸν αὐτῶν μεσοπύργιον ἤδη
κατειληφότων ἡ κατὰ τὸ σύνηθες ἐφοδία παραγενομένη
8κατενόησε. γενομένης δὲ μάχης οἱ μὲν
ἐκ τῆς πόλεως συνέδραμον καὶ φθάσαντες τοὺς
μέλλοντας τοῖς ἀναβεβηκόσι προσβοηθεῖν οὓς μὲν
ἀπέκτειναν, οὓς δ᾿ ἀπὸ τῶν ἐπάλξεων κατεκρήμνισαν.
9ἐφ᾿ οἷς Ἀμίλκας περιαλγὴς γενόμενος ἀπήγαγε
τὴν δύναμιν ἀπὸ τῆς πόλεως καὶ τοῖς εἰς
Καρχηδόνα βοήθειαν ἐξέπεμψε1 μετὰ στρατιωτῶν
πεντακισχιλίων.
17. Ἅμα δὲ τούτοις πραττομένοις ὁ μὲν Ἀγαθοκλῆς
κρατῶν τῶν ὑπαίθρων τὰ περὶ τὴν Καρχηδόνα
χωρία κατὰ κράτος ᾕρει καὶ τῶν πόλεων
ἃς μὲν διὰ φόβον, ἃς δὲ διὰ τὸ πρὸς Καρχηδονίους
μῖσος προσηγάγετο. παρεμβολὴν δὲ πλησίον τοῦ
Τύνητος ὀχυρωσάμενος καὶ τὴν ἱκανὴν ἀπολιπὼν
φυλακὴν ἀνέζευξε πρὸς τὰς ἐπὶ θαλάττῃ κειμένας
πόλεις. καὶ πρώτην μὲν ἑλὼν Νέαν πόλιν κατὰ
κράτος φιλανθρώπως ἐχρήσατο τοῖς χειρωθεῖσιν·
εἶτα παρελθὼν ἐπ᾿ Ἀδρύμητα πρὸς μὲν ταύτην
πολιορκίαν συνεστήσατο, Αἰλύμαν δὲ τὸν βασιλέα
1Fischer believes that either the number of ships or the name of the leader has been lost.186Book XX

inside of the range of missiles and, the Syracusans 310 b.c. having come to its aid, escaped from the danger. But when Hamilcar saw that the inhabitants of the city, because of their anxiety and because of the surprising nature of the message they now anticipated, had run together to the port, surmising that some portion of the wall was unguarded, he advanced his strongest soldiers with scaling ladders. These, finding that the guard-posts had been abandoned, ascended without being discovered; but, when they had almost taken the wall between two towers, the guard, making its rounds according to custom, discovered them. In the fighting that ensued the men of the city ran together and arrived in advance of those who were coming to reinforce the men who had scaled the wall, of whom they killed some and hurled others down from the battlements. Hamilcar, greatly distressed at this, withdrew his army from the city and sent to those in Carthage a relief expedition of five thousand men.
17. Meanwhile Agathocles, who had control of the open country, was taking the strongholds about Carthage by storm; and he prevailed on some of the cities to come over to him because of fear, others because of their hatred for the Carthaginians. After fortifying a camp near Tunis1 and leaving there an adequate garrison, he moved against the cities situated along the sea. Taking by storm the first, Neapolis, he treated the captured people humanely; then, marching against Hadrumetum, he began a siege of that city, but received Aelymas, the king



1Cp. chap. 8. 7, and note.187