Diodorus of Sicily

γὰρ Περδίκκας παραλαβὼν ἐν τοῖς ὑπομνήμασι τοῦ
βασιλέως τήν τε συντέλειαν τῆς Ἡφαιστίωνος
πυρᾶς, πολλῶν δεομένην χρημάτων, τάς τε λοιπὰς
αὐτοῦ ἐπιβολὰς πολλὰς καὶ μεγάλας οὔσας καὶ
δαπάνας ἀνυπερβλήτους ἐχούσας ἔκρινε συμφέρειν
3ἀκύρους ποιῆσαι. ἵνα δὲ μὴ δόξῃ διὰ τῆς ἰδίας
γνώμης καθαιρεῖν τι τῆς Ἀλεξάνδρου δόξης ἐπὶ τὸ
κοινὸν τῶν Μακεδόνων πλῆθος ἀνήνεγκε τὴν περὶ
τούτων βουλήν.
4Ἦν δὲ τῶν ὑπομνημάτων τὰ μέγιστα καὶ μνήμης
ἄξια τάδε· χιλίας μὲν ναῦς μακρὰς μείζους τριήρων
ναυπηγήσασθαι κατὰ τὴν Φοινίκην καὶ Συρίαν καὶ
Κιλικίαν καὶ Κύπρον πρὸς τὴν στρατείαν τὴν ἐπὶ
Καρχηδονίους καὶ τοὺς ἄλλους τοὺς παρὰ θάλατταν
κατοικοῦντας τῆς τε Λιβύης καὶ Ἰβηρίας καὶ τῆς
ὁμόρου χώρας παραθαλαττίου μέχρι Σικελίας· ὁδοποιῆσαι
δὲ τὴν παραθαλάττιον τῆς Λιβύης μέχρι
στηλῶν Ἡρακλείων, ἀκολούθως δὲ τῷ τηλικούτῳ
στόλῳ λιμένας καὶ νεώρια κατασκευάσαι κατὰ τοὺς
ἐπικαίρους τῶν τόπων1· ναούς τε κατασκευάσαι
πολυτελεῖς ἕξ, ἀπὸ ταλάντων χιλίων καὶ πεντακοσίων
ἕκαστον· πρὸς δὲ τούτοις πόλεων συνοικισμοὺς
καὶ σωμάτων μεταγωγὰς ἐκ τῆς Ἀσίας εἰς
τὴν Εὐρώπην καὶ κατὰ τοὐναντίον ἐκ τῆς Εὐρώπης
εἰς τὴν Ἀσίαν, ὅπως τὰς μεγίστας ἠπείρους
ταῖς ἐπιγαμίαις καὶ ταῖς οἰκειώσεσιν εἰς κοινὴν
5ὁμόνοιαν καὶ συγγενικὴν φιλίαν καταστήσῃ. τοὺς
δὲ προειρημένους ναοὺς ἔδει κατασκευασθῆναι ἐν
Δήλῳ καὶ Δελφοῖς καὶ Δωδώνῃ, κατὰ δὲ τὴν Μακεδονίαν

1ἀκολούθως δὲ . . . τῶν τόπων, which follows πεντακοσίων
ἕκαστον in the MSS., transferred here by Fischer.20Book XVIII

when Perdiccas found in the memoranda of the king 323 b.c. orders for the completion of the pyre of Hephaestion,1 which required a great deal of money, and also for the other designs of Alexander, which were many and great and called for an unprecedented outlay, he decided that it was inexpedient to carry them out. But that he might not appear to be arbitrarily detracting anything from the glory of Alexander, he laid these matters before the common assembly of the Macedonians for consideration.
The following were the largest and most remarkable items of the memoranda. It was proposed to build a thousand warships, larger than triremes, in Phoenicia, Syria, Cilicia, and Cyprus for the campaign against the Carthaginians and the others who live along the coast of Libya and Iberia and the adjoining coastal region as far as Sicily2; to make a road along the coast of Libya as far as the Pillars of Heracles and, as needed by so great an expedition, to construct ports and shipyards at suitable places; to erect six most costly temples, each at an expense of fifteen hundred talents; and, finally, to establish cities and to transplant populations from Asia to Europe and in the opposite direction from Europe to Asia, in order to bring the largest continents to common unity and to friendly kinship by means of intermarriages and family ties. The temples mentioned above were to be built at Delos, Delphi, and Dodona, and in Macedonia


1Since the pyre had already been completed (Book 17. 114–115), the reference here appears to be to the tomb planned by Alexander (Plutarch, Alexander, 72. 3).2The attack is to be directed against the non-Greeks on the northern coast of Africa and on the southern coast of Europe from Spain to Sicily. Cp. Arrian, Anabasis, 7.1.1–4; Curtius, 10. 1. 17–18; Plutarch, Alexander, 68. 1.21