Diodorus of Sicily

ἔπεισε1 προδότην γενέσθαι καὶ κατὰ τὴν μάχην
6αὐτομολῆσαι. τοῦ δ᾿ Εὐμενοῦς στρατοπεδεύοντος
τῆς Καππαδοκίας ἔν τισιν εὐθέτοις πεδίοις πρὸς
ἱππομαχίαν ἐπιβαλὼν ὁ Ἀντίγονος μετὰ πάσης τῆς
δυνάμεως κατελάβετο τὴν ὑπερκειμένην τῶν πεδίων
7ὑπωρίαν. εἶχε δ᾿ ὁ μὲν Ἀντίγονος κατ᾿ ἐκείνους
τοὺς καιροὺς̇ πεζοὺς μὲν πλείω τῶν μυρίων, ὧν
ἦσαν οἱ ἡμίσεις Μακεδόνες, θαυμαστοὶ κατὰ τὰς
ἀνδραγαθίας, ἱππεῖς δὲ δισχιλίους, ἐλέφαντας δὲ
τριάκοντα, ὁ δ᾿ Εὐμενὴς πεζοὺς μὲν οὐκ ἐλάττους
8τῶν δισμυρίων, ἱππεῖς δὲ πεντακισχιλίους. γενομένης
δὲ μάχης ἰσχυρᾶς καὶ τοῦ Ἀπολλωνίδου
μετὰ τῶν περὶ αὐτὸν ἱππέων ποιήσαντος ἀλόγως
ἀπὸ τῶν ἰδίων διάστασιν ἐνίκησεν ὁ Ἀντίγονος καὶ
ἀνεῖλεν τῶν ἐναντίων εἰς ὀκτακισχιλίους. ἐκυρίευσε
δὲ καὶ τῆς ἀποσκευῆς ἁπάσης, ὥστε τοὺς
περὶ τὸν Εὐμενῆ στρατιώτας διὰ μὲν τὴν ἧτταν
καταπλαγῆναι, διὰ δὲ τὴν ἀπώλειαν τῆς ἀποσκευῆς
ἀθυμῆσαι.
41. Μετὰ δὲ τοῦθ᾿ ὁ μὲν Εὐμενὴς ἐπεβάλετο φεύγειν
εἰς Ἀρμενίαν καὶ τῶν ἐν ταύτῃ κατοικούντων
τινὰς πρὸς τὴν συμμαχίαν συλλαβέσθαι· καταταχούμενος
δὲ καὶ τοὺς στρατιώτας ὁρῶν ἀποχωροῦντας
πρὸς τὸν Ἀντίγονον κατελάβετο χωρίον
2ὀχυρὸν ὃ προσηγορεύετο Νῶρα. ἦν δὲ τὸ φρούριον
τοῦτο παντελῶς μικρὸν διὰ τὸ τὸν περίβολον ἔχειν
μὴ πλείω δυεῖν σταδίων, κατὰ δὲ τὴν ἐρυμνότητα
θαυμαστόν· ἐπὶ γὰρ πέτρας ὑψηλῆς εἶχε τὰς οἰκίας
συνῳκοδομημένας καὶ τὰ μὲν ὑπὸ τῆς φύσεως, τὰ
δ᾿ ὑπὸ τῆς ἐκ τῶν χειρῶν κατασκευῆς θαυμαστῶς
3ὠχύρωτο. εἶχε δὲ καὶ παραθέσεις σίτου πολλοῦ

1ἔπεισε Stephanus, cp. chap. 49. 2: ἐποίησε.126Book XVIII

him to become a traitor and to desert during 320 b.c. the battle. While Eumenes was encamped in a plain of Cappadocia well suited for cavalry fighting,
Antigonus fell upon him with all his men and took the foothills that commanded the plain. Antigonus at that time had more than ten thousand foot soldiers, half of whom were Macedonians admirable for their hardihood, two thousand mounted troops, and thirty elephants; while Eumenes commanded not less than twenty thousand infantry and five thousand cavalry. But when the battle became hot and Apollonides with his cavalry unexpectedly deserted his own side, Antigonus won the day and slew about eight thousand of the enemy. He also became master of the entire supply train, so that Eumenes’ soldiers were both dismayed by the defeat and despondent at the loss of their supplies.
41. After this Eumenes undertook to escape into Armenia and to bring over to his alliance some of the inhabitants of that land; but as he was being overtaken and saw that his soldiers were going over to Antiognus, he occupied a stronghold called Nora.1 This fortress was very small with a circuit of not more than two stades,2 but of wonderful strength, for its buildings had been constructed close together on the top of a lofty crag, and it had been marvellously fortified, partly by nature, partly by the work of men’s hands. Furthermore, it contained a stock of grain,


1For the retirement to Nora and the defence of the fortress cp. Plutarch, Eumenes, 9–11; Nepos, Eumenes, 5. 3–7; Justin, 14. 2. 1–4; Strabo, 12. 2. 6. The exact location of Nora is not known; it was probably in the northern part of the Taurus (Hassan Dagh). Eumenes seems to have spent the winter of 320/19 in the fortress.2About 1200 feet.127