Diodorus of Sicily

προσκυροῦντα ταῖς ἐννέα πόλεσιν. ἑκάστη δὲ τούτων
εἶχε βασιλέα τῆς μὲν πόλεως ἄρχοντα, τῷ δὲ
5βασιλεῖ τῶν Περσῶν ὑποτεταγμένον. οὗτοι πάντες
συμφρονήσαντες καὶ μιμησάμενοι τοὺς Φοίνικας
ἀπέστησαν καὶ παρασκευασάμενοι τὰ πρὸς τὸν
πόλεμον αὐτοκράτορας τὰς ἰδίας βασιλείας ἐποίησαν.
6ἐφ᾿ οἷς παροξυνθεὶς ὁ Ἀρταξέρξης ἔγραψε
πρὸς τὸν Ἰδριέα1 τὸν τῆς Καρίας δυνάστην, ἄρτι
μὲν παρειληφότα τὴν ἀρχήν, φίλον δ᾿ ὄντα καὶ
σύμμαχον Περσῶν ἐκ προγόνων, ἀθροῖσαι δύναμιν
πεζικήν τε καὶ ναυτικὴν τὴν διαπολεμήσουσαν τοῖς
7ἐν Κύπρῳ βασιλεῦσιν. ὁ δ᾿ ὀξέως παρασκευασάμενος
τριήρεις μὲν τεσσαράκοντα στρατιώτας δὲ
μισθοφόρους ὀκτακισχιλίους ἐξέπεμψεν εἰς τὴν
Κύπρον, ἐπιστήσας στρατηγοὺς Φωκίωνα τὸν Ἀθηναῖον
καὶ Εὐαγόραν τὸν ἐν τοῖς ἐπάνω χρόνοις
8βεβασιλευκότα κατὰ τὴν νῆσον. οὗτοι μὲν οὖν
καταπλεύσαντες εἰς τὴν Κύπρον εὐθὺς ἐπὶ τὴν
μεγίστην τῶν πόλεων Σαλαμῖνα τὴν δύναμιν ἤγαγον.
βαλόμενοι δὲ χάρακα καὶ τὴν παρεμβολὴν ὀχυρώσαντες
ἐπολιόρκουν τοὺς Σαλαμινίους κατὰ γῆν
ἅμα καὶ κατὰ θάλατταν. τῆς δὲ νήσου πάσης ἐν
εἰρήνῃ πολὺν χρόνον γενομένης καὶ τῆς χώρας
εὐδαιμονούσης οἱ στρατιῶται κρατοῦντες τῶν ὑπαίθρων
9πολλὰς ὠφελείας ἤθροισαν. τῆς δὲ τούτων
εὐπορίας διαβοηθείσης πολλοὶ τῶν ἐκ τῆς περαίας
Συρίας τε καὶ Κιλικίας συνέρρεον ἐθελοντὶ στρατιῶται
πρὸς τὴν ἐλπίδα τοῦ κέρδους. τέλος δὲ
διπλασιασθείσης τῆς μετ᾿ Εὐαγόρου καὶ Φωκίωνος
δυνάμεως οἱ βασιλεῖς οἱ κατὰ τὴν Κύπρον εἰς
ἀγωνίαν καὶ μεγίστους φόβους ἐνέπιπτον.
1So Cospus: Ἀρσιέα PXFM, Γαρισέα RV (cp. chaps. 45. 7. 69. 2).354Book XVI

nine cities. Each of these cities had a king who 351/0 b.c. governed the city and was subject to the King of the Persians. All these kings in common agreement and in imitation of the Phoenicians revolted, and having made preparations for the war, declared their own kingdoms independent. Incensed at these actions, Artaxerxes wrote to Idrieus, despot of Caria, who had just acquired his office and was a friend and ally of the Persians by inheritance from his ancestors, to collect an infantry force and a navy to carry on a war with the kings in Cyprus. Idrieus, after making ready immediately forty triremes and eight thousand mercenary soldiers, sent them to Cyprus, having placed in command as their generals Phocion the Athenian and Evagoras, who had in the former period been king in the island.1 So these two, having sailed to Cyprus, at once led their army against Salamis, the largest of the cities. Having set up a palisade and fortified the encampment, they began to besiege the Salaminians by land and also by sea. Since all the island had enjoyed peace for a long time and the territory was wealthy, the soldiers, who had possession of the open country, gathered much booty. When word of their affluence got abroad, many soldiers from the opposite coast of Syria and Cilicia flocked over voluntarily in the hope of gain. Finally, after the army with Evagoras and Phocion had been doubled in size, the kings throughout Cyprus fell into a state of great anxiety and terror.
1This expedition to Cyprus is placed by Beloch, Griechische Geschichte2, 3. 2. 285–287 in the year 344. Hall, Cambridge Ancient History, 6. 152–153 is in agreement.355