Diodorus of Sicily

διέκοψε τὴν φάλαγγα τῶν πολεμίων. οἱ δὲ
Λακεδαιμόνιοι τὸ ἀξίωμα τοῦ Ἐπαμεινώνδου καὶ
τὸ βάρος τοῦ περὶ αὐτὸν συστήματος καταπλαγέντες
ἀνεχώρουν ἐκ τῆς μάχης· ἐπικειμένων δὲ
τῶν Βοιωτῶν καὶ τοὺς ἐσχάτους αἰεὶ φονευόντων,
νεκρῶν ἐσωρεύθη πλῆθος.
87. Οἱ δὲ Λακεδαιμόνιοι θεωροῦντες Ἐπαμεινώνδαν
προθυμότερον προπίπτοντα1 τῷ θυμῷ,
συνέδραμον ἐπ᾿ αὐτόν. πολλῶν δὲ καὶ πυκνῶν
φερομένων βελῶν, τὰ μὲν ἐξένευε, τὰ δὲ διεκρούετο,
τινὰ δὲ ἐκ τοῦ σώματος ἐξαιρῶν τούτοις ἠμύνετο
τοὺς ἐπιφερομένους. ἡρωικῶς δ᾿ ὑπὲρ τῆς νίκης
ἀγωνισάμενος καιρίαν ἔλαβε πληγὴν εἰς τὸν θώρακα.
κλασθέντος δὲ τοῦ δόρατος, καὶ τοῦ σιδήρου
καταλειφθέντος ἐν τῷ σώματι, παραχρῆμα ἔπεσε
κατισχυθεὶς ὑπὸ τῆς πληγῆς. περὶ δὲ τοῦ σώματος
ἐμπεσούσης φιλοτιμίας, καὶ πολλῶν παρ᾿ ἀμφοτέροις
ἀναιρεθέντων, μόγις οἱ Θηβαῖοι τῇ ῥώμῃ
τῶν σωμάτων προέχοντες κατεπόνησαν τοὺς Λακεδαιμονίους.
2φυγῆς δὲ γενομένης, οἱ μὲν Βοιωτοὶ
βραχὺν ἐπιδιώξαντες χρόνον ἀνέστρεψαν, ἀναγκαιότατον
ἡγούμενοι τὸ κυριεῦσαι τῶν νεκρῶν. ἀνακαλεσαμένων
οὖν τῶν σαλπιγκτῶν τοὺς στρατιώτας,
ἅπαντες τῆς μάχης ἀπέστησαν, καὶ τρόπαιον ἀμφότεροι
3στήσαντες ἠμφεσβήτουν2 τῆς νίκης. οἱ μὲν
γὰρ Ἀθηναῖοι νενικηκότες τοὺς περὶ τὸν λόφον
Εὐβοεῖς καὶ μισθοφόρους κύριοι τῶν νεκρῶν ὑπῆρχον,
οἱ δὲ Βοιωτοὶ τοὺς Λακεδαιμονίους ἀπὸ κράτους
ἡττηκότες καὶ κρατοῦντες τῶν πεπτωκότων
4προσένεμον ἑαυτοῖς τὴν νίκην. ἐπὶ μὲν οὖν χρόνον
τινὰ περὶ τῆς τῶν νεκρῶν ἀναιρέσεως οὐδέτεροι
1So Wesseling (cp. chap. 65. 1): προσπίπτοντα2ἀμφεσβήτουν PA, ἠμφισβήτουν cet.194Book XV

a panic, and broke through the enemy phalanx. The 363/2 b.c. Lacedaemonians, overawed by the prestige of Epameinondas and by the sheer weight of the contingent he led, withdrew from the battle, but the Boeotians kept pressing the attack and continually slaying any men who were in the rear rank, so that a multitude of corpses was piled up.
87. As for the Lacedaemonians, when they saw that Epameinondas in the fury of battle was pressing for-ward too eagerly, they charged him in a body. As the missiles flew thick and fast about him, he dodged some, others he fended off, still others he pulled from his body and used to ward off his attackers. But while struggling heroically for the victory, he received a mortal wound in the chest. As the spear broke and the iron point was left in his body, he fell of a sudden, his strength sapped by the wound. About his body a rivalry ensued in which many were slain on both sides, but at last with difficulty by their superiority in bodily strength, the Thebans wore the Lacedaemonians out. As the latter turned and fled, the Boeotians pursued for a short time but turned back, considering it most essential to take possession of the bodies of the dead. So, when the trumpeters sounded recall for their men, all withdrew from battle and both sides set up trophies claiming the victory. In fact the Athenians had defeated the Euboeans and mercenaries in the battle for the heights and were in possession of the dead; while the Boeotians, because they had overpowered the Lacedaemonians and were in possession of the dead, were for awarding the victory to themselves. So for a long time neither side sent envoys to recover its dead,



195