Diodorus of Sicily

μεμονωμένον προσέδραμε καὶ διὰ τῶν πλευρῶν
διανταίαν ἐνέγκας πληγὴν τὸν μὲν βασιλέα νεκρὸν
ἐξέτεινεν, αὐτὸς δ᾿ ἐπὶ τὰς πύλας καὶ τοὺς ἡτοιμασμένους
4πρὸς τὴν φυγὴν ἔθεεν1 ἵππους. εὐθὺς δὲ
τῶν σωματοφυλάκων οἱ μὲν πρὸς τὸ σῶμα τοῦ
βασιλέως ὥρμησαν, οἱ δ᾿ ἐπὶ τὸν τοῦ σφαγέως
διωγμὸν ἐξεχύθησαν,2 ἐν οἷς ὑπῆρχον καὶ Λεόννατος
καὶ Περδίκκας καὶ Ἄτταλος. ὁ δὲ Παυσανίας
προλαβὼν τῆς διώξεως ἔφθασεν ἂν ἐπὶ τὸν ἵππον
ἀναπηδήσας, εἰ μὴ τῆς ὑποδέσεως περὶ ἄμπελόν
τινα περιπλακείσης ἔπεσεν. διόπερ οἱ περὶ τὸν
Περδίκκαν καταλαβόντες αὐτὸν ἐκ τῆς γῆς ἀνιστάμενον
καὶ συγκεντήσαντες ἀνεῖλον.
95. Φίλιππος μὲν οὖν μέγιστος γενόμενος τῶν
καθ᾿ ἑαυτὸν ἐπὶ τῆς Εὐρώπης βασιλέων καὶ διὰ τὸ
μέγεθος τῆς ἀρχῆς ἑαυτὸν τοῖς δώδεκα θεοῖς σύνθρονον




1ἔθεεν PX: ἐνέθεεν cet.; ἔθει Dindorf.2ἐπεχύθησαν PX.100Book XVI

left alone, rushed at him, pierced him through his 336/5 b.c. ribs, and stretched him out dead1; then ran for the gates and the horses which he had prepared for his flight. Immediately one group of the bodyguards hurried to the body of the king while the rest poured out in pursuit of the assassin; among these last were Leonnatus and Perdiccas and Attalus.2 Having a good start, Pausanias would have mounted his horse before they could catch him had he not caught his boot in a vine and fallen. As he was scrambling to his feet, Perdiccas and the rest came up with him and killed him with their javelins.
95. Such was the end of Philip, who had made himself the greatest of the kings in Europe in his time, and because of the extent of his kingdom had made himself a throned companion of the twelve gods.3
1The date of Philip’s death is discussed by K. J. Beloch,
Griechische Geschichte, 3. 2 (1923), 59. The news had not
reached Athens by the end of the civil year 337/6 b.c.; IG
ii2. 1. 240 in the tenth prytany does not know of it. On the
other hand, the time must be early in the summer, for Philip
was busy with preparations for an invasion of Asia Minor.
A possible clue to the date is furnished by the statement of
Plutarch, Alexander, 16. 2, concerning the battle of the Granicus:
this would have taken place in the month Daesius, but
as that was unlucky, Alexander ordered the intercalation of
a second Artemisius. Since there is some evidence that the
intercalary month was the last month of the regnal year, this
establishes a certain presumption that Philip died and Alexander
came to the throne in Daesius; and this squares well
enough with the evidence of the Attic inscription. Since
Alexander died in Daesius, the Oxyrhynchus chronologist
was correct in crediting him with thirteen years of reign.
See below on Book 17. 117. 5, p. 467, note 1.2This is presumably the son of Andromenes, who like Leonnatus and Perdiccas was a close friend and contemporary of Alexander; probably they were his bodyguards and not Philip’s (the term may be used loosely; Attalus was never one of Alexander’s seven or eight bodyguards proper in Asia, and Leonnatus not until 332/1, Perdiccas not until 330; Berve, Alexanderreich, 1. 27). Pausanias was from Orestis, and so were two of his slayers, while Attalus was Perdiccas’s brother-in-law. It is tempting to suppose that they knew of Pausanias’s plan and then killed him to silence him. U. Wilcken (SB Ak. Berlin, 1923, 151 ff.) would find in P. Oxy. 1798 evidence that Pausanias was tried and executed, but the text is fragmentary and obscure, and the theory is not, to my mind, supported by Justin 11. 2. 1.3The implication of this claim on Philip’s part was that he was in some fashion the equal of the Twelve and entitled like them to worship; σύνθρονος is an equivalent to σύνναος. What precisely this meant to Philip and his contemporaries is unknown; cp. Habicht, Gottmenschentum, 14, note 3; L. Cerfaux, J. Tondriau, Le Culte des souverains dans la civilisation gréco-romaine (1956), 123–125.101