Diodorus of Sicily
4τῶν παρ᾿ ὑμῖν εἰς τὴν χρείαν ἀνηκόντων; ἡμεῖς
γὰρ οὐδενὶ τρόπῳ προσιέμενοι δουλεύειν συμπεφεύγαμεν
εἰς χώραν σπανίζουσαν πάντων τῶν ἐν
τοῖς ἄλλοις χρησίμων καὶ βίον εἱλόμεθα ζῆν ἔρημον
καὶ θηριώδη παντελῶς, οὐδὲν ὑμᾶς βλάπτοντες.
ἀξιοῦμεν οὖν καὶ σὲ καὶ τὸν πατέρα μὴ ἀδικεῖν
ἡμᾶς, ἀλλὰ λαβόντας δωρεὰς παρ᾿ ἡμῶν ἀπαγαγεῖν
τὸ στρατόπεδον καὶ φίλους νομίζειν Ναβαταίους εἰς
5τὸν λοιπὸν χρόνον. οὔτε γὰρ βουλόμενος δύνασαι
μένειν ἐνταῦθα πλείους ἡμέρας, ἀπορούμενος
ὕδατος καὶ τῶν ἄλλων ἐπιτηδείων ἁπάντων, οὔθ᾿
ἡμᾶς δύνασαι συναναγκάσαι βίον ζῆν ἕτερον, ἀλλά
τινας αἰχμαλώτους ἕξεις δούλους ἀθύμους καὶ ζῆν
6οὐκ ἂν ὑπομείναντας ἐν ἄλλοις νομίμοις.” ῥηθέντων
δὲ τοιούτων λόγων Δημήτριος μὲν ἀπαγαγὼν
τὴν στρατιὰν ἐκέλευσεν αὐτοὺς πρέσβεις
ἀποστέλλειν περὶ τούτων· οἱ δὲ Ἄραβες ἐξέπεμψαν
τοὺς πρεσβυτάτους, οἳ παραπλήσια τοῖς
προειρημένοις διελθόντες ἔπεισαν δεξάμενον δῶρα
τὰ1 πολυτελέστατα τῶν παρ᾿ αὐτοῖς διαλύσασθαι.
98.Ὁ μὲν οὖν Δημήτριος λαβὼν ὁμήρους καὶ
τὰς ὁμολογηθείσας δωρεὰς ἀνέζευξεν ἀπὸ τῆς πέτρας·
διατείνας δὲ σταδίους τριακοσίους κατεστρατοπέδευσε
πλησίον τῆς Ἀσφαλτίτιδος λίμνης, ἧς
τὴν φύσιν οὐκ ἄξιον παραδραμεῖν ἀνεπισήμαντον.
κεῖται γὰρ κατὰ μέσην τὴν σατραπείαν τῆς
Ἰδουμαίας, τῷ μὲν μήκει παρεκτείνουσα σταδίους
μάλιστά που πεντακοσίους, τῷ δὲ πλάτει
περὶ ἑξήκοντα. τὸ δ᾿ ὕδωρ ἔχει διάπικρον καὶ



1τὰ added by Hertlein.98Book XIX

that pertain to the necessities of life among you. 312 b.c. For we, since we are in no way willing to be slaves, have all taken refuge in a land that lacks all the things that are valued among other peoples and have chosen to live a life in the desert and one altogether like that of wild beasts, harming you not at all. We therefore beg both you and your father to do us no injury but, after receiving gifts from us, to withdraw your army and henceforth regard the Nabataeans as your friends. For neither can you, if you wish, remain here many days since you lack water and all the other necessary supplies, nor can you force us to live a different life; but you will have a few captives, disheartened slaves who would not consent to live among strange ways.” When words such as these had been spoken, Demetrius withdrew his army and ordered the Arabs to send an embassy about these matters. They sent their oldest men, who, repeating arguments similar to those previously uttered, persuaded him to receive as gifts the most precious of their products and to make terms with them.1
98. Demetrius received hostages and the gifts that had been agreed upon and departed from the rock. After marching for three hundred stades,2 he camped near the Dead Sea,3 the nature of which ought not to be passed over without remark. It lies along the middle of the satrapy of Idumaea, extending in length about five hundred stades and in width about sixty.4 Its water is very bitter and of exceedingly



1Cp. Plutarch, Demetrius, 7. 1.2About 34 miles, but cp. chap. 95. 2, and note.3Literally, the Asphaltic Lake. The rest of this chapter repeats Book 2. 48. 6–9, almost verbally.4About 57½ and 7 miles respectively. The actual length to-day is about 47 miles.99