Diodorus of Sicily

ἐπὶ δὲ τούτων Πτολεμαῖος ὁ τῆς Αἰγύπτου βασιλεύων
πυθόμενος τοὺς ἰδίους στρατηγοὺς ἀποβεβληκέναι
τὰς ἐν Κιλικίᾳ πόλεις, πλεύσας μετὰ
δυνάμεως ἐπὶ Φασήλιδα ταύτην μὲν ἐξεπολιόρκησεν,
εἰς δὲ τὴν Λυκίαν παρακομισθεὶς Ξάνθον φρουρουμένην
2ὑπ᾿ Ἀντιγόνου κατὰ κράτος εἷλεν. εἶτα τῇ
Καύνῳ προσπλεύσας τὴν μὲν πόλιν παρέλαβε, τὰς
δὲ ἀκροπόλεις φρουρουμένας τῇ βίᾳ κατισχύσας
τὸ μὲν Ἡράκλειον ἐξεῖλε, τὸ δὲ Περσικὸν παραδόντων
τῶν στρατιωτῶν ὑποχείριον ἐποιήσατο.
3μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα εἰς τὴν Κῶν πλεύσας μετεπέμψατο
Πτολεμαῖον, ὃς ὢν ἀδελφιδοῦς Ἀντιγόνου καὶ δύναμιν
πεπιστευμένος τοῦτον μὲν κατέλιπε πρὸς δὲ
Πτολεμαῖον κοινοπραγίαν ἐτίθετο. πλεύσαντος δ᾿
ἐκ τῆς Χαλκίδος αὐτοῦ καὶ κομισθέντος εἰς Κῶν
τὸ μὲν πρῶτον ὁ Πτολεμαῖος φιλανθρώπως αὐτὸν
προσεδέξατο· εἶτα ὁρῶν πεφρονηματισμένον καὶ
τοὺς ἡγεμόνας ὁμιλίαις καὶ δωρεαῖς ἐξιδιοποιούμενον,
φοβηθεὶς μή τινα ἐπιβουλὴν μηχανήσηται,
φθάσας αὐτὸν συνέλαβε καὶ πιεῖν κώνιον συνηνάγκασε.
τοὺς δὲ συνηκολουθηκότας στρατιώτας
ἐπαγγελίαις δημαγωγήσας κατέμιξε τοῖς μεθ᾿
ἑαυτοῦ στρατευομένοις.
28. Ἅμα δὲ τούτοις πραττομένοις Πολυπέρχων
μὲν ἠθροικὼς ἁδρὰν δύναμιν κατήγαγεν ἐπὶ τὴν
πατρῴαν βασιλείαν Ἡρακλέα τὸν Ἀλεξάνδρου καὶ
Βαρσίνης, Κάσανδρος δὲ καταστρατοπεδεύσαντος
αὐτοῦ περὶ τὴν καλουμένην Στυμφαίαν1 ἧκεν μετὰ



1Στυμφαίαν Palmer: Στυμφαλίαν.212Book XX

first.1 While these were in office, Ptolemy, the king 309 b.c. of Egypt, hearing that his own generals had lost the cities of Cilicia, sailed with an army to Phaselis and took this city. Then, crossing into Lycia, he took by storm Xanthus, which was garrisoned by Antigonus. Next he sailed to Caunus2 and won the city; and violently attacking the citadels, which were held by garrisons, he stormed the Heracleum, but he gained possession of the Persicum when its soldiers delivered it to him. Thereafter he sailed to Cos and sent for Ptolemaeus, who, although he was the nephew of Antigonus and had been entrusted by him with an army, had deserted his uncle and was offering cooperation to Ptolemy.3 When Ptolemaeus had sailed from Chalcis and had come to Cos, Ptolemy at first received him graciously; then, on discovering that he had become presumptuous and was trying to win over the leaders to himself by conversing with them and giving them gifts, fearing lest he should devise some plot, he forestalled this by arresting him and compelled him to drink hemlock. As for the soldiers who had followed Ptolemaeus, after Ptolemy had won their favour through promises, he distributed them among the men of his own army.
28. Meanwhile Polyperchon, who had collected a strong army, brought back to his father’s kingdom Heracles, the son of Alexander and Barsinê4; but when he was in camp at the place called Stymphaeum,5
1Demetrius was archon in 309/8 b.c. In the Fasti the
consuls for 310 b.c. are Q. Fabius Maximus Rullianus for the second time and C. Marcius Rutilus, who was later called Censorinus. Cp. Livy, 9. 33. The narrative is continued from chap. 21.2Both Phaselis and Xanthus are in Lycia. the former on the east, the latter on the west coast of the promontory. Caunus is in Caria.3Cp. chap. 19. 2.4Cp. chap. 20, and note.5A region of Epirus, also called Tymphaeum.213