Diodorus of Sicily
2ἀποτρίβεσθαι· τοῦ δ᾿ Ἑκαταίου κατὰ τὰς τοῦ βασιλέως
ἐντολὰς δολοφονήσαντος τὸν Ἄτταλον ἡ μὲν
κατὰ τὴν Ἀσίαν τῶν Μακεδόνων δύναμις ἐπαύσατο
τοῦ μετεωρίζεσθαι πρὸς ἀπόστασιν, τοῦ μὲν
Ἀττάλου πεφονευμένου, τοῦ δὲ Παρμενίωνος οἰκειότατα
διακειμένου πρὸς Ἀλέξανδρον.
3Περὶ δὲ τῆς τῶν Περσῶν βασιλείας μέλλοντας
ἡμᾶς ἀναγράφειν ἀναγκαῖόν ἐστι βραχὺ τοῖς χρόνοις
προαναλαβεῖν τὴν ἱστορίαν. Φιλίππου γὰρ
ἔτι βασιλεύοντος ἦρχε τῶν Περσῶν Ὦχος καὶ
προσεφέρετο τοῖς ὑποτεταγμένοις ὠμῶς καὶ βιαίως.
μισουμένου δὲ αὐτοῦ διὰ τὴν χαλεπότητα τῶν
τρόπων Βαγώας ὁ χιλίαρχος, εὐνοῦχος μὲν ὢν τὴν
ἕξιν, πονηρὸς δὲ καὶ πολεμικὸς τὴν φύσιν, ἀνεῖλε
φαρμάκῳ τὸν Ὦχον διά τινος ἰατροῦ, τὸν δὲ νεώτατον
τῶν υἱῶν τοῦ βασιλέως Ἀρσὴν1 εἰσήγαγεν
4εἰς τὴν βασιλείαν. ἀνεῖλε δὲ καὶ τοὺς ἀδελφοὺς τοῦ
βασιλέως, ὄντας νέους παντελῶς, ὅπως μονωθεὶς ὁ
νεανίσκος μᾶλλον ὑπήκοος αὐτῷ γένηται. τοῦ δὲ
μειρακίου ταῖς γενομέναις παρανομίαις προσκόπτοντος
καὶ φανεροῦ καθεστῶτος ὅτι τιμωρήσεται
τὸν αὐθέντην τῶν ἀνομημάτων, φθάσας αὐτοῦ τὰς
ἐπιβουλὰς ὁ Βαγώας ἀνεῖλε τὸν Ἀρσὴν μετὰ τῶν
5τέκνων τρίτον ἔτος ἤδη βασιλεύοντα. ἐρήμου δ᾿
ὄντος τοῦ βασιλέως οἴκου καὶ μηδενὸς ὄντος τοῦ



1Ἀρσὴν] Ἀρσῆν F.130Book XVII

self any possible suspicion. Hecataeus, however, following 335/4 b.c. the instructions of the king literally, had him killed by treachery,1 and thereafter the Macedonian forces in Asia were free from any incitement to revolution, Attalus being dead and Parmenion completely devoted to Alexander.
As our narrative is now to treat of the kingdom of the Persians, we must go back a little to pick up the thread.2 While Philip was still king, Ochus3 ruled the Persians and oppressed his subjects cruelly and harshly. Since his savage disposition made him hated, the chiliarch Bagoas, a eunuch in physical fact but a militant rogue in disposition, killed him by poison administered by a certain physician and placed upon the throne the youngest of his sons, Arses. He similarly made away with the brothers of the new king, who were barely of age, in order that the young man might be isolated and tractable to his control. But the young king let it be known that he was offended at Bagoas’s previous outrageous behaviour and was prepared to punish the author of these crimes, so Bagoas anticipated his intentions and killed Arses and his children also while he was still in the third year of his reign.4 The royal house was thus extinguished, and there was no one in the direct line of




1Continued from chap. 2, above. It is incredible that the
assassination of Attalus could have occurred without the connivance of Parmenion, who may have been pleased to be rid of the head of a rival faction at court (but Curtius, 6. 9. 18, reports that Attalus was Parmenion’s son-in-law). And Attalus could not be left alive after the execution of his niece.2Continued from Book 16. 52. Cp. Justin, 10. 3.3Ochus has been mentioned previously by his throne name Artaxerxes.4The king lists give Arses two years, 338–336 b.c., but he was in his third regnal year at the time of his death. His second year, 337/6 b.c., was the only full one which he enjoyed.131