Diodorus of Sicily

τοιαύτη γὰρ φορά τις προδοτῶν ὑπῆρξε τότε κατὰ
3τὴν Ἑλλάδα. διὸ καί φασι τὸν Φίλιππον βουλόμενον
ἑλεῖν τινα πόλιν ὀχυρότητι διαφέρουσαν,
εἰπόντος τινὸς αὐτῷ τῶν ἐγχωρίων ἀνάλωτον
αὐτὴν ἐκ βίας ὑπάρχειν, ἐπερωτῆσαι εἰ οὐδ᾿ ὁ
4χρυσὸς τὸ τεῖχος ὑπερβῆναι δυνατός ἐστιν. ἦν γὰρ
πεῖραν εἰληφὼς ὅτι τὰ τοῖς ὅπλοις ἀδύνατα χειρωθῆναι
τῷ χρυσῷ ῥᾴδιόν ἐστι καταπολεμῆσαι.
ἐγκατασκευάζων οὖν ἐν ταῖς πόλεσι προδότας διὰ
τῆς δωροδοκίας καὶ τοὺς δεχομένους τὸ χρυσίον
ξένους καὶ φίλους ὀνομάζων ταῖς πονηραῖς ὁμιλίαις
διέφθειρε τὰ ἤθη τῶν ἀνθρώπων.
55. Μετὰ δὲ τὴν ἅλωσιν τῆς Ὀλύνθου Ὀλύμπια
ποιήσας τοῖς θεοῖς ἐπινίκια μεγαλοπρεπεῖς θυσίας
συνετέλεσεν· πανήγυριν δὲ μεγάλην συστησάμενος
καὶ λαμπροὺς ἀγῶνας ποιήσας πολλοὺς τῶν ἐπιδημούντων
ξένων ἐπὶ τὰς ἑστιάσεις παρελάμβανε.
2παρὰ δὲ τοὺς πότους πολλαῖς ὁμιλίαις χρώμενος
καὶ πολλοῖς μὲν ποτήρια διδοὺς κατὰ τὰς προπόσεις,
οὐκ ὀλίγοις δὲ δωρεὰς ἀπονέμων, πᾶσι δὲ
μεγάλας ἐπαγγελίας εὐχαρίστως1 ποιούμενος πολλοὺς
ἔσχεν ἐπιθυμητὰς τῆς πρὸς αὐτὸν φιλίας.
3Καὶ δήποτ᾿ ἐν τῷ συμποσίῳ κατανοήσας Σάτυρον
τὸν ὑποκριτὴν σκυθρωπὸν ὄντ᾿2 ἤρετο διὰ τί μόνος





1So Meineke; εὐχερῶς Herwerden: εὐχρήστως.2ὄντ᾿ added by Herwerden.390Book XVI

as it were, of traitors that had sprung up at that time 343/7 b.c. throughout Hellas. Hence the anecdote that when Philip wished to take a certain city with unusually strong fortifications and one of the inhabitants remarked that it was impregnable, he asked if even gold could not scale its walls.1 For he had learned from experience that what could not be subdued by force of arms could easily be vanquished by gold. So, organizing bands of traitors in the several cities by means of bribes and calling those who accepted his gold “guests” and “friends,” by his evil communications he corrupted the morals of the people.2
55. After the capture of Olynthus, he celebrated the Olympian festival3 to the gods in commemoration of his victory, and offered magnificent sacrifices; and he organized a great festive assembly at which he held splendid competitions and thereafter invited many of the visiting strangers to his banquets. In the course of the carousals he joined in numerous conversations, presenting to many guests drinking cups4 as he proposed the toasts, awarding gifts to a considerable number, and graciously making such handsome promises to them all that he won over a large number to crave friendship with him.
At one time in the course of the drinking bout, noticing Satyrus,5 the actor, with a gloomy look on his face, Philip asked him why he alone disdained to



1See Horace on the power of gold: “diffidit urbium
Portas vir Macedo et subruit aemulos Reges muneribus”
(Odes, 3. 16. 13 ff.).2Cp. φθείρουσιν ἤθη χρήσθ᾿ ὁμιλίαι κακαί (Euripides, fr.
1013, Menander, Thaïs, fr. 218 Kock and 1 Corinthians 15. 33).3The Macedonian Olympia celebrated at Dium. See D. M. Robinson, TAPA (1934), 117: ἐς [τὸ] ἱερὸν τοῦ Διὸς τ[οῦ] Ὀλυμπίου, and note.4Cp. Demosthenes, 19. 139: καὶ τελευτῶν ἐκπώματ᾿ ἀργυρᾶ καὶ χρυσᾶ προὔπινεν αὐτοῖς.5This episode about Satyrus is recounted by Demosthenes, 19. 193 ff.391