Diodorus of Sicily

τοὺς πάντας1 σὺν τοῖς προϋπάρχουσιν ἐν τῇ νήσῳ
πεζοὺς μὲν πλείους τῶν ἑπτακισμυρίων, ἱππεῖς δὲ
καὶ ἅρματα καὶ συνωρίδας οὐκ ἐλάττους τῶν
μυρίων, ναῦς δὲ μακρὰς μὲν διακοσίας,2 φορτηγοὺς
δὲ τὰς τοὺς ἵππους τε καὶ βέλη καὶ σῖτον καὶ τἄλλα
5κομιζούσας πλείους τῶν χιλίων. Τιμολέων δὲ
πυθόμενος τὸ μέγεθος τῆς τῶν πολεμίων δυνάμεως
οὐ κατεπλάγη τοὺς βαρβάρους, καίπερ εἰς ὀλίγους
στρατιώτας συνεσταλμένος. ἔχων δὲ πόλεμον πρὸς
Ἱκέταν διελύσατο πρὸς αὐτὸν καὶ προσλαβόμενος
τοὺς μετὰ τούτου στρατιώτας οὐ μετρίως ηὔξησε
τὴν ἰδίαν δύναμιν.
78. Ἔδοξε δ᾿ αὐτῷ τὸν πρὸς τοὺς Φοίνικας
ἀγῶνα συστήσασθαι κατὰ τὴν τῶν Καρχηδονίων
ἐπικράτειαν, ὅπως τὴν μὲν τῶν συμμάχων χώραν
ἀσινῆ διαφυλάξῃ τὴν δ᾿ ὑπὸ τοὺς βαρβάρους οὖσαν
2καταφθείρῃ. εὐθὺς οὖν τούς τε μισθοφόρους καὶ
Συρακοσίους καὶ τοὺς ἄλλους συμμάχους ἀθροίσας
καὶ κοινὴν ἐκκλησίαν συναγαγὼν παρώρμησε τοῖς
οἰκείοις λόγοις τὰ πλήθη πρὸς τὸν ὑπὲρ3 τῶν ὅλων
ἀγῶνα· πάντων δ᾿ ἀποδεξαμένων τοὺς λόγους καὶ
βοώντων ἄγειν τὴν ταχίστην ἐπὶ τοὺς βαρβάρους
προῆγεν ἔχων τοὺς σύμπαντας οὐ πλείους τῶν
μυρίων καὶ δισχιλίων.
3Ἤδη δ᾿ αὐτοῦ κατὰ τὴν Ἀκραγαντίνην ὄντος
παραδόξως ἐνέπεσε τῇ στρατιᾷ ταραχὴ καὶ στάσις.
τῶν γὰρ μισθοφόρων τις ὄνομα Θρασίος, σεσυληκὼς
τὸ ἐν Δελφοῖς ἱερὸν μετὰ τῶν Φωκέων, ἀπονοίᾳ δὲ
καὶ θράσει διαφέρων, ἀκόλουθον τοῖς πρότερον τετολμημένοις


1τοὺς πάντας PX, σύμπαντας cet.2διακοσίας] ἑβδομήκοντα PX, but see Plutarch, Timoleon,3ὑπὲρ added by Reiske (cp. chap. 76. 1).54Book XVI

previously on the island, more than seventy thousand 340/39 b.c. infantry; cavalry, war-chariots, and extra teams of horses amounting to not less than ten thousand; two hundred battleships; and more than a thousand freighters carrying the horses, weapons, food and everything else. Timoleon was not daunted, however, although he learned the size of the hostile force while he himself was reduced to a handful of soldiers. He was still at war with Hicetas, but came to terms with him and took over his troops, thus materially increasing his own army.1
78. He decided to commence the struggle with the Carthaginians in their own territory so as to keep intact the land of his allies while wasting that which was subject to the barbarians. He assembled his mercenaries immediately, together with the Syracusans and his allies, called a general assembly, and encouraged his audience with appropriate words to face the decisive struggle. When all applauded and shouted, urging him to lead them immediately against the barbarians, he took the field with not more than twelve thousand men in all.2
He had reached the territory of Agrigentum when unexpected confusion and discord broke out in his army. One of his mercenaries named Thrasius, who had been with the Phocians when they plundered the shrine at Delphi and was remarkable for his mad recklessness, now perpetrated an act that matched




1Plutarch does not mention the support furnished Timoleon by Hicetas at this time.2Plutarch, Timoleon, 25. 2–3, states that there were 3000 Syracusans and 4000 mercenaries, of whom 1000 deserted before the battle; the remainder were 5000 foot and 1000 horse.55