Diodorus of Sicily

Κασάνδρου στρατιωτῶν, Αἴγιον δὲ ἐκπολιορκήσας
τῆς τε φρουρᾶς ἐκυρίευσε καὶ τοῖς Αἰγιεῦσι κατὰ
δόγμα τὴν ἐλευθερίαν βουλόμενος ἀποκαταστῆσαι
διὰ ταύτην τὴν περίστασιν ἐκωλύθη· τῶν γὰρ
στρατιωτῶν τραπέντων πρὸς ἁρπαγὴν πολλοὶ μὲν
ἀπεσφάγησαν τῶν Αἰγιέων πλεῖσται δὲ τῶν οἰκιῶν
4διεφθάρησαν. μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα διαπλεύσαντος εἰς
Αἰτωλίαν αὐτοῦ Δυμαῖοι, φρουρὰν ἔχοντες παρὰ
Κασάνδρου, διετείχισαν τὴν πόλιν, ὥστε κατ᾿ ἰδίαν
οὖσαν ἀπὸ τῆς ἀκροπόλεως διεζεῦχθαι. παρακαλέσαντες
δ᾿ ἀλλήλους ἀντέχεσθαι τῆς αὐτονομίας
περιεστρατοπέδευσαν τὴν ἄκραν καὶ συνεχεῖς προσβολὰς
5ἐποιοῦντο. ἃ δὴ πυθόμενος ὁ Ἀλέξανδρος
ἧκεν μετὰ δυνάμεως καὶ βιασάμενος ἐντὸς τοῦ
τείχους ἐκυρίευσε τῆς πόλεως, τῶν δὲ Δυμαίων
τοὺς μὲν ἀπέσφαξεν, τοὺς δ᾿ εἰς φυλακὴν ἀπέθετο,
6πολλοὺς δὲ ἐφυγάδευσεν. οἱ δὲ περιλειθέντες
ἀπαλλαγέντος ἐκ τῆς πόλεως Ἀλεξάνδρου χρόνον
μέν τινα τὴν ἡσυχίαν ἦγον, καταπεπληγμένοι τὸ
μέγεθος τῆς συμφορᾶς ἅμα δὲ καὶ συμμάχων ὄντες
ἔρημοι· μετὰ δέ τινα χρόνον ἐξ Αἰγίου τοὺς Ἀριστοδήμου
μισθοφόρους μεταπεμψάμενοι πάλιν ἐπέθεντο
τῇ φρουρᾷ καὶ κυριεύσαντες τῆς ἄκρας τὴν
μὲν πόλιν ἠλευθέρωσαν, τῶν δὲ καταλειφθέντων1
τοὺς πλείστους ἀποσφάξαντες συνανεῖλαν καὶ τῶν
ἰδίων πολιτῶν ὅσοι πρὸς Ἀλέξανδρον εἶχον φιλίαν.
67. Ἅμα δὲ τούτοις πρασσομένοις Ἀλέξανδρος
μὲν ὁ Πολυπέρχοντος ἐκ Σικυῶνος ἀναζευγνύων
μετὰ τῆς δυνάμεως ὑπ᾿ Ἀλεξίωνος τοῦ Σικυωνίου
καί τινων ἄλλων προσποιουμένων εἶναι

1So the MSS., but with η added above ει by second hands.10Book XIX

of Cassander’s troops. After a successful siege 314 b.c. of Aegium he became master of its garrison; but, although he wished to establish freedom for the people of Aegium according to the decree,1 he was blocked by the following incident: for while the soldiers were engaged in pillaging, many of the Aegienses were killed and very many of their buildings were destroyed. Thereafter, when Aristodemus had sailed to Aetolia, the Dymaeans,2 who were subject to a garrison sent by Cassander, cut off their city by a dividing wall in such a way that it was isolated and separated from the citadel. Then, after encouraging each other to assert their freedom, they invested the citadel and made unremitting attacks upon it. But Alexander on learning of this came with his army, forced his way within the wall, and became master of the city, slaying some of the Dymaeans, imprisoning others, and sending many into exile. When Alexander had departed from the city, the survivors remained quiet for some time, stunned by the magnitude of the disaster and also bereft of allies. After a little while, however, they summoned from Aegium the mercenaries of Aristodemus and once more made an attack on the garrison. Taking the citadel, they freed the city; and when they had massacred most of those who had been left there,3 they likewise slew all those of their own citizens who maintained friendship with Alexander.
67. While this was taking place, Polyperchon’s son Alexander, as he was setting out from Sicyon with his army, was killed by Alexion of Sicyon and certain others who pretended to be friends. His



1Cp. chap. 61. 3.2Dymê is a town in western Achaia.3Or, reading καταληφθέντων: “who had been captured.”11