Diodorus of Sicily

δεῖν παραδιδόναι τὴν πόλιν, ὢν ἄνανδρος φύσει καὶ
τῆς τἀδελφοῦ τόλμης καὶ πράξεως ἐναντίαν ἔχων
διάθεσιν· Ἐρύμνων δ᾿ ὁ Αἰτωλός, παρακαθεσταμένος
ὑπ᾿ Ἀγαθοκλέους τἀδελφῷ σύνεδρος, τὴν
ἐναντίαν δοὺς γνώμην ἔπεισεν ἅπαντας διακαρτερεῖν
2μέχρι ἂν πύθωνται τἀληθές. Ἀμίλκας δὲ μαθὼν
τὰ δόξαντα τοῖς ἐν τῇ πόλει συνεπήγνυε μηχανὰς
3παντοίας, διεγνωκὼς προσβάλλειν. Ἀγαθοκλῆς δὲ
δύο τριακοντόρους μετὰ τὴν μάχην νεναυπηγημένος
τὴν ἑτέραν ἀπέστειλεν εἰς Συρακούσσας, ἐρέτας
ἐμβιβάσας τοὺς κρατίστους καὶ τῶν περὶ αὐτὸν
πιστευομένων φίλων ἕνα Νέαρχον, ἀπαγγελοῦντα
4τοῖς ἰδίοις τὴν νίκην. ἔπειτ᾿ εὐπλοίας γενομένης
πεμπταῖοι ταῖς Συρακούσσαις νύκτωρ προσεπέλασαν
καὶ στεφανωσάμενοι καὶ παιανίσαντες κατὰ
τὸν πλοῦν1 ἅμ᾿ ἡμέρᾳ κατέπλεον ἐπὶ τὴν πόλιν.
5αἱ δὲ φυλακίδες τῶν Καρχηδονίων αἰσθόμεναι κατὰ
σπουδὴν ἐπεδίωκον καὶ οὐ πολὺ προειληφότων τῶν
ὑποφευγόντων ἀγὼν τῆς εἰρεσίας ἐγίνετο. ἅμα δὲ
τῇ τούτων φιλοτιμίᾳ συνέβη τούς τε ἐκ τῆς πόλεως
καὶ τοὺς πολιορκοῦντας αἰσθομένους συνδραμεῖν ἐπὶ
τὸν λιμένα καὶ τοῖς ἰδίοις ἑκατέρους συναγωνιῶντας
6ἀναβοᾶν θαρρεῖν. ἤδη δὲ τῆς τριακοντόρου καταλαμβανομένης
οἱ βάρβαροι μὲν ἐπηλάλαξαν, οἱ δ᾿
ἐκ τῆς πόλεως ἀδυνατοῦντες βοηθεῖν τοῖς θεοῖς
ηὔχοντο περὶ τῆς σωτηρίας τῶν καταπλεόντων.
τῆς πρῴρας δὲ τῶν διωκόντων εἰς ἐμβολὴν ἤδη
φερομένης οὐκ ἄπωθεν τῆς γῆς ἔφθασε τὸ διωκόμενον

1τὸν πλοῦν Hertlein: τὸ πλοῖον.184Book XX

it necessary to surrender the city, since he was unmanly1 310 b.c. by nature and of a disposition the direct opposite of the boldness and energy of his brother; but Erymnon the Aetolian, who had been set up by Agathocles as co-ruler with his brother, expressing the contrary opinion persuaded all of them to hold out until they should hear the truth. When Hamilcar learned the decision of those in the city, he constructed engines of all kinds, having determined to attack. But Agathocles, who had built two thirty-oared
ships after the battle, sent one of them to Syracuse, placing on board his strongest oarsmen and Nearchus, one of his trusted friends, who was to report the victory to his own people. Having had a fair voyage, they approached Syracuse during the night of the fifth day, and wearing wreaths and singing paeans as they sailed they reached the city at daybreak. But the picket ships of the Carthaginians caught sight of them and pursued them vigorously, and since the pursued had no great start, there arose a contest in rowing. While they were vying with each other, the folk of the city and the besiegers, seeing what was happening, both ran to the port, and each group, sharing in the anxiety of its own men, encouraged them with shouts. When the dispatch boat was already at the point of being taken, the barbarians raised a shout of triumph, and the inhabitants of the city, since they could give no aid, prayed the gods for the safety of those who were sailing in. But when, not far from the shore, the ram of one of the pursuers was already bearing down to deliver its blow, the pursued ship succeeded in getting

1The play on words (Ἄντανδρος, ἄνανδρος) is probably intentional.185