Diodorus of Sicily
Ὡς κατεστρατήγησεν Εὐμενὴς τοὺς περὶ Ἀντίγονον
διὰ τῆς ἐρήμου πορευομένους.
Ἀντιγόνου πορεία διὰ τῆς ἐρήμου ἐπὶ τοὺς πολεμίους
καὶ ἐπίθεσις τοῖς ἐν τῇ παραχειμασίᾳ θηρίοις.1
Ὡς παρατάξεως γενομένης Ἀντίγονος ἐκυρίευσε πάσης
τῆς τῶν ἀντιταχθέντων δυνάμεως.
Ὡς Εὐμενῆ καὶ τῶν ἄλλων ἡγεμόνων τοὺς ἀλλοτρίως
πρὸς αὐτὸν διατεθέντας ἀνεῖλεν.
Ὁ γενόμενος ἐν Ῥόδῳ κατακλυσμὸς καὶ τὰ συμβάντα
περὶ τὴν πόλιν ἀτυχήματα.
Πείθωνος ὑπ᾿ Ἀντιγόνου θάνατος καὶ τῶν δι᾿ αὐτὸν
ἀποστάντων εἰς τὴν Μηδίαν ἀναίρεσις.
Ὀλυμπιάδος ἅλωσις ὑπὸ Κασάνδρου καὶ θάνατος.
Ὡς Κάσανδρος Θεσσαλονίκην ἔγημε τὴν Φιλίππου
τοῦ Ἀμύντου, ἐπώνυμον δ᾿ ἑαυτοῦ πόλιν ἔκτισεν ἐπὶ τῆς
Παλλήνης.
Ὡς Πολυπέρχων ἀπογνοὺς τὰ πρὸς τοὺς βασιλεῖς
ἔφυγεν εἰς τὴν Αἰτωλίαν.
Ὡς Κάσανδρος τὴν τῶν Θηβαίων πόλιν ὑπ᾿ Ἀλεξάνδρου
κατεσκαμμένην ἀποκατέστησε.
Περὶ τῶν ἐν τοῖς ἀρχαίοις χρόνοις συμβάντων τῇ
πόλει τῶν Θηβαίων καὶ ποσάκις ἀνάστατος ἐγένετο.
Περὶ τῶν πραχθέντων Κασάνδρῳ κατὰ Πελοπόννησον·
Ἀντιγόνου μετὰ τῆς δυνάμεως κατάβασις ἐπὶ θάλατταν
καὶ φυγὴ Σελεύκου πρὸς Πτολεμαῖον εἰς Αἴγυπτον.
Σύνθεσις Πτολεμαίου καὶ Σελεύκου καὶ Κασάνδρου,
πρὸς δὲ τούτοις καὶ Λυσιμάχου πρὸς τὸν κατ᾿ Ἀντιγόνου
πόλεμον.
1In the MSS. the order of this and the preceding item is
reversed. Transposed by Dindorf.220Book XVIII
How Eumenes outgeneralled Antigonus when the latter was going through the desert (chaps. 37–38).
The march of Antigonus through the desert against the enemy and his attack on their elephants in the winter quarters (chap. 39).
How after a pitched battle Antigonus gained control of all the forces of his opponents (chaps. 40–43).
How he killed Eumenes and such other generals as had been his enemies (chap. 44).
The flood at Rhodes and the disasters that befell that city (chap. 45).
The death of Pithon at the hands of Antigonus and the destruction of those who had been instigated by him to revolt in Media (chaps. 46–48).
The capture of Olympias by Cassander, and her death (chaps. 49–51).
How Cassander married Thessalonicê, the daughter of Philip son of Amyntas; and how he founded a city named for himself on Pallenê (chap. 52).
How Polyperchon, giving up the cause of the kings as hopeless, fled to Aetolia (chap. 52).
How Cassander restored the city of Thebes, which had been razed by Alexander (chap. 53).
About the misfortunes that had befallen Thebes in former times, and how often the city had been destroyed (chap. 53).
On the operations of Cassander in the Peloponnesus (chap. 54).
The march of Antigonus and his army to the sea, and the flight of Seleucus into Egypt to Ptolemy (chap. 55).
The alliance of Ptolemy, Seleucus, and Cassander, and Lysimachus also, for the war against Antigonus (chaps. 56–57).
221