Diodorus of Sicily

καινοτομία παράλογος. οἱ γὰρ τῶν Ἀρκάδων
φυγάδες ὁρμηθέντες ἐξ Ἤλιδος κατελάβοντο τῆς
ὀνομαζομένης Τριφυλίας χωρίον ὀχυρόν, ὃ προσηγόρευται
2Λασίων.1 ἐκ πολλῶν δὲ χρόνων περὶ τῆς
Τριφυλίας ἠμφισβήτουν Ἀρκάδες καὶ Ἠλεῖοι, καὶ
κατὰ τὰς ἑκατέρων ἐν ταῖς μεταβολαῖς ὑπεροχὰς
ἐναλλὰξ ἐκυρίευον τῆς χώρας· κατὰ δὲ τοὺς ὑποκειμένους
καιροὺς τῶν Ἀρκάδων κρατούντων τὴν
Τριφυλίαν, προφάσει τῶν φυγάδων ἀφῃροῦντο ταύτην
3τῶν Ἀρκάδων οἱ Ἠλεῖοι. διὸ καὶ παροξυνθέντες
οἱ Ἀρκάδες τὸ μὲν πρῶτον πρέσβεις
ἐξαποστείλαντες ἀπῄτουν τὸ χωρίον· ὡς δ᾿ οὐδεὶς
αὐτοῖς προσεῖχε, μετεπέμψαντο παρ᾿ Ἀθηναίων
συμμαχίαν καὶ μετὰ ταύτης ἐστράτευσαν ἐπὶ τὸν
Λασίωνα.2 τῶν δὲ Ἠλείων βοηθησάντων τοῖς
φυγάσιν ἐγένετο μάχη πλησίον τοῦ Λασίωνος,2 καὶ
τῶν Ἀρκάδων πολλαπλασίων ὄντων ἡττήθησαν
Ἠλεῖοι καὶ πλείους τῶν διακοσίων στρατιωτῶν
4ἀπέβαλον. ταύτης δὲ ἀρχῆς τοῦ πολέμου γενομένης
συνέβη τὴν διαφορὰν ἐπὶ πλέον προβῆναι τοῖς
Ἀρκάσι καὶ τοῖς Ἠλείοις· εὐθὺς γὰρ οἱ μὲν Ἀρκάδες
μετεωρισθέντες τῷ προτερήματι ἐστράτευσαν
ἐπὶ τὴν Ἠλείαν, καὶ εἷλον πόλεις Μάργανα
καὶ Κρόνιον, ἔτι δὲ Κυπαρισσίαν καὶ Κορυφάσιον.
5Ἅμα δὲ τούτοις πραττομένοις κατὰ τὴν Μακεδονίαν
Πτολεμαῖος μὲν ὁ Αλωρίτης ἐδολοφονήθη




1So Dindorf: Λασσίων.2See note 1 above.164Book XV

and strange new outbreaks of revolution. For instance, 365/4 b.c. the Arcadian exiles,1 setting out from Elis, occupied a stronghold known as Lasion of the country called Triphylia. For many years Arcadia and Elis had been disputing the possession of Triphylia, and according as the ascendancy shifted from one country to the other, they had alternately been masters of the district; but at the period in question, though the Arcadians were ruling Triphylia, the Eleians, making the refugees a pretext, took it from the Arcadians.2 As a result the Arcadians were incensed and at first dispatched envoys demanding a return of the district; but when no one paid any attention to them, they summoned an allied force from the Athenians and with it attacked Lasion. The Eleians coming to the rescue of the refugees, a battle ensued near Lasion in which, being many times outnumbered by the Arcadians, the Eleians were defeated and lost over two hundred men. When the war had started in this way, it came to pass that the disagreement between Arcadians and Eleians widened in scope, for immediately the Arcadians, elated by their success, invaded Elis and took the cities of Margana and Cronion,3 and Cyparissia and Coryphasium.4
While these things were going on, in Macedon Ptolemy of Alorus5 was assassinated by his brother-in-law




1There seems to be no specific reference to this group in
Elis, though they probably went into exile at the same time
as the groups which chose Sparta and Pallantium (chap.
59. 2). Even so Elis and Arcadia are allies in chaps 62. 5,
64. 6, and 68. 1. See Xenophon, Hell.7. 4.2See Xenophon, Hell. 7. 12–27; Polybius, 4. 74.3Margana was a town in Pisatis their claims to which the Eleians renounced to Sparta in a treaty in 400 (Xenophon, Hell. 3.2. 30). Cronium appears to refer to the Hill of Cronos by the Alpheius in Pisatis.4Of these Strabo says (8. 4. 1) “Messenê comes after Triphylia; and there is a cape which is common to both; and after this cape come Cyparissa and Coryphasium” (L.C.L., translated by H. L. Jones).5See chap. 71. 1.165