Diodorus of Sicily

πίνακας παραλλήλους ζῳοφόρους τέσσαρας ἴσους
τοῖς τοίχοις ἔχον.
27. Τούτων δ᾿ ὁ μὲν πρῶτος ἦν ἔχων ἅρμα τορευτὸν
καὶ καθήμενον ἐπὶ τούτου τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον,
μετὰ χεῖρας ἔχοντα σκῆπτρον διαπρεπές· περὶ δὲ
τὸν βασιλέα μία μὲν ὑπῆρχε θεραπεία καθωπλισμένη
Μακεδόνων, ἄλλη δὲ Περσῶν μηλοφόρων
καὶ πρὸ τούτων ὁπλοφόροι· ὁ δὲ δεύτερος εἶχε τοὺς
ἐπακολουθοῦντας τῇ θεραπείᾳ ἐλέφαντας κεκοσμημένους
πολεμικῶς, ἀναβάτας ἔχοντας ἐκ μὲν τῶν
ἔμπροσθεν Ἰνδούς, ἐκ δὲ τῶν ὄπισθεν Μακεδόνας
καθωπλισμένους τῇ συνήθει σκευῇ· ὁ δὲ τρίτος
ἱππέων εἴλας μιμουμένας τὰς ἐν ταῖς παρατάξεσι
συναγωγάς, ὁ δὲ τέταρτος ναῦς κεκοσμημένας πρὸς
ναυμαχίαν. καὶ παρὰ μὲν τὴν εἰς τὴν καμάραν
εἴσοδον ὑπῆρχον λέοντες χρυσοῖ, δεδορκότες πρὸς
2τοὺς εἰσπορευομένους· ἀνὰ μέσον δὲ ἑκάστου τῶν
κιόνων ὑπῆρχε χρυσοῦς ἄκανθος ἀνατείνων ἐκ τοῦ
κάτω1 κατ᾿ ὀλίγον μέχρι τῶν κιονοκράνων. ἐπάνω
δὲ τῆς καμάρας κατὰ μέσην τὴν κορυφὴν φοινικὶς2
ὑπῆρχεν ὑπαίθριος, ἔχουσα χρυσοῦν στέφανον ἐλαίας
εὐμεγέθη, πρὸς ὃν ὁ ἥλιος προσβάλλων τὰς ἀκτῖνας
κατεσκεύαζε τὴν αὐγὴν ἀποστίλβουσαν καὶ σειομένην,
ὥστ᾿ ἐκ μακροῦ διαστήματος ὁρᾶσθαι τὴν
πρόσοψιν ἀστραπῇ παραπλησίαν.
3Ἡ δ᾿ ὑπὸ τὴν καμάραν καθέδρα δύο εἶχεν ἄξονας,




1κάτω added by Wilamowitz.2Wilamowitz suggests χοινικὶς.90Book XVIII

of a finger, which carried four Jong painted 322 b.c. tablets, their ends adjoining, each equal in length to a side of the colonnade.1
27. On the first of these tablets was a chariot ornamented with work in relief, and sitting in it was Alexander holding a very splendid sceptre in his hands. About the king were groups of armed attendants, one of Macedonians, a second of Persians of the bodyguard,2 and armed soldiers in front of them. The second tablet showed the elephants arrayed for war who followed the bodyguard. They carried Indian mahouts in front with Macedonians fully armed in their regular equipment behind them. The third tablet showed troops of cavalry as if in formation for battle; and the fourth, ships made ready for naval combat. Beside the entrance to the chamber there were golden lions with eyes turned toward those who would enter. There was a golden acanthus stretching little by little up the centre of each column from below to the capital. Above the chamber in the middle of the top under the open sky there was a purple banner blazoned with a golden olive wreath of great size,3 and when the sun cast upon it its rays, it sent forth such a bright and vibrant gleam that from a great distance it appeared like a flash of lightning.
The body of the chariot beneath the covered



1The chamber resembled a peripteral Ionic temple.
Architrave and frieze are not mentioned and may have been
omitted. The goat-stag masks correspond to the water
spouts of the temple; but, since they are found on all four sides, we must suppose a hip roof or a cloister vault. The cella walls are lacking, but their place is taken by the gold net, which permits the sarcophagus within to be seen. The four tablets correspond in position to the Ionic frieze of the Parthenon.2Literally “apple-bearers.” The men of the Great King’s bodyguard had golden apples in place of ferrules or spikes at the butts of their spears (Herodotus, 7. 41).3Or, reading χοινικίς, “There was a base upon which rested a golden olive wreath.”91