Diodorus of Sicily

ὕστερον δὲ δουλευόντων Μεσσηνίων τοῖς Λακεδαιμονίοις,
Ἀριστομένης ἔπεισε τοὺς Μεσσηνίους
ἀποστῆναι τῶν Σπαρτιατῶν, καὶ πολλὰ κακὰ
διειργάσατο τοὺς Σπαρτιάτας ὅτε καὶ Τυρταῖος ὁ
ποιητὴς ὑπὸ Ἀθηναίων ἡγεμὼν ἐδόθη τοῖς Σπαρτιάταις.
4ἔνιοι δὲ τὸν Ἀριστομένη γεγονέναι φασὶ
κατὰ τὸν εἰκοσαετῆ πόλεμον. ὁ δ᾿ ὕστατος ἐγένετο
πόλεμος αὐτοῖς σεισμοῦ μεγάλου γενομένου· καὶ
τῆς μὲν Σπάρτης ὅλης σχεδὸν συγχυθείσης ἀνδρῶν
δ᾿ ἐρήμου γενομένης, οἱ Μεσσηνίων περιλειφθέντες
ᾤκισαν τὴν Ἰθώμην μετὰ τῶν συναποστάντων1
Εἱλώτων, ἀναστάτου γεγενημένης τῆς Μεσσήνης
5πολλοὺς χρόνους. ἀτυχήσαντες δ᾿ ἐν πᾶσι τοῖς
πολέμοις, τὸ τελευταῖον ἀνάστατοι γενόμενοι κατῴκησαν
ἐν Ναυπάκτῳ, δόντων αὐτοῖς Ἀθηναίων
οἰκητήριον τήνδε τὴν πόλιν. καὶ τινὲς μὲν αὐτῶν
εἰς Κεφαλληνίαν ἐξέπεσον, τινὲς δ᾿ ἐν Σικελίᾳ
Μεσσήνην τὴν ἀπ᾿ ἐκείνων ὀνομασθεῖσαν κατῴκησαν.
6τὸ δὲ τελευταῖον κατὰ τοὺς ὑποκειμένους
καιροὺς Θηβαῖοι, πείσαντος αὐτοὺς Ἐπαμεινώνδου
καὶ πανταχόθεν συναγαγόντος τοὺς Μεσσηνίους,
ᾤκισαν τὴν Μεσσήνην καὶ τὴν ἀρχαίαν αὐτοῖς
χώραν ἀποκατέστησαν.
Περὶ μὲν οὖν τὴν Μεσσήνην τοσαύτας καὶ τηλικαύτας
συνέβη γενέσθαι μεταβολάς.
1So Dindorf: συναποστατῶν.136Book XV

Later, however, while the Messenians were in slavery 369/8 b.c. to the Lacedaemonians, Aristomenes1 persuaded the Messenians to revolt from the Spartans, and he inflicted many defeats upon the Spartans at the time when the poet Tyrtaeus2 was given by the Athenians as a leader to Sparta. Some say that Aristomenes lived during the twenty-year war. The last war3 between them was on the occasion of a great earthquake; practically all Sparta was destroyed and left bare of men, and the remnants of the Messenians settled Ithomê with the aid of the Helots who joined the revolt, after Messenê had for a long time been desolate. But when they were unsuccessful in all their wars and were finally driven from their homes, they settled in Naupactus,4 a city which the Athenians had given them for an abode. Furthermore some of their number were exiled to Cephallenia, while others settled in Messana5 in Sicily, which was named after them. Finally at the time under discussion the Thebans, at the instigation of Epameinondas, who gathered together the Messenians from all quarters, settled Messene and restored their ancient land to them.
Such then were the many important vicissitudes of Messenian history.
1Messenian hero of the Second Messenian War, 685–668
b.c.2Fragments of his marching songs and his poem on good
government (Εὐνομία) are collected in Edmunds, Elegy and
Iambus, 1. 58 ff., L.C.L. See Book 8. 27. 2. Schmid-Stählin,
Gr. Litt.-Gesch. 1. 1. 358 ff., doubt if a poet came out of Athens or Sparta at this period but think it quite possible that Tyrtaeus came from Miletus (cp. Suidas, Lexicon, s.v. Λάκων ἢ Μιλήσιος) along with other poets that came to Sparta from the more forward regions of Asia Minor and the islands. For other notices of his life see Edmunds, ibid. 50–58.3464–455 b.c. See Book 11. 63.4Situated on a promontory on the north shore of the Gulf of Corinth; an important ally of Athens in the Peloponnesian War.5Formerly Zanclê, settled by Siculians probably, later colonized by Chalcidians.137