Diodorus of Sicily

παρά τε τῆς φύσεως καὶ τῆς τύχης ἀπειληφώς.
3καταπειραθεὶς δ᾿ ὑπ᾿ ἀρρωστίας καὶ καθ᾿ ἡμέραν
αἰεὶ μᾶλλον βαρυνόμενος ἠξίωσε τὸν βασιλέα πυρὰν
αὐτῷ μεγάλην κατασκευάσαι καὶ προσαναβάντος
ἐπὶ ταύτην αὐτοῦ προστάξαι τοῖς ὑπηρέταις πῦρ
ἐνεῖναι.
4Ὁ δὲ Ἀλέξανδρος τὸ μὲν πρῶτον αὐτὸν ἀποτρέπειν
ἐπειρᾶτο ταύτης τῆς ἐπιβολῆς, ὡς δ᾿ οὐχ
ὑπήκουσεν, ὡμολόγησε συντελέσειν περὶ ὧν ἠξιωκὼς
ἦν. διαγγελθείσης δὲ τῆς πράξεως ἡ μὲν πυρὰ
κατεσκευάσθη, τὸ δὲ πλῆθος κατήντησεν ἐπὶ τὴν
5παράδοξον θέαν. ὁ δὲ Κάρανος ἀκολουθήσας τοῖς
ἰδίοις δόγμασι τεθαρρηκότως ἐπέστη τῇ πυρᾷ καὶ
μετὰ ταύτης καταφλεχθεὶς ἐτελεύτησεν. τῶν δὲ
παρόντων οἱ μὲν μανίαν αὐτοῦ κατέγνωσαν, οἱ δὲ
κενοδοξίαν ἐπὶ καρτερίᾳ, τινὲς δὲ τὴν εὐψυχίαν καὶ
τὴν τοῦ θανάτου καταφρόνησιν ἐθαύμασαν.
6Ὁ δὲ βασιλεὺς τοῦτον μὲν ἔθαψε πολυτελῶς,
αὐτὸς δὲ παρελθὼν εἰς Σοῦσα1 τὴν μὲν πρεσβυτέραν
τῶν Δαρείου θυγατέρων Στάτειραν ἔγημεν, τὴν δὲ
νεωτέραν Ἡφαιστίωνι συνῴκισε Δρυπῆτιν.2 ἔπεισε
δὲ καὶ τοὺς ἐπιφανεστάτους τῶν φίλων γῆμαι καὶ
συνῴκισεν αὐτοῖς τὰς εὐγενεστάτας παρθένους
Περσίδας.
108. Κατὰ τοῦτον τὸν καιρὸν ἧκον εἰς τὰ Σοῦσα
τρισμύριοι τῶν Περσῶν, νέοι μὲν παντελῶς ταῖς
ἡλικίαις, ἐπιλελεγμένοι δὲ ταῖς τῶν σωμάτων
2εὐπρεπείαις τε καὶ ῥώμαις. κατὰ δέ τινας ἐντολὰς
τοῦ βασιλέως ἠθροισμένοι, χρόνον ἱκανὸν ἐπιστάτας




1Σούσαν RX.2Δρυπίτην F.432Book XVII

nature and from Fortune. He had been taken ill and 326/5 b.c. each day becoming more exhausted he asked the king to erect for him a huge pyre and, after he had ascended it, to order the attendants to ignite it.
At first Alexander tried to dissuade him from this plan, but when he was unsuccessful, he agreed to do what was asked. After the project had become generally known, the pyre was erected, and everybody came to see the remarkable sight. True to his own creed, Caranus cheerfully mounted the pyre and perished, consumed along with it. Some of those who were present thought him mad, others vainglorious about his ability to bear pain, while others simply marvelled at his fortitude and contempt for death.
The king gave Caranus a magnificent funeral and then proceeded to Susa, where he married Stateira, the elder daughter of Dareius, and gave her younger sister Drypetis as wife to Hephaestion. He prevailed upon the most prominent of his Friends to take wives also, and gave them in marriage the noblest Persian ladies.1
108. Now there came to Susa at this time a body of thirty thousand Persians, all very young and selected for their bodily grace and strength.2 They had been enrolled in compliance with the king’s


1Curtius, 10. 3. 11–12; Justin, 12. 10. 9–10; Plutarch, Alexander, 70. 2; Arrian, 7. 4. 4–8. There were one hundred couples (Plutarch, De Fortuna aut Virtute Alexandri, 1. 7. 329 e). Justin and Plutarch report that Alexander married Stateira; Arrian names Barsinê and Parysatis. This marriage was described in detail by Chares, Alexander’s minister of protocol (Athenaeus, 12. 538 b–539 a).2Arrian, 7. 6. 1: Plutarch, Alexander, 71.1. Curtius (8. 5. 1) mentions the organization of this force in Bactria in 397; Plutarch (Alexander, 47. 3) places it in Hyrcania in 330.433