Diodorus of Sicily

διὰ τὸ τὴν ἀρχὴν ἐκ τῆς προειρημένης πόλεως
ὄντα διὰ τὸν κατακλυσμὸν ἐκπεσεῖν καὶ διασπαρῆναι.
5τοὺς οὖν τότε κατοικήσαντας ὕστερον
Ἐγχελεῖς καταπολεμήσαντες ἐξέβαλον, ὅτε δὴ συνέβη
καὶ τοὺς περὶ Κάδμον εἰς Ἰλλυριοὺς ἐκπεσεῖν.
μετὰ δὲ ταῦτ᾿ Ἀμφίονος καὶ Ζήθου κρατησάντων
τοῦ τόπου καὶ τότε πρῶτον τὸ ἄστυ κτισάντων,
καθάπερ καὶ ὁ ποιητής φησιν
οἳ πρῶτοι Θήβης ἕδος ἔκτισαν ἑπταπύλοιο.
τὸ δεύτερον οἱ κατοικήσαντες τὸν τόπον ἐξέπεσον
κατελθόντος Πολυδώρου τοῦ Κάδμου καὶ καταφρονήσαντος
τῶν πραγμάτων1 διὰ τὴν γενομένην
6τῷ Ἀμφίονι περὶ τὰ τέκνα συμφοράν. ἑξῆς δὲ τῶν
ἀπογόνων τούτου βασιλευόντων καὶ τῆς ὅλης χώρας
ἤδη Βοιωτίας καλουμένης ἀπὸ Βοιωτοῦ τοῦ Μελανίππης
μὲν καὶ Ποσειδῶνος υἱοῦ, δυναστεύσαντος
δὲ τῶν τόπων, τὸ τρίτον ἐκπίπτουσιν οἱ Θηβαῖοι
τῶν ἐξ Ἄργους ἐπιγόνων ἐκπολιορκησάντων τὴν
7πόλιν. τῶν δ᾿ ἐκπεσόντων οἱ διασωθέντες κατέφυγον
μὲν εἰς Ἀλαλκομενίαν καὶ τὸ Τιλφώσιον




1Wesseling’s conjecture, τῶν προσταξάντων, may be correct.376Book XIX

because they were originally from Thebes but had 316 b.c. been driven out and scattered by the flood. Be that as it may, these people then settled in the city but later the Encheleans defeated them in war and drove them out, at which time Cadmus and his followers also were driven to Illyria.1 Later Amphion and Zethus became masters of the site and then built the lower city for the first time, as the poet says:
First by them was established Thebes of the seven
gates.2
Then the inhabitants of the place were exiled a second time, for Polydorus, son of Cadmus, came back and was dissatisfied with the situation because of the misfortunes that had befallen Amphion in connection with his children.3 Next, when Polydorus’ own descendants were kings4 and the whole country had already received the name Boeotia from Boeotus, who was the son of Melanippê and Poseidon and had been ruler of the region, the Thebans for the third time suffered exile, for the Eipgoni from Argos took the city by siege.5 The survivors of those driven out took refuge in Alalcomenia and on Mount Til-




1For Cadmus among the Encheleans, an Illyrian tribe, cp.
Apollodorus, 3. 5. 4; Euripides, Bacchae, 1334. As king of
these Encheleans, Cadmus led an army into Greece and
sacked Delphi, but I find no other reference to a sack of
Thebes by the Encheleans. According to Herodotus (5. 61),
when the Thebans were driven from home by the Epigoni
they took refuge with the Encheleans.2Odyssey, 11. 263. Amphion and Zethus, sons of Zeus
and Antiopê, captured Thebes to avenge the cruel treatment
accorded their mother by Lycus, king of Thebes,
and his wife Dircê. They then built a wall for the city, the stones being charmed into place by the lyre-playing of Amphion.3i.e. the Niobides, slain by Apollo and Artemis to punish their mother Niobê, who had presumed to compare herself with Leto.4Eteocles and Polyneices, sons of Oedipus, son of Laius, son of Labdacus, son of Polydorus. Polyneices, wrongfully excluded from a share in power by his brother, secured the aid of his father-in-law, Adrastus of Argos, in a vain effort to make good his return—the Seven Against Thebes. Cp. Book 4. 65.5A generation after the failure of the “Seven,” their descendants, the Epigoni or Late-born, were successful in their attack on Thebes, cp. Book 4, 66–61.377