Diodorus of Sicily

τὸ δὲ τελευταῖον φθείρας χρήμασι τοὺς
προεστηκότας τῶν Ὀλυνθίων, Εὐθυκράτην τε καὶ
Λασθένην, διὰ τούτων προδοθεῖσαν τὴν Ὄλυνθον
3εἷλεν. διαρπάσας δ᾿ αὐτὴν καὶ τοὺς ἐνοικοῦντας
ἐξανδραποδισάμενος ἐλαφυροπώλησε. τοῦτο δὲ
πράξας χρημάτων τε πολλῶν εἰς τὸν πόλεμον εὐπόρησε
καὶ τὰς ἄλλας πόλεις τὰς ἐναντιουμένας
κατεπλήξατο. τοὺς δὲ ἀνδραγαθήσαντας τῶν στρατιωτῶν
κατὰ τὴν μάχην ἀξίαις δωρεαῖς τιμήσας
καὶ χρημάτων πλῆθος διαδοὺς τοῖς ἐν ταῖς πόλεσιν
ἰσχύουσι πολλοὺς ἔσχε προδότας τῶν πατρίδων.
καὶ αὐτὸς δὲ ἀπεφαίνετο διὰ χρυσίου πολὺ1 μᾶλλον
ἢ διὰ τῶν ὅπλων ηὐξηκέναι τὴν ἰδίαν βασιλείαν.
54. Οἱ δ᾿ Ἀθηναῖοι τὴν αὔξησιν ὑφορώμενοι τοῦ
Φιλίππου τοῖς ἀεὶ πολεμουμένοις ὑπὸ τοῦ βασιλέως
ἐβοήθουν, πρέσβεις ἀποστέλλοντες ἐπὶ τὰς πόλεις
καὶ παρακαλοῦντες τηρεῖν τὴν αὐτονομίαν καὶ τοὺς
ἐπὶ τὴν προδοσίαν ὁρμῶντας τῶν πολιτῶν θανάτῳ
κολάζειν· ἐπηγγέλλοντο δὲ πᾶσι συμμαχήσειν καὶ
φανερῶς ἑαυτοὺς πολεμίους ἀποδείξαντες τῷ βασιλεῖ
2διεπολέμουν πρὸς Φίλιππον. μάλιστα δ᾿ αὐτοὺς
παρώξυνε προστῆναι τῆς Ἑλλάδος Δημοσθένης ὁ
ῥήτωρ, δεινότατος ὢν τῶν κατ᾿ ἐκείνους τοὺς χρόνους
Ἑλλήνων. οὐ μὴν ἡ πόλις γε ἀναστεῖλαι τῆς
ἐπὶ τὴν προδοσίαν ὁρμῆς ἠδυνήθη τοὺς πολίτας·



1So Wesseling: πολλοῦ R, πολλοὺς PXF; πολλῷ conj.
Rhodoman.388Book XVI

but finally bribed the chief officials of the Olynthians, 348/7 b.c. Euthycrates and Lasthenes,1 and captured Olynthus through their treachery. After plundering it and enslaving the inhabitants he sold both men and property as booty. By so doing he procured large sums for prosecuting the war and intimidated the other cities that were opposed to him. Having rewarded with appropriate gifts such soldiers as had behaved gallantly in the battle and distributed a sum of money to men of influence in the cities, he gained many tools ready to betray their countries. Indeed he was wont to declare that it was far more by the use of gold than of arms that he had enlarged his kingdom.
54. Since the Athenians viewed with alarm the rising power of Philip, they came to the assistance of any people2 who were attacked by the king, by sending envoys to the cities and urging them to watch over their independence and punish with death those citizens who were bent on treason, and they promised them all that they would fight as their allies, and, after publicly declaring themselves the king’s enemies, engaged in an out-and-out war against Philip. The man who more than any other spurred them on to take up the cause of Hellas was the orator Demosthenes, the most eloquent of the Greeks of those times. Even his city was, however, unable to restrain its citizens from their urge toward treason, such was the crop,3
1Euthycrates and Lasthenes became the stock examples of
fifth columnists (see Demosthenes, 8. 40; 19. 265, 342; also,
on Olynthus, Philochorus, fr. 132; Suidas, s.v. Κάρανος; Demosthenes, 9. 56–66; and Pickard-Cambridge, Cambridge Ancient History, 6. 228–233).2For instances see Philochorus, l.c.3See Demosthenes, 18. 61: “In all the Greek states—not
in some of them but in every one of them—it chanced that there had sprung up the most abundant crop of traitorous, venal, and profligate politicians ever known within the memory of mankind.” (Vince & Vince, L.C.L.)389