Diodorus of Sicily

καταπεπληγμένους παρεκάλει θαρρεῖν ὡς οὐδενὸς
4ἐσομένου περὶ αὐτοὺς δεινοῦ. διαβοηθείσης δὲ τῆς
περὶ τὸ ἱερὸν καταλήψεως Λοκροὶ μὲν οἱ πλησίον
οἰκοῦντες παραχρῆμα ἐστράτευσαν ἐπὶ τὸν Φιλόμηλον.
γενομένης δὲ περὶ Δελφοὺς μάχης οἱ μὲν
Λοκροὶ λειφθέντες καὶ πολλοὺς ἀποβαλόντες τῶν
στρατιωτῶν ἔφυγον εἰς τὴν οἰκείαν, ὁ δὲ Φιλόμηλος
ἐπαρθεὶς τῇ νίκῃ τὰς τῶν Ἀμφικτυόνων ἀποφάσεις
ἔκ τε τῶν στηλῶν ἐξέκοψε1 καὶ τὰ περὶ τῶν καταδικῶν
5γράμματα κατέλυσεν, αὐτὸς δὲ διέδωκε
λόγον ὡς οὔτε συλᾶν τὸ μαντεῖον διέγνωκεν οὔτ᾿
ἄλλην οὐδεμίαν παράνομον πρᾶξιν συντελεῖν βεβούλευται,
τῆς δὲ προγονικῆς προστασίας ἀμφισβητῶν
καὶ τὰς τῶν Ἀμφικτυόνων ἀδίκους ἀποφάσεις
ἀκυρῶσαι βουλόμενος βοηθεῖν2 τοῖς πατρίοις νόμοις
τῶν Φωκέων.
25. Οἰ δὲ Βοιωτοὶ συνελθόντες εἰς ἐκκλησίαν
ἐψηφίσαντο βοηθεῖν τῷ μαντείῳ καὶ παραχρῆμα
στρατιώτας ἐξέπεμψαν. τούτων δὲ πραττομένων
ὁ Φιλόμηλος τεῖχός τε περιεβάλετο τῷ ἱερῷ καὶ
μισθοφόρους ἤθροιζε πολλούς, ἀναβιβάσας τοὺς
μισθοὺς καὶ ποιήσας ἡμιολίους, καὶ τῶν Φωκέων
ἐπιλέγων τοὺς ἀρίστους κατέγραφε καὶ ταχὺ δύναμιν
ἀξιόλογον ἤθροισεν· οὐκ ἐλάττους γὰρ τῶν
πεντακισχιλίων στρατιωτῶν ἔχων προεκάθητο τῶν
Δελφῶν, φοβερὸς ὢν ἤδη τοῖς πολεμεῖν πρὸς αὐτὸν
2βουλομένοις. μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα στρατεύσας εἰς τὴν
τῶν Λοκρῶν χώραν καὶ πολλὴν τῆς πολεμίας γῆς

1Wesseling conjectures ἐξεκόλαψε (cp. Cobet, p. 246, Demosthenes,
57. 64 and 59. 98).2βοηθεῖν Fischer: βοηθεῖ.306Book XVI

the others were terror-stricken, he exhorted them to 355/4 b.c. be of good cheer since no danger would befall them. When news of the seizure of the shrine was noised abroad, the Locrians, who lived near by,1 straightway took the field against Philomelus. A battle took place near Delphi and the Locrians, having been defeated with the loss of many of their men, fled to their own territory, and Philomelus, being elated by his victory, hacked from the slabs the pronouncements of the Amphictyons, deleted the letters recording their judgements, and personally caused the report to be circulated that he had resolved not to plunder the oracle nor had he purposed to commit any other lawless deed, but that in support of the ancestral claim to the guardianship and because of his desire to annul the unjust decrees of the Amphictyons, he was vindicating the ancestral laws of the Phocians.
25. The Boeotians, coming together in an assembly, voted to rally to the support of the oracle and immediately dispatched troops. While these things were going on, Philomelus threw a wall around the shrine and began to assemble a large number of mercenaries by raising the pay to half as much again, and selecting the bravest of the Phocians he enrolled them and quickly had a considerable army; for with no less than five thousand troops he took up a position in defence of Delphi, already a formidable adversary for those who wished to make war upon him. Later on, having led an expedition into the territory of the Locrians and laid waste much of the enemy’s land, he



1Near Amphissa. The account of the battle is repeated chap. 28. 3.307