Diodorus of Sicily

ὧν ἦσάν τινες Ῥόδιοι μισθοφοροῦντες παρὰ τῷ
βασιλεῖ.
Καὶ τὰ μὲν περὶ τὴν ἐν Ῥόδῳ πολιορκίαν ἐν
τούτοις ἦν.
89. Κατὰ δὲ τὴν Σικελίαν Ἀγαθοκλῆς οὐ δυνάμενος
διαλύσασθαι πρὸς τοὺς περὶ Δεινοκράτην
φυγάδας ἀνέζευξεν ἐπ᾿ αὐτοὺς μεθ᾿ ἧς εἶχε δυνάμεως,
νομίζων ἀναγκαῖον ὑπάρχειν αὐτῷ διακινδυνεύειν
καὶ παραβάλλεσθαι περὶ τῶν ὅλων.
συνηκολούθουν δ᾿ αὐτῷ πεζοὶ μὲν οὐ πλείους τῶν
2πεντακισχιλίων, ἱππεῖς δὲ εἰς ὀκτακοσίους. οἱ δὲ
περὶ Δεινοκράτην φυγάδες ὁρῶντες τὴν τῶν πολεμίων
ὁρμὴν ἄσμενοι κατήντησαν εἰς τὴν μάχην,
ὄντες πολλαπλάσιοι· πεζοὶ μὲν γὰρ ὑπῆρχον πλείους
τῶν δισμυρίων καὶ πεντακισχιλίων, ἱππεῖς δ᾿ οὐκ
ἐλάττους τρισχιλίων. ἀντιστρατοπεδευσάντων δ᾿ αὐτῶν
περὶ τὸ καλούμενον Τόργιον1 καὶ μετὰ ταῦτα
παραταξαμένων ἐπ᾿ ὀλίγον μὲν χρόνον συνέστη
καρτερὰ μάχη διὰ τὰς ἀμφοτέρων προθυμίας· μετὰ
δὲ ταῦτα τῶν πρὸς τὸν Δεινοκράτην διαφερομένων
τινές, ὄντες πλείους τῶν δισχιλίων, μετεβάλοντο
πρὸς τὸν τύραννον καὶ τοῖς φυγάσιν αἴτιοι κατέστησαν
3τῆς ἥττης. οἱ μὲν γὰρ μετ᾿ Ἀγαθοκλέους
ὄντες πολὺ μᾶλλον ἐθάρρησαν, οἱ δὲ Δεινοκράτει
συναγωνιζόμενοι κατεπλάγησαν καὶ νομίσαντες
πλείους εἶναι τοὺς ἀφισταμένους πρὸς φυγὴν ὥρμησαν.
εἶθ᾿ ὁ μὲν Ἀγαθοκλῆς διώξας αὐτοὺς μέχρι
τινὸς καὶ τοῦ φονεύειν ἀποσχόμενος διεπέμψατο
πρὸς τοὺς ἡττημένους, ἀξιῶν παύσασθαι μὲν τῆς
1Τόργιον Ortelius and Cluverius from Hesychius: Γόργιον RX, Γορηόνιον F.376Book XX

some of whom were Rhodians serving as mercenaries 305 b.c. in the king’s army.
This was the state of the siege of Rhodes.1
89. In Sicily Agathocles,2 since he had been unable to make terms with Deinocrates and the exiles, took the field against them with what forces he had, believing that it was necessary for him to fight a battle with them and stake everything on the result. Not more than five thousand foot soldiers followed him and horsemen to the number of eight hundred. Deinocrates and the exiles, when they saw the move made by the enemy, gladly came out to meet him in battle, being many times as strong; for their foot soldiers came to more than twenty-five thousand and their cavalry to not less than three thousand. When the armies had encamped opposite each other near the place called Torgium,3 and then were drawn up against each other in battle array, for a short time there was a stubborn battle because of the eagerness of both sides; but then some of those who were at odds with Deinocrates, more than two thousand in number, went over to the tyrant and were responsible for the defeat of the exiles. For those who were with Agathocles gained much more confidence, and those who were fighting on the side of Deinocrates were dismayed and, overestimating the number of the deserters, broke into flight. Then Agathocles, after pursuing them for a certain distance and refraining from slaughter, sent envoys to the defeated and asked them to put an end to the quarrel and return





1Continued in chap. 91.2Continued from chap. 79.3The exact position is unknown.377