Diodorus of Sicily

τοῦ υἱοῦ Δημητρίου νυκτὸς εἰσβὰς εἰς τὰς Ἀττικὰς
ναῦς. ἐν δὲ ταύταις κομισθεὶς εἰς τὴν Εὐρώπην
προῆγε συμμίξων Ἀντιπάτρῳ.
24. Κατὰ δὲ τούτους τοὺς καιροὺς Ἀντίπατρος
καὶ Κρατερὸς ἐπὶ τοὺς Αἰτωλοὺς ἐστράτευσαν,
ἔχοντες πεζοὺς μὲν τρισμυρίους, ἱππεῖς δὲ δισχιλίους
καὶ πεντακοσίους· οὗτοι γὰρ τῶν ἐν τῷ
Λαμιακῷ πολέμῳ διαπολεμησάντων ὑπόλοιποι διέμενον
2ἀχείρωτοι. οἱ δὲ Αἰτωλοὶ τηλικούτων
δυνάμεων ἐπ᾿ αὐτοὺς ὡρμημένων οὐ κατεπλάγησαν
ταῖς ψυχαῖς, ἀλλὰ τοὺς μὲν ἀκμάζοντας ταῖς
ἡλικίαις ἀθροίσαντες εἰς μυρίους κατέφυγον εἰς τοὺς
ὀρεινοὺς καὶ τραχεῖς τόπους, εἰς οὓς τέκνα καὶ γυναῖκας
καὶ τοὺς γεγηρακότας καὶ τὸ τῶν χρημάτων
πλῆθος ἀπέθεντο, καὶ τὰς μὲν ἀνωχύρους πόλεις
ἐξέλιπον, τὰς δὲ ὀχυρότητι διαφερούσας φρουραῖς
ἀξιολόγοις διαλαβόντες εὐτόλμως ὑπέμενον τὴν τῶν
πολεμίων ἔφοδον.
25. Οἱ δὲ περὶ τὸν Ἀντίπατρον καὶ Κρατερὸν
εἰσβαλόντες εἰς τὴν Αἰτωλίαν καὶ τὰς εὐχειρώτους
πόλεις ὁρῶντες ἐρήμους ὥρμησαν ἐπὶ τοὺς ἀνακεχωρηκότας
εἰς τὰς δυσχωρίας. τὸ μὲν οὖν πρῶτον
οἱ Μακεδόνες πρὸς τόπους ὀχυροὺς καὶ τραχεῖς
βιαζόμενοι πολλοὺς τῶν στρατιωτῶν ἀπέβαλον· ἡ
γὰρ τόλμα τῶν Αἰτωλῶν προσλαβοῦσα τὴν ἐν τοῖς
τόποις ὀχυρότητα ῥᾳδίως ἠμύνετο τοὺς διὰ τὴν
προπέτειαν εἰς ἀβοηθήτους κινδύνους προπίπτοντας1·
μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα τῶν περὶ Κρατερὸν στεγνὰ
κατασκευασάντων καὶ συναναγκαζόντων τοὺς πολεμίους
μένειν τὸν χειμῶνα καὶ διακαρτερεῖν ἐν

1προπίπτοντας Dindorf: προσπίπτοντας.82Book XVIII

and his son Demetrius, boarded the Athenian ships 322 b.c. undetected at night. And having been brought to Europe in these, he travelled on to join forces with Antipater.
24. At this time Antipater and Craterus had taken the field against the Aetolians with thirty thousand infantry and twenty-five hundred cavalry; for of those who had taken part in the Lamian War, the Aetolians alone were left unconquered.1 Although such great forces were sent against them, they were in no panic-stricken mood, but gathering together all who were in the full vigour of manhood to the number of ten thousand, they retired to the mountainous and rough places, in which they placed the children, the women, and the old, together with the greater part of their wealth. The cities that could not be defended they abandoned, but those that were particularly strong they secured, each with a considerable garrison, and boldly awaited the approach of the enemy.
25. Antipater and Craterus, coming into Aetolia and finding that the cities which were easy to capture were deserted, moved against the men who had withdrawn into the difficult regions. At first, then, the Macedonians, violently attacking positions that were strongly fortified and in broken terrain, lost many of their soldiers; for the hardihood of the Aetolians joined with the strength of their positions easily turned back men who rushed headlong into dangers beyond reach of succour. Afterward, however, when Craterus had built shelters and was forcing the enemy to stay through the winter and to hold out in regions

1Cp. chap. 18. 8. This campaign, since it follows the battle of Crannon (September, 322), belongs to the archonyear 322/1.83