Diodorus of Sicily

πρὸς πάντας1 φιλοφρονηθεὶς ἐπανῆλθεν εἰς Μακεδονίαν,
οὐ μόνον δόξαν εὐσεβείας καὶ ἀρετῆς στρατηγικῆς
περιπεποιημένος, ἀλλὰ καὶ πρὸς τὴν
μέλλουσαν αὔξησιν αὐτῷ γίνεσθαι μεγάλα προκατεσκευασμένος.
5ἐπεθύμει γὰρ τῆς Ἑλλάδος ἀποδειχθῆναι
στρατηγὸς αὐτοκράτωρ καὶ τὸν πρὸς
Πέρσας ἐξενεγκεῖν πόλεμον· ὅπερ καὶ συνέβη
γενέσθαι. ἀλλὰ περὶ μὲν τούτων ἐν τοῖς οἰκείοις
χρόνοις τὰ κατὰ μέρος ἀναγράψομεν, νῦν δ᾿ ἐπὶ τὸ
συνεχὲς τῆς ἱστορίας τρεψόμεθα.
61. Δίκαιον δ᾿ εἶναι νομίζομεν πρῶτον ἀναγράψαι
τὴν ἐκ θεῶν γενομένην τοῖς εἰς τὸ μαντεῖον παρανενομηκόσι2
κόλασιν. ὅλως γὰρ οὐ μόνον τοῖς
αὐθένταις τῆς ἱεροσυλίας, ἀλλὰ καὶ πᾶσι τοῖς προσαψαμένοις
μόνον τῆς παρανομίας ἀπαραίτητος ἐκ
2τοῦ δαιμονίου ἐπηκολούθησε τιμωρία. ὁ μὲν γὰρ
ἀρχιτέκτων τῆς καταλήψεως τοῦ ἱεροῦ Φιλόμηλος
κατά τινα περίστασιν πολεμικὴν ἑαυτὸν κατεκρήμνισεν,
ὁ δὲ ἀδελφὸς αὐτοῦ Ὀνόμαρχος διαδεξάμενος
τὴν τῶν ἀπονοηθέντων στρατηγίαν μετὰ
τῶν συμπαραταξαμένων ἐν Θετταλίᾳ Φωκέων καὶ
3μισθοφόρων κατακοπεὶς ἐσταυρώθη. ὁ δὲ τρίτος
καὶ πλεῖστα τῶν ἀναθημάτων κατακόψας Φάυλλος
πολυχρονίῳ νόσῳ νοσήσας οὐδ᾿ ἀπολυθῆναι συντόμως
τῆς τιμωρίας ἠδυνήθη. ὁ δ᾿ ἐπὶ πᾶσι Φάλαικος
τὰ λείψανα τῆς ἱεροσυλίας ἀναλαβὼν ἐν
πλάναις καὶ μεγάλοις φόβοις καὶ κινδύνοις ἐφ᾿
ἱκανὸν χρόνον ἐβίωσεν, οὐχ ἵνα μακαριώτερος γένηται
τῶν συνασεβησάντων, ἀλλ᾿ ἵνα πλείω χρόνον


1πρὸς πάντας Kallenberg (cp. chap. 89. 2), πάντας Dindorf:
πάντα.2So Dindorf: παρηνομηκόσι (except P παρενομικόσι).408Book XVI

with all, he returned to Macedonia, having not merely 346/5 b.c. won for himself a reputation for piety and excellent generalship, but having also made important preparations for the aggrandizement that was destined to be his. For he was ambitious to be designated general of Hellas in supreme command and as such to prosecute the war against the Persians. And this was what actually came to pass. But these events we shall record severally in their proper periods; we shall now proceed with the thread of our narrative.
61. But first it is only right, so we think, to record the punishment which was visited by the gods upon those who had committed the outrage on the oracle. For, speaking generally, it was not merely the perpetrators of the sacrilege but all persons who had the slightest connection with the sacrilege that were hounded by the inexorable retribution sent of Heaven. In fact the man who first schemed for the seizure of the shrine, Philomelus, in a crisis of the war hurled himself over a cliff,1 while his brother Onomarchus, after taking over the command of his people, now become desperate, was cut to pieces in a battle in Thessaly, along with the Phocians and mercenaries of his command, and crucified.2 The third in succession and the one who coined into money most of the dedications, Phaÿllus,3 fell ill of a lingering disease and so was unable even to secure a quick release from his punishment. And the last of all, Phalaecus, who had gathered the remnants of the pillaged property, passed his life for a considerable length of time wandering about in great fear and danger, though it was not Heaven’s intent that he should be happier than those who participated with him in the sacrilege, but that



1See chap. 31.2See chap. 35.3See chap. 38.409