Diodorus of Sicily

καὶ Ὑρκανία,1 δι᾿ ἧς συμβαίνει περιέχεσθαι
τὴν Ὑρκανίαν θάλατταν, οὖσαν καθ᾿ αὑτήν· μετὰ
δὲ ταῦτα Μηδία, πολλὰς μὲν ἔχουσα τόπων προσηγορίας,
μεγίστη δ᾿ οὖσα πασῶν τῶν σατραπειῶν·
ἑξῆς δ᾿ Ἀρμενία καὶ Λυκαονία καὶ Καππαδοκία,
πᾶσαι τὸν ἀέρα δυσχείμερον ἔχουσαι· ταύταις δὲ
συνορίζουσαι κατ᾿ εὐθεῖαν μὲν ἥ τε μεγάλη Φρυγία
καὶ ἡ ἐφ᾿ Ἑλλησπόντῳ κειμένη, ἐκ δὲ τῶν πλαγίων
Λυδία καὶ Καρία, ὑπερδέξιος δὲ τῆς Φρυγίας καὶ
παράλληλος ἡ Πισιδικὴ καὶ ταύτης ἐχομένη Λυκία.
5ἐν δὲ τοῖς παρὰ θάλασσαν τόποις τούτων τῶν
σατραπειῶν αἱ τῶν Ἑλλήνων πόλεις καθίδρυνται,
ὧν τὰς προσηγορίας γράφειν οὐκ ἀναγκαῖον πρὸς
τὴν ὑποκειμένην ὑπόθεσιν. αἱ μὲν οὖν πρὸς τὴν
ἄρκτον ἐστραμμέναι σατραπεῖαι τὸν εἰρημένον
τρόπον καθίδρυνται.
6. Τῶν δὲ πρὸς μεσημβρίαν ἐστραμμένων πρώτη
μὲν παρὰ τὸν Καύκασόν ἐστιν Ἰνδική, βασιλεία
μεγάλη καὶ πολυάνθρωπος, οἰκουμένη δ᾿ ὑπὸ πλειόνων
Ἰνδικῶν ἐθνῶν, ὧν ἐστι μέγιστον τὸ τῶν
Γανδαριδῶν ἔθνος, ἐφ᾿ οὓς διὰ τὸ πλῆθος τῶν
παρ᾿ αὐτοῖς ἐλεφάντων οὐκ ἐπεστράτευσεν ὁ Ἀλέξανδρος.
2ὁρίζει δὲ τὴν χώραν ταύτην καὶ τὴν ἑξῆς
Ἰνδικὴν ποταμὸς ὁ Γάγγης, καὶ τὸ βάθος μέγιστος2
ὢν τῶν περὶ τοὺς τόπους καὶ τὸ πλάτος ἔχων
σταδίων τριάκοντα. ἐχομένη δὲ ταύτης ἡ λοιπὴ τῆς




1καὶ Ὑρκανία added by Fischer.2ὁ Γάγγης, καὶ τὸ βάθος μέγιστος Post, ὁ ὀνομαζόμενος
Γάγγης, μέγιστος Fischer: ὁ μέγιστος.26Book XVIII

and Hyrcania, by which the Hyrcanian Sea,1 a detached 323 b.c. body of water, is surrounded. Next is Media, which embraces many regions with distinctive names and is the greatest of all the satrapies. Armenia, Lycaonia, and Cappadocia, all having a very wintry climate, are next. Bordering on them in a straight line are both Great Phrygia and Hellespontine Phrygia;
Lydia and Caria are to the side; above Phrygia and beside it is Pisidia, with Lycia next to it. In the coastal regions of these satrapies are established the cities of the Greeks; to give their names is not necessary for our present purposes. The satrapies that face the north are situated in the way described.
6. Of those satrapies that face the south, the first one along the Caucasus is India,2 a great and populous kingdom, inhabited by many Indian nations, of which the greatest is that of the Gandaridae, against whom Alexander did not make a campaign because of the multitude of their elephants.3 The river Ganges, which is the deepest of the region and has a width of thirty stades,4 separates this land from the neighbouring part of India. Adjacent to this is the rest of




1This name is sometimes applied to the whole of the
Caspian Sea, sometimes to its eastern portion only. Erastos- thenes and later Greek geographers in general believed that the Caspian was a gulf of the Northern Ocean (Strabo, 2. 1. 17, 2. 5. 18), but Herodotus (1. 203.1) had already called it an inland sea.2In Book 2. 35–37, Diodorus discusses India, which he states to be square, bounded on south and east by the “Great Sea” (the Indian Ocean or the Bay of Bengal), on the west by the Indus, and on the north by the mountains. Of the southern extension of India he knows nothing.3They are said to have had four thousand war elephants (Books 2. 37. 3, 17. 93. 2).4In Book 2. 37. 2 the width is given as thirty stades, but in Book 17. 93. 2 it is thirty-two. Strabo (15. 1. 35) quotes Megasthenes as giving it a width of one hundred stades (about twelve miles).27