Diodorus of Sicily

ἔχειν. καὶ τῶν μὲν Φωκέων τοὺς ἐναντιουμένους
συλλαμβάνων ἀνῄρει καὶ τὰς οὐσίας ἐδήμευεν. εἰς
δὲ τὴν πολεμίαν ἐμβαλὼν Θρόνιον μὲν ἐκπολιορκήσας
ἐξηνδραποδίσατο, Ἀμφισσεῖς δὲ καταπληξάμενος
4ἠνάγκασεν ὑποτάττεσθαι. τὰς δ᾿ ἐν Δωριεῦσι
πόλεις πορθήσας τὴν χώραν αὐτῶν ἐδῄωσεν. εἰς
δὲ τὴν Βοιωτίαν ἐμβαλὼν Ὀρχομενὸν μὲν εἷλεν,
ἐπιχειρήσας δ᾿ ἐκπολιορκεῖν1 Χαιρώνειαν καὶ ἡττηθεὶς
ὑπὸ Θηβαίων ἐπανῆλθεν εἰς τὴν οἰκείαν.
34. Ἅμα δὲ τούτοις πραττομένοις Ἀρτάβαζος,
ἀποστάτης ὢν τοῦ βασιλέως, διεπολέμει πρὸς τοὺς
ἀποσταλέντας ὑπὸ τοῦ βασιλέως σατράπας εἰς τὸν
πόλεμον. καὶ τὸ μὲν πρῶτον συμμαχοῦντος αὐτῷ
Χάρητος τοῦ Ἀθηναίων στρατηγοῦ ἐρρωμένως ἀντετάττετο
τοῖς σατράπαις, ἐκείνου δ᾿ ἀπελθόντος
μονωθεὶς ἔπεισε τοὺς Θηβαίους συμμαχίαν αὐτῷ
πέμψαι. οἱ δὲ Παμμένη στρατηγὸν ἑλόμενοι καὶ
δόντες αὐτῷ στρατιώτας πεντακισχιλίους ἐξέπεμψαν
2εἰς τὴν Ἀσίαν. ὁ δὲ Παμμένης βοηθήσας
Ἀρταβάζῳ καὶ τοὺς σατράπας μεγάλαις μάχαις
δυσὶ νικήσας περιεποιήσατο μεγάλην δόξαν ἑαυτῷ
τε καὶ τοῖς Βοιωτοῖς. ἐφάνη γὰρ θαυμαστὸν εἰ
Βοιωτοὶ τῶν μὲν Θετταλῶν ἐγκαταλελοιπότων, τοῦ
δὲ Φωκικοῦ πολέμου μεγάλους ἐπιφέροντος κινδύνους
διαποντίους δυνάμεις εἰς Ἀσίαν ἐξέπεμπον
καὶ προετέρουν κατὰ τὸ πλεῖστον ἐν τοῖς κινδύνοις.
1So Capps: δὲ πολιορκεῖν.330Book XVI

maintain the peace. In his dealings with the Phocians 353/2 b.c. also he arrested and executed those who opposed him and confiscated their property. After invading the territory of the enemy1 he took Thronion2 by storm and reduced its inhabitants to slavery, and having intimidated the Amphissans3 by threats he forced them to submit. He sacked the cities of the Dorians4 and ravaged their territory. He invaded Boeotia, captured Orchomenus, then, having attempted to reduce Chaeroneia by siege and being defeated by the Thebans, he returned to his own territory.
34. While these things were going on, Artabazus, who had revolted from the Persian King, continued the war against the satraps who had been dispatched by the King to take part in the war against him. At first when Chares the Athenian general was fighting with him, Artabazus resisted the satraps courageously, but when Chares5 had gone and he was left alone he induced the Thebans to send him an auxiliary force. Choosing Pammenes6 as general and giving him five thousand soldiers, they dispatched him to Asia. Pammenes, by the support he gave to Artabazus and by defeating the satraps in two great battles, won great glory for himself and the Boeotians. Now it seemed an amazing thing that the Boeotians,- after the Thessalians had left them in the lurch, and when the war with the Phocians was threatening them with serious dangers, should be sending armies across the sea into Asia and for the most part proving successful in the battles.
1The Locrians.2In Epicnemidian Locris. Alponus, Thronion, and Nicaea
were posts controlling the roads to Thermopylae held by
Phocians (cp. Aeschines, On the Embassy, 132; Demosthenes,
19. 83).3In Ozolian Locris. Cp. Plutarch, Mulierum Virtutes, 249 e, f.4See Strabo, 9. 4. 11.5See chap. 22. 1–2.6For this campaign see Beloch, Griechische Geschichte2, 3. 1. 250–251; Pickard-Cambridge, Cambridge Ancient History, 6. 217–918; Glotz, Hist. gr. 3. 268.331