Diodorus of Sicily
6τοὺς σατράπας μετὰ τῶν δυνάμεων. Εὐμενὴς δὲ
διαβὰς τὸν Τίγριν καὶ παραγενόμενος εἰς τὴν Σουσιανὴν
εἰς τρία μέρη διεῖλε τὴν δύναμιν διὰ τὴν
τοῦ σίτου σπάνιν. ἐπιπορευόμενος δὲ τὴν χώραν
κατὰ μέρος σίτου μὲν παντελῶς ἐσπάνιζεν, ὄρυζαν
δὲ καὶ σήσαμον καὶ φοίνικα διέδωκε τοῖς στρατιώταις,
δαψιλῶς ἐχούσης τῆς χώρας τοὺς τοιούτους
7καρπούς. πρὸς δὲ τοὺς ἐν ταῖς ἄνω σατραπείαις
ἡγεμόνας ἦν μὲν καὶ πρότερον ἀπεσταλκὼς τὰς
παρὰ τῶν βασιλέων ἐπιστολάς, ἐν αἷς ἦν γεγραμμένον
πάντα πειθαρχεῖν Εὐμενεῖ, καὶ τότε δὲ
βυβλιοφόρους ἀπέστειλεν, ἀξιῶν ἀπαντᾶν εἰς τὴν
Σουσιανὴν ἅπαντας μετὰ τῶν ἰδίων δυνάμεων, καθ᾿
ὃν δὴ χρόνον συνέβη κἀκείνους ἠθροικέναι τὰ
στρατόπεδα καὶ συνδεδραμηκέναι πρὸς ἀλλήλους
δι᾿ ἑτέρας αἰτίας, ὑπὲρ ὧν ἀναγκαῖον προειπεῖν.
14. Πίθων σατράπης μὲν ἀπεδέδεικτο Μηδίας,
στρατηγὸς δὲ τῶν ἄνω σατραπειῶν ἁπασῶν γενόμενος
Φιλώταν μὲν τὸν προϋπάρχοντα Παρθυαίας
στρατηγὸν ἀπέκτεινε, τὸν δὲ αὑτοῦ ἀδελφὸν Εὔδαμον
2ἀντὶ τούτου κατέστησεν.1 οὗ γενομένου συνέδραμον
οἱ λοιποὶ σατράπαι πάντες, φοβηθέντες
μὴ τὸ παραπλήσιον πάθωσιν, ὄντος τοῦ Πίθωνος
κινητικοῦ καὶ μεγάλα ταῖς2 ἐπιβολαῖς περιβαλομένου.
περιγενόμενοι δ᾿ αὐτοῦ μάχῃ καὶ πολλοὺς
τῶν συναγωνισαμένων ἀνελόντες ἐξήλασαν ἐκ τῆς
3Παρθυαίας. κἀκεῖνος τὸ μὲν πρῶτον ἀνεχώρησεν
εἰς Μηδίαν, μετ᾿ ὀλίγον δ᾿ εἰς τὴν Βαβυλῶνα παραγενόμενος

1γενόμενος Φιλώταν . . . κατέστησεν Fischer, γενόμενος
Φίλιππον . . . κατέστησεν Wesseling: γενόμενος Παρθυαῖος ὃς
Φιλώταν μὲν τὸν προυπάρχοντα στρατηγὸν ἀπέκτεινεν, τὸν δὲ
αὐτοῦ (αὐτοῦ δὲ τὸν X) ἀδελφὸν Εὔδαμον ἀντὶ τούτου κατέστησεν
RVX, γενόμενος Παρθυαίας Φιλώταν μὲν τὸν προυπάρχοντα στρατηγὸν ἀπέκτεινε, τὸν ἑαυτοῦ δ᾿ ἀδελφὸν Εὔδαμον ἀντὶ τούτου κατέστησεν F.2μεγάλα ταῖς Reiske; μεγάλαις.264Book XIX

arrive with their forces. Eumenes, however, after 317 b.c. crossing the Tigris and arriving in Susianê, divided his army into three parts because of the dearth of food. Marching through the country in separate columns, he was completely without grain, but he distributed to his soldiers rice, sesame, and dates, since the land produced such fruits as these in plenty. He had already sent to the commanders of the upper satrapies the letter from the kings in which it was written that they should obey Eumenes in every way; and at this time he again sent couriers bidding the satraps all to assemble in Susianê each with his own army. But it happened that at this very time they had themselves mobilized their forces and had assembled for other reasons, with which it is necessary to deal first.
14. Pithon had been appointed satrap of Media, but when he became general of all the upper satrapies, he put to death Philotas, the former general of Parthia, and set up his own brother Eudamus in his place.1 At this all the other satraps joined forces, fearing that they might suffer a similar fate since Pithon was seditious and had included great undertakings in his plans. But they got the better of him in a battle, killed many of his supporters, and drove him out of Parthia. At first he withdrew to Media, but after a little he went on to Babylon, where he invited




1Pithon received Media in the distribution at Triparadeisus, but the satrap of Parthia is there called Philip (Book 18. 39. 6). As Diodorus’ words suggest, Pithon’s “generalship” of the upper satrapies was by usurpation. For earlier projects of Pithon cp. Book 18. 7.265