Diodorus of Sicily
2τοιαύτας αἰτίας. Ἀμύντου καταπολεμηθέντος ὑπὸ
Ἰλλυριῶν καὶ φόρους τοῖς κρατήσασι τελεῖν ἀναγκασθέντος
οἱ μὲν Ἰλλυριοὶ λαβόντες εἰς ὁμηρίαν
Φίλιππον τὸν νεώτατον τῶν υἱῶν παρέθεντο τοῖς
Θηβαίοις. οὗτοι δὲ τῷ Ἐπαμεινώνδου πατρὶ παρέθεντο
τὸν νεανίσκον καὶ προσέταξαν ἅμα τηρεῖν
ἐπιμελῶς τὴν παρακαταθήκην καὶ προστατεῖν τῆς
3ἀγωγῆς καὶ παιδείας. τοῦ δ᾿ Ἐπαμεινώνδου
Πυθαγόριον ἔχοντος φιλόσοφον ἐπιστάτην συντρεφόμενος
ὁ Φίλιππος μετέσχεν ἐπὶ πλεῖον τῶν
Πυθαγορίων λόγων. ἀμφοτέρων δὲ τῶν μαθητῶν
προσενεγκαμένων φύσιν τε καὶ φιλοπονίαν ὑπῆρξαν
ἑκάτεροι διαφέροντες ἀρετῇ· ὧν Ἐπαμεινώνδας μὲν
μεγάλους ἀγῶνας καὶ κινδύνους ὑπομείνας τῇ
πατρίδι παραδόξως τὴν ἡγεμονίαν τῆς Ἑλλάδος
περιέθηκεν, ὁ δὲ Φίλιππος ταῖς αὐταῖς ἀφορμαῖς χρησάμενος
οὐκ ἀπελείφθη τῆς Ἐπαμεινώνδου δόξης.
4μετὰ γὰρ τὴν Ἀμύντου τελευτὴν Ἀλέξανδρος ὁ
πρεσβύτατος τῶν υἱῶν διεδέξατο τὴν ἀρχήν. τοῦτον



236Book XVI

Amyntas had been defeated by the Illyrians1 and 360/59 b.c. forced to pay tribute to his conquerors, the Illyrians, who had taken Philip, the youngest son of Amyntas, as a hostage, placed him in the care of the Thebans.2 They in turn entrusted the lad to the father of Epameinondas and directed him both to keep careful watch over his ward and to superintend his upbringing and education. Since Epameinondas had as his instructor a philosopher of the Pythagorean school,3 Philip, who was reared along with him, acquired a wide acquaintance with the Pythagorean philosophy. Inasmuch as both students showed natural ability and diligence they proved to be superior in deeds of valour. Of the two, Epameinondas underwent the most rigorous tests and battles, and invested his fatherland almost miraculously with the leadership of Hellas, while Philip, availing himself of the same initial training, achieved no less fame than Epameinondas. For after the death of Amyntas, Alexander,4 the eldest of the sons of Amyntas, succeeded to the throne.



1This defeat occurs on two occasions according to Diodorus,
at the beginning of his reign (Book 14. 92. 3–4) and
again about 383 (Book 15. 19. 2). Beloch (Griechische Geschichte2,
3. 2. 58) thinks the first mention erroneous.2Since Philip was born about 383 he was an infant when
given to the Illyrians. Justin (7. 5. 1) states that he was
ransomed by Alexander II and later sent by him as hostage
to Thebes. Diodorus likewise has Alexander send him to
Thebes (Book 15. 67. 4) as does Plutarch (Pelopidas, 26. 4).
Modern historians, e.g. Beloch (op. cit. 3. 1. 182, note), Glotz
(Hist. gr. 3. 227), and the author of the article on Philip in
P.-W. (Realencyclopädie, 19. 2266) agree that Ptolemy of
Alorus, paramour and later husband of Eurydicê, widow of
Amyntas III, was the monarch who sent Philip to Thebes,
basing their account on Aeschines (False Embassy, 26 ff.), who places Philip at the court of Ptolemy when he succeeded Alexander II (369). Philip was probably in Thebes 368-365. His adoption of the “oblique order of battle” from Epameinondas is probably the most striking result of his sojourn in Thebes (see Wilcken, Alexander the Great, translated by G. C. Richards, 30).3Lysis of Tarentum (see Nepos, Epaminondas, 2. 2). But Wesseling quotes Plutarch, De Genio Socratis, 584 b, to show that Lysis died shortly before the deliverance of Thebes. For the education of Epameinondas see Book 15. 39. 2. According to Plutarch (Pelopidas, 26. 5), Philip was a hostage in the house of Pammenes (see Books 15. 94. 2 and 16. 34. 1–2) and not in the house of Epameinondas’ father, whose name was Polymnus (Nepos, op. cit. 1. 1). Certainly Epameinondas had passed his student days when Philip was a hostage, since he had already won the battle of Leuctra.4See Book 15. 60. 3.237