Diodorus of Sicily

ὁ Φίλιππος οὐ κατεπλάγη τὸ μέγεθος τῶν
προσδοκωμένων δεινῶν, ἀλλὰ τοὺς Μακεδόνας ἐν
συνεχέσιν ἐκκλησίαις συνέχων καὶ τῇ τοῦ λόγου
δεινότητι προτρεπόμενος ἐπὶ τὴν ἀνδρείαν εὐθαρσεῖς
ἐποίησε, τὰς δὲ στρατιωτικὰς τάξεις ἐπὶ τὸ κρεῖττον
διορθωσάμενος καὶ τοὺς ἄνδρας τοῖς πολεμικοῖς
ὅπλοις δεόντως κοσμήσας, συνεχεῖς ἐξοπλασίας
2καὶ γυμνασίας ἐναγωνίους ἐποιεῖτο. ἐπενόησε δὲ
καὶ τὴν τῆς φάλαγγος πυκνότητα καὶ κατασκευήν,
μιμησάμενος τὸν ἐν Τροίᾳ τῶν ἡρώων συνασπισμόν,
καὶ πρῶτος συνεστήσατο τὴν Μακεδονικὴν
3φάλαγγα. ἐν δὲ ταῖς ὁμιλίαις προσηνὴς ἦν καὶ
διά τε τῶν δωρεῶν καὶ τῶν ἐπαγγελιῶν εἰς τὴν
μεγίστην εὔνοιαν τὰ πλήθη προήγετο, πρός τε τὸ
πλῆθος τῶν ἐπιφερομένων κινδύνων εὐστόχως ἀντεμηχανᾶτο.
θεωρῶν γὰρ τοὺς Ἀθηναίους ὑπὲρ τοῦ
τὴν Ἀμφίπολιν ἀνακτήσασθαι τὴν πᾶσαν φιλοτιμίαν
εἰσφερομένους καὶ διὰ τοῦτο κατάγοντας τὸν
Ἀργαῖον ἐπὶ τὴν βασιλείαν ἑκουσίως ἐξεχώρησε
4τῆς πόλεως, ἀφεὶς αὐτὴν αὐτόνομον. πρὸς δὲ



240Book XVI

them, Philip was not panic-stricken by the magnitude 360/59 b.c. of the expected perils, but, bringing together the Macedonians in a series of assemblies and exhorting them with eloquent speeches to be men, he built up their morale, and, having improved the organization of his forces and equipped the men suitably with weapons1 of war, he held constant manoeuvres of the men under arms and competitive drills. Indeed he devised the compact order and the equipment of the phalanx, imitating the close order fighting with overlapping shields of the warriors at Troy,2 and was the first to organize the Macedonian phalanx. He was courteous in his intercourse with men and sought to win over the multitudes by his gifts and his promises to the fullest loyalty, and endeavoured to counteract by clever moves the crowd of impending dangers. For instance, when he observed that the Athenians were centring all their ambition upon recovering Amphipolis and for this reason were trying to bring Argaeus back to the throne, he voluntarily withdrew from the city, after first making it autonomous.3 Then

1For the reorganization of the Macedonian army see
Pickard-Cambridge, Cambridge Ancient History, 6. 205. The
addition of foot-soldiers to form the famous “Phalanx” and
the provision of a long pike, sarissa, were the most important
military reforms. See also Wilcken, Alexander the Great
(trans.), 31–32.2See Homer, Iliad, 13. 131 ff.
“Spear crowded spear,
Shield, helmet, man press’d helmet, man and shield;
The hairy crests of their resplendent casques
Kiss’d close at every nod, so wedged they stood.”
(Cowper’s translation.)
These lines are quoted of the phalanx by Polybius, 18. 28. 6
and Curtius Rufus, 3. 2. 13.3Amphipolis was coveted by the Athenians (who had lost it to Brasidas in the Peloponnesian War) because of its commanding position by the Strymon River, giving access to the plains of Macedonia, and its nearness to forests needed in shipbuilding and to the gold and silver mines of Mt. Pangaeus. Between this occasion when Amphipolis was declared autonomous to thwart Argaeus, who had promised to hand it over to Athens if they made him king, and Philip’s capture of the town (see chap. 8.2 if.), a secret treaty was made by which Philip promised to procure Amphipolis for Athens if he were assured of a free hand in Pydna, formerly Macedonian but then in the Athenian League. See Beloch, Griechische Geschichte2 3. 1. 225–226; Pickard-Cambridge, Cambridge Ancient History, 6. 203–204. Compare Polyaenus, 4. 2. 17; Justin, 7. 6; Demosthenes, 23. 121; 2. 6 f.; and Theopompus, fr. 165 (Oxford).241