Diodorus of Sicily
Περὶ Εὐμενοῦς καὶ τῶν περὶ αὐτὸν γενομένων παραδόξων
μεταβολῶν.
Ὡς Πτολεμαῖος τήν τε Φοινίκην καὶ τὴν Κοίλην
Συρίαν προσεκτήσατο.
Ὡς Ἀντίγονος Ἀλκέταν ἐνίκησεν ἐπιφανεῖ παρατάξει.
Ἀντιπάτρου θάνατος καὶ τῆς βασιλικῆς δυνάμεως
παράληψις ὑπὸ Πολυπέρχοντος.
Ὡς Ἀντίγονος μετεωρισθεὶς ἐπί τε τῇ Ἀντιπάτρου
τελευτῇ καὶ τοῖς ὑφ᾿ αὑτοῦ κατειργασμένοις ἀντεποιήσατο
τῆς βασιλείας.
Εὐμενοῦς αὔξησις παράδοξος καὶ παράληψις τῆς τε
τῶν βασιλέων ἐπιμελείας καὶ τῆς Μακεδονικῆς δυνάμεως.
Κασάνδρου αὔξησις καὶ πόλεμος πρὸς Πολυπέρχοντα
τὸν ἐπιμελητὴν τῶν βασιλέων1 καὶ κοινοπραγία πρὸς
Ἀντίγονον.
Ὡς Εὐμενὴς ἐν Κιλικίᾳ τοὺς ἀργυράσπιδας παραλαβὼν
εἰς τὰς ἄνω σατραπείας ἀπῆλθε καὶ δύναμιν ἀξιόλογον
παρεσκευάσατο.
Περὶ τῆς Εὐμενοῦς ἀγχινοίας καὶ στρατηγίας καὶ τῶν
ὑπ᾿ αὐτοῦ πραχθέντων μέχρι τῆς τελευτῆς.
Τὰ συμβάντα περὶ Κάσανδρον κατὰ τὴν Ἀττικὴν καὶ
Νικάνορα τὸν φρουροῦντα τὴν Μουνυχίαν.
Φωκίωνος τοῦ χρηστοῦ προσαγορευθέντος θάνατος.
Ὡς Πολυπέρχων Μεγαλοπολίτας πολιορκήσας καὶ
πολλὰ παθὼν καὶ δράσας ἄπρακτος ἐπανῆλθεν.
Ὡς Κλεῖτος ὁ Πολυπέρχοντος ναύαρχος ἐνίκησε
ναυμαχίᾳ Νικάνορα τὸν Κασάνδρου ναύαρχον.
1βασιλέων Rhodoman: βασιλειῶν.6Book XVIII
About Eumenes, and the strange changes of fortune that befell him (chap. 42).
How Ptolemy added Phoenicia and Coelê Syria to his domains (chap. 43).
How Antigonus defeated Alcetas in a noteworthy engagement (chaps. 44–47).
The death of Antipater, and the taking over of the royal army by Polyperchon (chaps. 48–49).
How Antigonus, encouraged by the death of Antipater
and by his own accomplishments, became a competitor for the throne (chaps. 50–52).
How Eumenes unexpectedly gained in power and took over both the guardianship of the kings and the command of the Macedonian army (chap. 53).
The rise of Cassander and his war against Polyperchon, the guardian of the kings, and his cooperation with Antigonus (chaps. 54–57).
How Eumenes took over the Silver Shields in Cilicia, retired to the upper satrapies, and made ready for himself a considerable army (chaps. 58–59).
About the shrewdness and generalship of Eumenes, and about his deeds up to his death (chaps. 60–63).
What happened in Attica in regard to Cassander and Nicanor, commander of the garrison at Munychia (chaps. 64–65, 68–69).
The death of Phocion, called the Good (chaps. 66–67).
How Polyperchon besieged the people of Megalopolis, and, after many losses and successes, withdrew without accomplishing anything (chaps. 69–72).
How Cleitus, the admiral of Polyperchon, defeated Nicanor, the admiral of Cassander, in a naval battle (chap. 72).
7