Diodorus of Sicily

τὰ φρονήματα παρέλοιτο τῶν Καρχηδονίων, εὐχειρώτους
μὲν ἑαυτῷ τοὺς προηττημένους ἔσεσθαι,
τὸν δ᾿ Ἀγαθοκλέα ῥᾳδίως καταπολεμήσειν, ὅταν
6αὐτῷ δόξῃ. ταῦτα δὲ διανοηθεὶς ἀνεχώρησε μετὰ
τῶν πρωτοστατῶν, δοὺς τοῖς μὲν πολεμίοις ἄσημον
ἔκκλιμα, τοῖς δ᾿ ἰδίοις δηλώσας τὸν Ἄννωνος
θάνατον καὶ παρακελευόμενος ἀναχωρεῖν ἐν τάξει
7πρὸς τὸν γεώλοφον· τοῦτο γὰρ συμφέρειν. ἐπικειμένων
δὲ τῶν πολεμίων καὶ τῆς ὅλης ὑποχωρήσεως
φυγῇ παραπλησίας γινομένης οἱ μὲν συνεχεῖς Λίβυες
ἀπὸ κράτους ἡττῆσθαι τοὺς πρωτοστάτας νομίσαντες
πρὸς φυγὴν ὥρμησαν, οἱ δὲ τὸν ἱερὸν λόχον
ἔχοντες μετὰ τὸν Ἄννωνος τοῦ στρατηγοῦ θάνατον
τὸ μὲν πρῶτον ἀντεῖχον εὐρώστως καὶ τοὺς ἐξ
αὑτῶν1 πίπτοντας ὑπερβαίνοντες ὑπέμενον πάντα
κίνδυνον, ἐπεὶ δὲ κατενόησαν τὸ πλεῖον μέρος τῆς
δυνάμεως πρὸς φυγὴν ὡρμημένον καὶ τοὺς πολεμίους
περιισταμένους κατὰ νώτου, συνηναγκάσθησαν
8ἐκκλῖναι. διὸ καὶ τροπῆς γενομένης κατὰ πᾶν
τὸ τῶν Καρχηδονίων στρατόπεδον οἱ μὲν βάρβαροι
τὴν φυγὴν ἐποιοῦντο πρὸς τὴν Καρχηδόνα, Ἀγαθοκλῆς
δὲ μέχρι τινὸς ἐπιδιώξας ἐπανῆλθε καὶ τὴν
στρατοπεδείαν τῶν Καρχηδονίων διήρπασεν.
13. Ἔπεσον δ᾿ ἐν τῇ μάχῃ τῶν μὲν Ἑλλήνων εἰς
διακοσίους, τῶν δὲ Καρχηδονίων οὐ πλείους χιλίων,
ὡς δ᾿ ἔνιοι γεγράφασιν, ὑπὲρ τοὺς ἑξακισχιλίους.
ἐν δὲ τῇ τῶν Καρχηδονίων παρεμβολῇ σὺν ταῖς
ἄλλαις ὠφελείαις εὑρέθησαν ἅμαξαι πλείους, ἐν αἷς
ἐκομίζετο ζεύγη χειροπεδῶν πλείω τῶν δισμυρίων·
1αὑτῶν editors: αὐτῶν.174Book XX

quench the pride of the Carthaginians, the already 310 b.c. defeated people would be easy for him to manage, and he could defeat Agathocles readily whenever he wished. When he had reached this conclusion, he withdrew with the men of the front rank, presenting to the enemy an inexplicable retirement but making known to his own men the death of Hanno and ordering them to withdraw in formation to the high ground; for this, he said, was to their advantage. But as the enemy pressed on and the whole retreat was becoming like a rout, the Libyans of the next ranks, believing that the front rank was being defeated by sheer force, broke into flight; those, however, who were leading the Sacred Band after the death of its general Hanno, at first resisted stoutly and, stepping over the bodies of their own men as they fell, withstood every danger, but when they perceived that the greater part of the army had turned to flight and that the enemy was surrounding them in the rear, they were forced to withdraw. And so, when rout spread throughout the entire army of the Carthaginians, the barbarians kept fleeing toward Carthage; but Agathocles, after pursuing them to a certain point, turned back and plundered the camp of the enemy.
13. There fell in this battle Greeks to the number of two hundred, and of Carthaginians not more than a thousand, but as some have written, upwards of six thousand.1 In the camp of the Carthaginians were found, along with other goods, many waggons, in which were being transported more than twenty



1Justin, 22. 6. 6, places the Greek losses at 2000 men, the Carthaginian at 3000. Orosius, 4. 6. 25, says that the Carthaginians lost 2000 and the Sicilians only 2.175