Diodorus of Sicily

χωρὶς τῶν ὅπλων διασώζειν ἑαυτοὺς ἐλαφρούς.
παραλλάσσοντος δὲ αὐτοῦ Γάζαν περὶ ἡλίου δύσιν
ἀπολιπόντες τῶν ἱππέων τινὲς παρῆλθον εἰς τὴν
8πόλιν, ἐκκομίσαι βουλόμενοι τὰς ἀποσκευάς. ἀνοιχθεισῶν
οὖν τῶν πυλῶν καὶ πλήθους ὑποζυγίων
ἀθροισθέντος, ἔτι δ᾿ ἑκάστου πρώτου σπεύδοντος
ἐξαγαγεῖν τὰ σκευοφόρα τοσοῦτον θόρυβον γενέσθαι
συνέβη περὶ τὰς πύλας ὥστε τῶν περὶ Πτολεμαῖον
ἐπιόντων μηδένα δύνασθαι φθάσαι συγκλείσαντα.
διόπερ εἰσπεσόντων τῶν πολεμίων ἐντὸς τοῦ τείχους
ἡ πόλις ὑποχείριος ἐγένετο τοῖς περὶ Πτολεμαῖον.
85. Τῆς δὲ μάχης τοιοῦτο τὸ τέλος λαβούσης
Δημήτριος μὲν διέτεινεν εἰς Ἄζωτον περὶ μέσας
νύκτας, διελθὼν σταδίους ἑβδομήκοντα καὶ διακοσίους.
ἐντεῦθεν δὲ κήρυκα περὶ τῆς τῶν νεκρῶν
ἀναιρέσεως ἐξέπεμψεν, σπεύδων ἐκ παντὸς τρόπου
τῆς ἐπιβαλλούσης κηδείας ἀξιῶσαι τοὺς τετελευτηκότας·
2ἐτύγχανον γὰρ οἱ πλεῖστοι τῶν
φίλων πεπτωκότες, ὧν ἦσαν ἐπιφανέστατοι Πίθων
τε ὁ μετέχων τῆς στρατηγίας ἐπ᾿ ἴσης αὐτῷ καὶ
Βοιωτὸς πολὺν χρόνον συνεζηκὼς Ἀντιγόνῳ τῷ
3πατρὶ καὶ μετεσχηκὼς παντὸς ἀπορρήτου· κατὰ δὲ
τὴν παράταξιν ἔπεσον μὲν πλείους τῶν πεντακοσίων,
ὧν ἦσαν οἱ πλείους ἱππεῖς τῶν ἐπιφανῶν ἀνδρῶν,
ἑάλωσαν δ᾿ ὑπὲρ ὀκτακισχιλίους. οἱ δὲ περὶ
Πτολεμαῖον καὶ Σέλευκον δόντες τὴν ἀναίρεσιν τῶν
νεκρῶν τήν τε ἁλοῦσαν βασιλικὴν ἀποσκευὴν καὶ
τῶν αἰχμαλώτων τοὺς περὶ τὴν αὐλὴν εἰωθότας διατρίβειν
χωρὶς λύτρων ἀπέστειλαν πρὸς Δημήτριον·
66Book XIX

leave their lines and, abandoning their heavy arms, 312 b.c. save themselves by travelling light. But as Demetrius was passing Gaza at about sunset, some of the cavalry dropped out and entered the city since they wished to carry away their baggage. Then, when the gates were opened and a large number of pack animals were gathered together and when each man tried to lead out his own beasts first, there arose such confusion around the gates that when the troops of Ptolemy came up no one was able to close the gates in time. Hence the enemy dashed within the walls, and the city came into the possession of Ptolemy.
85. After the battle had ended in this fashion, Demetrius reached Azotus about the middle of the night, covering two hundred and seventy stades.1 Thence he sent a herald about the burial of the dead since he was very anxious at any cost to honour those who had perished with the funeral that was their due; for it happened that most of his friends had fallen, the most distinguished of whom were Pithon, who had shared the command on equal terms with himself, and Boeotus, who for a long time had lived with his father Antigonus and had shared in all his state secrets. In the battle there had fallen more than five hundred men,2 the majority of whom were cavalry and men of distinction; and more than eight thousand had been captured. Ptolemy and Seleucus permitted the recovery of the dead, and they returned to Demetrius without ransom the royal baggage, which had been captured, and those of the prisoners who had been accustomed to be in attendance at the


1About 31 miles.2Plutarch, Demetrius, 5. 2, says that 5000 men were slain.67