Diodorus of Sicily
καὶ τὰ τούτων ἐφεξῆς προσσυνεῖρε, πάντα πρὸς τὴν
4ὁμοίαν φερόμενα διάνοιαν. ὁ δὲ Φίλιππος ἡσθεὶς
ἐπὶ τοῖς ἀπηγγελμένοις ὅλος ἦν καὶ τελείως φερόμενος
τῇ διανοίᾳ πρὸς τὴν τοῦ Περσῶν βασιλέως
καταστροφήν, ἅμα δὲ καὶ τὸν πυθόχρηστον χρησμὸν
ἀνελογίζετο, παραπλησίαν ἔχοντα διάνοιαν
τοῖς ὑπὸ τοῦ τραγῳδοῦ ῥηθεῖσι.
5Τέλος δὲ τοῦ πότου διαλυθέντος καὶ τῶν ἀγώνων
κατὰ τὴν ὑστεραίαν τὴν ἀρχὴν λαμβανόντων τὸ
μὲν πλῆθος ἔτι νυκτὸς οὔσης συνέτρεχεν εἰς τὸ θέατρον,
ἅμα δ᾿ ἡμέρᾳ τῆς πομπῆς γινομένης σὺν
ταῖς ἄλλαις ταῖς μεγαλοπρεπέσι κατασκευαῖς εἴδωλα
τῶν δώδεκα θεῶν ἐπόμπευε ταῖς τε δημιουργίαις
περιττῶς εἰργασμένα καὶ τῇ λαμπρότητι
τοῦ πλούτου θαυμαστῶς κεκοσμημένα· σὺν δὲ τούτοις
αὐτοῦ τοῦ Φιλίππου τρισκαιδέκατον ἐπόμπευε
θεοπρεπὲς εἴδωλον, σύνθρονον ἑαυτὸν ἀποδεικνύντος
τοῦ βασιλέως τοῖς δώδεκα θεοῖς.
93. Τοῦ δὲ θεάτρου πληρωθέντος αὐτὸς ὁ Φίλιππος
ᾔει λευκὸν ἔχων ἱμάτιον καὶ προστεταχὼς
τοὺς δορυφόρους μακρὰν ἀφεστῶτας ἀφ᾿ ἑαυτοῦ
συνακολουθεῖν· ἐνεδείκνυτο γὰρ πᾶσιν ὅτι τηρούμενος
τῇ κοινῇ τῶν Ἑλλήνων εὐνοίᾳ τῆς τῶν δορυφόρων
2φυλακῆς οὐκ ἔχει χρείαν. τηλικαύτης δ᾿
οὔσης περὶ αὐτὸν ὑπεροχῆς καὶ πάντων ἐπαινούντων
ἅμα καὶ μακαριζόντων τὸν ἄνδρα παράδοξος
καὶ παντελῶς ἀνέλπιστος ἐφάνη κατὰ τοῦ βασιλέως
3ἐπιβουλὴ καὶ θάνατος. ἵνα δὲ σαφὴς ὁ περὶ τούτων
γένηται λόγος, προεκθησόμεθα τὰς αἰτίας τῆς
ἐπιβουλῆς.
Παυσανίας ἦν τὸ μὲν γένος Μακεδὼν ἐκ τῆς
94Book XVI
He continued with the rest of the song, all of it dealing 336/5 b.c. with the same theme. Philip was enchanted with the message and was completely occupied with the thought of the overthrow of the Persian king, for he remembered the Pythian oracle which bore the same meaning as the words quoted by the tragic actor.
Finally the drinking was over and the start of the games set for the following day. While it was still dark, the multitude of spectators hastened into the theatre and at sunrise the parade formed. Along with lavish display of every sort, Philip included in the procession statues of the twelve gods wrought with great artistry and adorned with a dazzling show of wealth to strike awe in the beholder, and along with these was conducted a thirteenth statue, suitable for a god, that of Philip himself, so that the king exhibited himself enthroned among the twelve gods.1
93. Every seat in the theatre was taken when Philip appeared wearing a white cloak, and by his express orders his bodyguard held away from him and followed only at a distance, since he wanted to show publicly that he was protected by the goodwill of all the Greeks, and had no need of a guard of spearmen.2 Such was the pinnacle of success that he had attained, but as the praises and congratulations of all rang in his ears, suddenly without warning the plot against the king was revealed as death struck. We shall set forth the reasons for this in order that our story may be clear.
There was a Macedonian Pausanias who came of a


1Cp. p. 101, note 3.2He walked between the two Alexanders, his son and his son-in-law (Justin, 9. 6. 3–4), and so between those who had most reason to wish his death.95