Diodorus of Sicily

γὰρ Μάρκος1 ὁ τῶν Καταναίων τύραννος δύναμιν
ἀξιόλογον ἔχων προσέθετο τῷ Τιμολέοντι, ἔπειτα
πολλὰ τῶν φρουρίων ὀρεγόμενα τῆς ἐλευθερίας
ἀπέκλινε πρὸς αὐτόν, τὸ δὲ τελευταῖον Κορίνθιοι
δέκα ναῦς πληρώσαντες χρήματά τε πορίσαντες
5ἐξαπέστειλαν εἰς τὰς Συρακούσσας. ὧν πραχθέντων
Τιμολέων μὲν ἐθάρρησεν, οἱ δὲ Καρχηδόνιοι
φοβηθέντες ἀπέπλευσαν ἐκ τοῦ λιμένος ἀλόγως καὶ
μετὰ πάσης τῆς δυνάμεως εἰς τὴν ἰδίαν ἐπικράτειαν
6ἀπηλλάγησαν. μονωθέντος δὲ τοῦ Ἱκέτα Τιμολέων
περιγενόμενος τῶν πολεμίων ἐκράτησε τῶν
Συρακουσσῶν. εὐθὺς δὲ καὶ τὴν Μεσσήνην μετατεθειμένην2
πρὸς Καρχηδονίους ἀνεκτήσατο.
Καὶ τὰ μὲν κατὰ Σικελίαν ἐν τούτοις ἦν.
7Κατὰ δὲ τὴν Μακεδονίαν Φίλιππος πατρικὴν
ἔχθραν διαδεδεγμένος πρὸς Ἰλλυριοὺς καὶ τὴν διαφορὰν
ἀμετάθετον ἔχων ἐνέβαλεν εἰς τὴν Ἰλλυρίδα
μετὰ πολλῆς δυνάμεως. πορθήσας δὲ τὴν
χώραν καὶ πολλὰ τῶν πολισμάτων χειρωσάμενος
μετὰ πολλῶν λαφύρων ἐπανῆλθεν εἰς τὴν Μακεδονίαν.
8μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα παρελθὼν εἰς τὴν Θετταλίαν
καὶ τοὺς τυράννους ἐκ τῶν πόλεων ἐκβαλὼν ἰδίους
ταῖς εὐνοίαις ἐποιήσατο τοὺς Θετταλούς· ἤλπιζε
γὰρ τούτους ἔχων συμμάχους καὶ τοὺς Ἕλληνας
ῥᾳδίως εἰς εὔνοιαν προτρέψασθαι· ὅπερ καὶ συνέβη
γενέσθαι. εὐθὺς γὰρ οἱ πλησιόχωροι τῶν Ἑλλήνων


1Μάμερκος Casaubon (cp. Nepos, Timoleon, 2. 4; Plutarch,
Timoleon, 13. 1).2So Dindorf; μετατιθεμένην.34Book XVI

tyrant of Catania, came over to Timoleon with a 344/3 b.c. considerable army, and then many of the outlying Syracusan forts declared for him in a move to gain their independence. On top of all this, the Corinthians manned ten ships, supplied them with money, and dispatched them to Syracuse.1 Thereupon Timoleon plucked up courage but the Carthaginians took alarm and unaccountably sailed out of the harbour, returning with all their forces to their own territory.2 Hicetas was left isolated, while Timoleon victoriously occupied Syracuse.3 Then he proceeded to recover Messana, which had gone over to the Carthaginians.4
Such was the state of affairs in Sicily.
In Macedonia, Philip had inherited from his father a quarrel with the Illyrians and found no means of reconciling the disagreement. He therefore invaded Illyria with a large force, devasted the countryside, captured many towns, and returned to Macedonia laden with booty.5 Then he marched into Thessaly, and by expelling tyrants from the cities won over the Thessalians through gratitude. With them as his allies, he expected that the Greeks too would easily be won over also to his favour; and that is just what happened. The neighbouring Greeks straightway associated 





1According to Plutarch, Timoleon, 16. 1–2, the Corinthians sent 2000 hoplites and 200 cavalry to Thurii, but the force made its way to Sicily only somewhat later (Timoleon, 19).2Plutarch, Timoleon, 20, tells a different and more circumstantial and picturesque account of the Carthaginian withdrawal.3Plutarch, Timoleon, 21. 3.4Plutarch, Timoleon, 20. 1, places this event earlier.5This campaign may be the one referred to below, chap. 93. 6. The narrative of Philip’s activities is continued from chap. 60.35