Diodorus of Sicily

φόβων τὴν Ἀσίαν καὶ τὴν περιβόητον Ἀλεξάνδρου
τόλμαν ταῖς ἰδίαις χερσὶ καταλυθῆναι καὶ
τὴν τῶν Περσῶν δόξαν μὴ καταισχυνθῆναι1 φθάνει
βαλὼν τὸ σαυνίον ἐπὶ τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον καὶ οὕτω
μετὰ σφοδρᾶς εἰσπεσὼν ῥύμης καὶ βιαίως τὸ δόρυ
ὠσάμενος διαρρήξας τε τήν τε ἀσπίδα Ἀλεξάνδρου
καὶ τὴν δεξιὰν ἐπωμίδα διήλασε διὰ τοῦ θώρακος.
4ὁ δὲ βασιλεὺς τὸ μὲν βέλος τῷ βραχίονι περιελκόμενον
ἀπέρριψε, τῷ δ᾿ ἵππῳ προσβαλὼν τὰ κέντρα
καὶ τῇ ῥύμῃ2 τῆς φορᾶς συνεργῷ χρησάμενος εἰς
μέσον τοῦ σατράπου τὸ στῆθος ἐνήρεισε τὸ ξυστόν.
5οὗ συντελεσθέντος αἱ μὲν πλησίον τάξεις παρ᾿
ἀμφοτέροις διὰ τὴν ὑπερβολὴν τῆς ἀνδρείας ἀνεβόησαν,
τῆς δ᾿ ἐπιδορατίδος περὶ τὸν θώρακα συντριβείσης
καὶ τοῦ θραύσματος ἀποπηδήσαντος ὁ μὲν
Πέρσης σπασάμενος τὸ ξίφος ἐπὶ τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον
ἐπεφέρετο, ὁ δὲ βασιλεὺς διαλαβὼν τὸ ξυστὸν ἔφθασεν
ἐνερεῖσαι τῷ προσώπῳ καὶ διήλασε τὴν
6πληγήν. καθ᾿ ὃν δὴ χρόνον ὁ ἀδελφὸς τοῦ πεσόντος
Ῥωσάκης προσιππεύσας κατήνεγκε τῷ ξίφει κατὰ
τῆς κεφαλῆς Ἀλεξάνδρου οὕτως ἐπικίνδυνον πληγὴν
ὥστε τὸ μὲν κράνος διαπτύξαι, τοῦ δὲ χρωτὸς




1F omits Ἀλεξάνδρου . . . καὶ τὴν. RX omit καὶ τὴν . . .
καταισχυνθῆναι. No MS. has the full text printed here.2So Reiske: ῥώμῃ.174Book XVII

terrible menace, the renowned daring of Alexander 334/3 b.c. arrested by his own hands, and the glory of the Persians saved from disgrace. He hurled his javelin first at Alexander with so mighty an impulse and so powerful a cast that he pierced Alexander’s shield and right epomis and drove through the breastplate.1 The king shook off the weapon as it dangled by his arm, then applying spurs to his horse and employing the favouring momentum of his charge drove his lance squarely into the satrap’s chest. At this, adjacent ranks in both armies cried out at the superlative display of prowess. The point, however, snapped off against the breastplate and the broken shaft recoiled, and the Persian drew his sword and drove at Alexander; but the king recovered his grip upon his lance in time to thrust at the man’s face and drive the blow home. The Persian fell, but just at this moment, Rhosaces, his brother, galloping up brought his sword down on Alexander’s head with such a fearsome blow that it split his helmet and

1If Alexander may be assumed to have carried a shield on
his left arm, it would have been possible for the javelin to pass
through this and his breastplate and catch in his epomis on
the right shoulder (not the shoulder itself, since Alexander
was not wounded; Plutarch, Alexander, 16. 5), although
this would have required a remarkably violent cast, especially
since the weapon, dangling from the right arm, must have
passed its entire length completely through the shield. This all suggests some exaggeration if not confusion, and it is doubtful if the Macedonian cavalry carried shields; Alexander is shown without one in the mosaic from the House of the Faun in Pompeii, which, of course, pictures the Battle of Issus, and not that at the Granicus (cp. Berve, Alexanderreich 1. 104, n. 4; such pictures as that in Doro Levy, Antioch Mosaic Pavements, 2 (1947), LXIX, c, however, show that cavalry could carry shields; so also Polybius, 6. 25; but in Arrian 1. 6. 5 and 4. 23. 2, mounted troops carried shields only when they expected to fight on foot). If this shield is the same as the hoplon taken from Ilium and mentioned below, chap. 21. 2, it may be that, as Arrian reports (1. 11. 7–8), it was actually carried before him by an attendant (this does not, of course, make the course of the iavelin any more easily explicable). In the mosaic, Alexander wears the chlamys over his breastplate, and fastened with a fibula on his right shoulder.175