Diodorus of Sicily

τῆς περὶ τὴν πρᾶξιν ἀμφισβητήσεως ἐπὶ τὸ συνέδριον
ἀναπεμφθείσης οἱ μὲν ἐχθροὶ τοῦ Τιμολέοντος
κατηγόρουν, οἱ δὲ χαριέστεροι συνηγοροῦντες συνεβούλευον
7σώζειν τὸν ἄνδρα. ἀκρίτου δ᾿ ἔτι τῆς
ζητήσεως οὔσης κατέπλευσαν ἐκ τῶν Συρακουσσῶν
οἱ πρέσβεις καὶ τῇ γερουσίᾳ τὰς ἐντολὰς
δηλώσαντες ἠξίουν τὴν ταχίστην ἀποστεῖλαι τὸν
8στρατηγόν. ἔδοξεν οὖν τῷ συνεδρίῳ πέμπειν τὸν
Τιμολέοντα καὶ πρὸς τὸ κατορθῶσαι τὴν πρᾶξιν
ξένας τινὰς καὶ παραδόξους αἱρέσεις αὐτῷ προέθηκαν·
διεβεβαιώσαντο γάρ, ἐὰν μὲν καλῶς ἄρξῃ
τῶν Συρακοσίων, κρίνειν αὐτὸν τυραννοκτόνον, ἐὰν
9δὲ πλεονεκτικώτερον, ἀδελφοῦ φονέα. ὁ δὲ Τιμολέων
οὐχ οὕτω διὰ τὸν ἐπικρεμασθέντα φόβον ὑπὸ
τῆς γερουσίας ὡς διὰ τὴν ἀρετὴν καλῶς καὶ συμφερόντως
προέστη τῶν κατὰ τὴν Σικελίαν πραγμάτων·
Καρχηδονίους μὲν γὰρ κατεπολέμησε, τὰς
δὲ κατεσκαμμένας ὑπὸ τῶν βαρβάρων Ἑλληνίδας
πόλεις ἀπεκατέστησεν εἰς τὴν ἐξ ἀρχῆς κατάστασιν,1
πᾶσαν δὲ Σικελίαν ἠλευθέρωσε, καθόλου δὲ τὰς
Συρακούσσας καὶ τὰς ἄλλας2 Ἑλληνίδας πόλεις
παραλαμβάνων ἐρήμους ἐποίησε πολυανθρωπίᾳ
διενεγκεῖν.
Ἀλλὰ περὶ μὲν τούτων τὰ κατὰ μέρος μικρὸν
ὕστερον ἐν τοῖς οἰκείοις χρόνοις ἀναγράψομεν, νῦν
δ᾿ ἐπὶ τὸ συνεχὲς τῆς ἱστορίας μεταβιβάσομεν τὸν
λόγον.
420Book XVI

council chamber and the matter in dispute was referred 346/5 b.c. to the session, Timoleon’s personal enemies denounced him, while those more favourably inclined rallied to his cause and counselled letting him go free. While the investigation was still unsettled there sailed into the harbour from Syracuse the ambassadors who, having made known their mission to the senate, requested them to dispatch with all speed the general they needed. The session accordingly voted to send Timoleon and, in order to ensure the success of the project, they proposed a strange and amazing alternative to him. They affirmed categorically that if he ruled the Syracusans fairly, they adjudged him a tyrannicide, but if too ambitiously, a murderer of his brother.1 Timoleon, not so much in fear of the threat imposed on him by the senate as because of his native virtue, administered the government in Sicily fairly and profitably. For he subdued in war the Carthaginians, restored to their original state the Greek cities which had been razed by the barbarians, and made all Sicily independent; in a word, having found Syracuse and the other Greek cities depopulated when he took them over, he made them notably populous.
These matters, however, we shall record severally below in their proper periods; now we shall return to the thread of our narrative.
1Plutarch (Timoleon, 7. 2) puts this in the mouth of one Telecleides speaking before the assembly (δῆμος), not the senate.421