Diodorus of Sicily
Ὡς Κλεῖτος ὁ τῶν Μακεδόνων ναύαρχος ἐνίκησε δυσὶ
ναυμαχίαις τοὺς Ἕλληνας.
Ὡς Περδίκκας Ἀριαράθην τὸν βασιλέα παρατάξει
μεγάλῃ νικήσας ἐζώγρησε τὸν βασιλέα μετὰ καὶ πολλῶν
ἄλλων.
Ὡς Κρατερὸς βοηθήσας Ἀντιπάτρῳ ἐνίκησε τοὺς
Ἕλληνας καὶ κατέλυσε τὸν Λαμιακὸν πόλεμον.
Περὶ τῶν ὑπ᾿ Ἀντιπάτρου πραχθέντων πρὸς Ἀθηναίους
καὶ τοὺς ἄλλους Ἕλληνας.
Περὶ τῶν πραχθέντων ἐν τῷ κατὰ Κυρήνην πολέμῳ
Πτολεμαίῳ.
Ὡς Περδίκκας ἐμβαλὼν εἰς τὴν Πισιδίαν Λαρανδεῖς
μὲν ἐξηνδραποδίσατο, Ἰσαυρεῖς δὲ πολιορκήσας συνηνάγκασεν
ἑαυτούς τε κατασφάξαι καὶ τὴν πόλιν ἐμπρῆσαι.
Ἀντιπάτρου καὶ Κρατεροῦ στρατεία εἰς Αἰτωλίαν.
Κατακομιδὴ τοῦ Ἀλεξάνδρου σώματος ἐκ Βαβυλῶνος
εἰς Ἀλεξάνδρειαν καὶ τῆς κατὰ τὴν ἁρμάμαξαν πολυτελείας
ἀπαγγελία.
Ὡς Εὐμενὴς παρατάξει νικήσας Κρατερὸν κατέσφαξεν
ἐν τῇ μάχῃ καὶ Νεοπτόλεμον.
Ὡς Περδίκκας εἰς Αἴγυπτον στρατεύσας ὑπὸ τῶν
φίλων ἀνῃρέθη.
Ὡς τῶν βασιλέων ἐπιμελητὴς ᾑρέθη Πίθων καὶ μετ᾿
αὐτοῦ Ἀρριδαῖος, ὕστερον δ᾿ Ἀντίπατρος.
Ὡς Ἀντίπατρος ἡγεμὼν κατασταθεὶς τῶν ὅλων ἐμερίσατο
τὰς σατραπείας ἐξ ἀρχῆς ἐν Τριπαραδείσῳ τῆς Συρίας.
Ὡς Ἀντίγονος ὑπ᾿ Ἀντιπάτρου κατασταθεὶς στρατηγὸς
κατεπολέμησε τὸν Εὐμενῆ.
4Book XVIII
How Cleitus, the Macedonian admiral, defeated the Greeks in two naval battles (chap. 15).
How Perdiccas, after defeating King Ariarathes in a great engagement, took the king and many others captive (chap. 16).
How Craterus, going to the aid of Antipater, defeated the Greeks and ended the Lamian War (chaps. 16–17).
The dealings of Antipater with the Athenians and the other Greeks (chap. 18).
Concerning the achievements of Ptolemy in the war about Cyrenê (chaps. 19–21).
How Perdiccas invaded Pisidia and enslaved the Larandians, and, besieging the Isaurians, forced them to kill themselves and burn their city (chap. 22).
The invasion of Aetolia by Antipater and Craterus (chaps. 24–25).
The transfer of the body of Alexander from Babylon to Alexandria, and description of the magnificent funeral chariot (chaps. 26–28).
How Eumenes, defeating Craterus in an engagement, killed him and Neoptolemus in the battle (chaps. 29–32).
How Perdiccas invaded Egypt and was destroyed by his friends (chaps. 33–36).
How Pithon was chosen guardian of the kings and Arrhidaeus with him, and Antipater afterwards (chaps. 36–39).
How Antipater, being set up as supreme commander, divided the satrapies anew at Triparadeisus in Syria (chap. 39).
How Antigonus, having been made general by Antipater, defeated Eumenes (chaps. 40–41).
5