Diodorus of Sicily
2σκεπαστηρίοις ὅπλοις ἐδέχετο. τριῶν δ᾿ ὑπερασπιζόντων
αὐτὸν εἷς μὲν λόγχῃ πληγεὶς ἔπεσεν, οἱ δὲ
δύο κατετραυματίσθησαν. τέλος δὲ τοὺς ἀντιστάντας
ὁ Δημήτριος ἐκβιασάμενος καὶ τροπὴν τοῦ
δεξιοῦ κέρατος ποιήσας εὐθὺ καὶ τὰς συνεχεῖς
3φυγεῖν ἠνάγκασεν. Πτολεμαῖος δὲ τὰ μέγιστα τῶν
σκαφῶν καὶ τοὺς κρατίστους ἄνδρας ἔχων μεθ᾿
αὑτοῦ ῥᾳδίως ἐτρέψατο τοὺς καθ᾿ αὑτὸν τεταγμένους
καὶ τῶν νεῶν ἃς μὲν κατέδυσεν, ἃς δὲ αὐτάνδρους
εἷλεν. ὑποστρέφων δ᾿ ἀπὸ τοῦ νικήματος
ἤλπιζε καὶ τὰς ἄλλας ῥᾳδίως χειρώσασθαι· θεωρήσας
δὲ τό τε δεξιὸν1 κέρας τῶν ἰδίων συντετριμμένον
καὶ τὰς συνεχεῖς ἁπάσας πρὸς φυγὴν ὡρμημένας,
ἔτι δὲ τοὺς περὶ τὸν Δημήτριον μετὰ βάρους ἐπιφερομένους
ἀπέπλευσεν εἰς Κίτιον.
4Δημήτριος δὲ νικήσας τῇ ναυμαχίᾳ τῷ μὲν Νέωνι
καὶ Βουρίχῳ παρέδωκε τὰ στρατιωτικὰ τῶν πλοίων,
προστάξας διώκειν καὶ τοὺς ἐν τῇ θαλάττῃ διανηχομένους
ἀναλαμβάνειν· αὐτὸς δὲ τὰς ἰδίας ναῦς
κοσμήσας τοῖς ἀκροστολίοις καὶ τὰς ἁλούσας ἐφελκόμενος
τὸν πλοῦν ἐποιεῖτο πρὸς τὸ στρατόπεδον
5καὶ τὸν οἰκεῖον λιμένα. κατὰ δὲ τὸν τῆς ναυμαχίας
καιρὸν Μενέλαος ὁ ἐν τῇ Σαλαμῖνι στρατηγὸς πληρώσας
τὰς ἑξήκοντα ναῦς ἐξαπέστειλε πρὸς βοήθειαν
τῷ Πτολεμαίῳ, ναύαρχον ἐπιστήσας Μενοίτιον.
γενομένου δ᾿ ἀγῶνος περὶ τὸ στόμα τοῦ λιμένος πρὸς
τὰς ἐφορμούσας ναῦς καὶ τῶν ἐκ τῆς πόλεως βιασαμένων
αἱ μὲν τοῦ Δημητρίου δέκα ναῦς ἔφυγον
πρὸς τὸ πεζὸν στρατόπεδον, οἱ δὲ περὶ τὸν Μενοίτιον
ἀναπλεύσαντες καὶ τῶν καιρῶν μικρὸν ὑστερήσαντες
ἀνέστρεψαν πάλιν εἰς τὴν Σαλαμῖνα.
6Τῆς δὲ ναυμαχίας τοιοῦτον τέλος λαβούσης τῶν
1δεξιὸν Geer, cp. chaps. 50. 6; 52, 2: εὐώνυμον.286Book XX

upon his defensive armour. Of the three men who 307 b.c. protected him with shields, one fell struck by a lance and the other two were severely wounded. Finally Demetrius drove back the forces confronting him, created a rout in the right wing, and forthwith forced even the ships next to the wing to flee. Ptolemy, who had with himself the heaviest of his ships and the strongest men, easily routed those stationed opposite him, sinking some of the ships and capturing others with their crews. Turning back from that victorious action, he expected easily to subdue the others also; but when he saw that the right wing of his forces had been shattered and all those next to that wing driven into flight, and further, that Demetrius was pressing on with full force, he sailed back to Citium.
Demetrius, after winning the victory, gave the transports to Neon and Burichus, ordering them to pursue and pick up those who were swimming in the sea; and he himself, decking his own ships with bow and stern ornaments and towing the captured craft, sailed to his camp and his home port. At the time of the naval battle Menelaüs, the general in Salamis, had manned his sixty ships and sent them as a reinforcement to Ptolemy, placing Menoetius in command. When a battle occurred at the harbour mouth with the ships on guard there, and when the ships from the city pressed forward vigorously, Demetrius’ ten ships fled to the camp of the army; and Menoetius, after sailing out and arriving a little too late, returned to Salamis.
In the naval battle, whose outcome was as stated,


287