Diodorus of Sicily

σταδίους τῶν πολεμίων ἐξῆλθεν ἔχων πεζοὺς μὲν
μυρίους καὶ δισχιλίους, ἱππεῖς δὲ περὶ ὀκτακοσίους.
γενομένης δὲ μάχης ἐπ᾿ ὀλίγον χρόνον οἱ μὲν περὶ
τὸν Μενέλαον ἐκβιασθέντες ἐτράπησαν, ὁ δὲ Δημήτριος
συνδιώξας τοὺς πολεμίους εἰς τὴν πόλιν
αἰχμαλώτους μὲν ἔλαβεν οὐ πολὺ ἐλάττους τρισχιλίων,
4ἀνεῖλε δὲ περὶ χιλίους. τοὺς δ᾿ ἁλόντας τὸ
μὲν πρῶτον ἀπολύσας τῶν ἐγκλημάτων καταδιεῖλεν
εἰς τὰς τῶν ἰδίων στρατιωτῶν τάξεις· ἀποδιδρασκόντων
δ᾿ αὐτῶν πρὸς τοὺς περὶ τὸν Μενέλαον διὰ
τὸ τὰς ἀποσκευὰς ἐν Αἰγύπτῳ καταλελοιπέναι παρὰ
Πτολεμαίῳ, γνοὺς ἀμεταθέτους ὄντας ἐνεβίβασεν
εἰς τὰς ναῦς καὶ πρὸς Ἀντίγονον εἰς Συρίαν
ἀπέστειλεν.
5Οὗτος δὲ τοῦτον τὸν χρόνον διέτριβε περὶ τὴν
ἄνω Συρίαν, πόλιν κτίζων περὶ τὸν Ὀρόντην ποταμὸν
τὴν ὠνομασμένην Ἀντιγονίαν ἀφ᾿ ἑαυτοῦ.
κατεσκεύαζε δὲ πολυτελῶς, τὴν περίμετρον ὑποστησάμενος
σταδίων ἑβδομήκοντα· εὐφυὴς γὰρ ἦν
ὁ τόπος ἐφεδρεῦσαι τῇ τε Βαβυλῶνι καὶ ταῖς ἄνω
σατραπείαις καὶ πάλιν τῇ κάτω Συρίᾳ καὶ ταῖς
6περὶ Αἰγύπτου σατραπείαις.1 οὐ μὴν πολύν γε χρόνον
συνέβη μεῖναι τὴν πόλιν, Σελεύκου καθελόντος
αὐτὴν καὶ μεταγαγόντος ἐπὶ τὴν κτισθεῖσαν
μὲν ὑπ᾿ αὐτοῦ, ἀπ᾿ ἐκείνου δὲ κληθεῖσαν Σελεύκειαν.2
ἀλλὰ περὶ μὲν τούτων ἀκριβῶς ἕκαστα
δηλώσομεν ἐπὶ τοὺς οἰκείους χρόνους παραγενηθέντες·


1ταῖς περὶ Αἰγύπτου σατραπείαις Reiske, ταῖς ἀπ᾿ Αἰ. στρατείαις
Madvig, τοῖς περὶ Αἰ. πράγμασι Fischer in apparatus, cp.
chap. 104. 4: ταῖς ἀπ᾿ Αἰ. σατραπείας.2ἀπὸ δὲ τοῦ πατρὸς ἐκείνου κληθεῖσαν Ἀντιόχειαν Dindorf.272Book XX

distance of forty stades,1 he came out with twelve 307 b.c. thousand foot and about eight hundred horse. In a battle of short duration which occurred, the forces of Menelaüs were overwhelmed and routed; and Demetrius, pursuing the enemy into the city, took prisoners numbering not much less than three thousand and killed about a thousand. At first he freed the captives of all charges and distributed them among the units of his own soldiers; but when they ran off to Menelaüs because their baggage had been left behind in Egypt with Ptolemy, recognizing that they would not change sides, he forced them to embark on his ships and sent them off to Antigonus in Syria.
At this time Antigonus was tarrying in upper Syria, founding a city on the Orontes River, which he called Antigonia after himself. He laid it out on a lavish scale, making its perimeter seventy stades2; for the location was naturally well adapted for watching over Babylon and the upper satrapies, and again for keeping an eye upon lower Syria and the satrapies near Egypt.3 It happened, however, that the city did not survive very long, for Seleucus dismantled it and transported it to the city which he founded and called Seleucea after himself.4 But we shall make these matters clear in detail when we




1About 4 ½ miles.2About 8 miles.3Or, reading ταῖς ἀπ᾿ Αἰγύπτου στρατείαις, “and expeditions from Egypt”; or again, reading τοῖς περὶ Αἰγύπτου πράγμασι, “and affairs in Egypt.”4So the text; but the city was actually called Antiochea after Seleucus’ father. The error is probably Diodorus’ rather than the copyist’s. Antigonia was not completely abandoned; at least it is mentioned as if still in existence in 51 b.c. (Dio Cassius, 40. 29. 1. Cp. also Benziger, in Pauly-Wissowa, s.v. Antiocheia (1) and Antigoneia (1).)273