Diodorus of Sicily
3τινὰς εἰς τὸ μεταβολῆς ἐπιθυμεῖν. πολλῶν δὲ πρὸς
αὐτὸν αὐτομολούντων ὁ μὲν Ἀντίγονος ἐπιστήσας
τῷ χείλει τοῦ ποταμοῦ τοξότας καὶ σφενδονήτας
καὶ πολλὰ τῶν ὀξυβελικῶν τοὺς προσπλέοντας ἐν
τοῖς κοντωτοῖς ἀνέστελλε· τῶν δ᾿ αὐτομολούντων
συλλαβών τινας δεινῶς ᾐκίσατο, βουλόμενος καταπλήξασθαι
τοὺς τῆς ὁμοίας ὁρμῆς ἀντεχομένους.
4καὶ προσλαβὼν τὰ καθυστεροῦντα τῶν σκαφῶν
προσέπλευσεν ἐπὶ τὸ καλούμενον Ψευδόστομον, νομίζων
ἐνταῦθα δυνήσεσθαί τινας τῶν στρατιωτῶν
ἀποβιβάσαι. εὑρὼν δὲ πρὸς αὐτῷ φυλακὴν ἰσχυρὰν
καὶ τοῖς τε ὀξυβελέσι καὶ τοῖς ἄλλοις παντοίοις
βέλεσιν ἀνειργόμενος ἀπέπλευσε περικαταλαμβανούσης
5νυκτός. ἔπειτα παραγγείλας τοῖς κυβερνήταις
ἀκολουθεῖν τῇ στρατηγίδι νηὶ προσέχοντας τῷ
λαμπτῆρι προσέπλευσεν ἐπὶ τὸ στόμα τοῦ Νείλου
τὸ καλούμενον Φατνιτικόν1· ἡμέρας δὲ γενομένης,
ἐπειδὴ πολλαὶ τῶν νεῶν ἀπεπλανήθησαν, ἠναγκάσθη
ταύτας περιμένειν καὶ τὰς μάλιστα ταχυναυτούσας
τῶν ἠκολουθηκυιῶν2 ἐξαποστέλλειν ἐπὶ τὴν τούτων
ζήτησιν.
76. Διόπερ χρόνου γενομένου πλείονος οἱ μὲν
περὶ τὸν Πτολεμαῖον πυθόμενοι τὸν κατάπλουν τῶν
πολεμίων ἧκον ὀξέως βοηθήσοντες καὶ τὴν δύναμιν
διασκευάσαντες ἔστησαν παρὰ τὸν αἰγιαλόν· ὁ δὲ
Δημήτριος ἀποτυχὼν καὶ ταύτης τῆς ἐκβάσεως
καὶ τὴν συνάπτουσαν παραλίαν ἀκούων ἕλεσι καὶ
λίμναις ὠχυρῶσθαι φυσικῶς ἐπαλινδρόμει παντὶ
2τῷ στόλῳ. εἶτ᾿ ἐμπεσόντος βορέου λαμπροῦ καὶ
τοῦ κλύδωνος εἰς ὕψος αἰρομένου τρία μὲν σκάφη
τῶν τετρηρικῶν καὶ τῶν στρατιωτικῶν πορίων τινὰ3
κατὰ τὸ αὐτὸ βιαιότερον ὑπὸ τοῦ κύματος ἐπὶ τὴν
1Φατνιτικόν Stephanus: Φαγνιτικὸν RX, Φαγνητικὸν F.2ἠκολουθηκυιῶν Schaefer: ἠκολουθηκότων.3τινὰ Rhodoman, ἔνια Madvig: ἅμα.342Book XX

to desire a change. But when many were going over 306 b.c. to Ptolemy, Antigonus, stationing bowmen, slingers, and many of his catapults on the edge of the river, drove back those who were drawing near in their punts; and he captured some of the deserters and tortured them frightfully, wishing to intimidate any who were contemplating such an attempt as this. After adding to his force the ships that were late in arriving, he sailed to the place called Pseudostomon,1 believing that he would be able to disembark some of the soldiers there. But when he found at that place a strong garrison and was held in check by bolts and other missiles of every kind, he sailed away as night was closing in. Then giving orders to the pilots to follow the ship of the general, keeping their eyes fixed on its light, he sailed to the mouth of the Nile called Phatniticum; but when day came, since many of the ships had missed the course, he was forced to wait for these and to send out the swiftest of those that had followed him to search for them.
76. Since this caused considerable delay, Ptolemy, hearing of the arrival of the enemy, came quickly to reinforce his men and after drawing up his army, stationed it along the shore; but Demetrius, having failed to make this landing also and hearing that the adjacent coast was naturally fortified by swamps and marshes, retraced his course with his whole fleet. Then a strong north wind burst upon them and the billows rose high; and three of his quadriremes and in the same way some of the transports were cast





1Literally, “False Mouth.”343