Diodorus of Sicily

συντόμως καὶ προθύμως χορηγησάντων ἀνέλαβον
ἑαυτοὺς ταῖς ἐλπίσι καὶ πρὸς τοὺς κινδύνους εὐθαρσεῖς
7κατέστησαν. εὐθὺ δὲ καὶ μακρὰς ναῦς
καθελκύσαντες παρέπλεον τὴν παραθαλάττιον καὶ
τοὺς ἀπὸ τῆς χώρας ἀναλαμβάνοντες ἀπεκόμιζον
εἰς τὴν πόλιν. ταχὺ δὲ στρατιωτῶν εὐπορήσαντες
καὶ πολλοὺς τῶν πολιορκούντων ἀποκτείναντες
ἀπετρίψαντο τὴν πολιορκίαν. Ἀρριδαῖος μὲν οὖν
καταστρατηγηθεὶς ὑπὸ τῶν Κυζικηνῶν ἄπρακτος
ἐπανῆλθεν εἰς τὴν ἰδίαν σατραπείαν.
52. Ἀντίγονος δὲ πυθόμενος τὴν τῶν Κυζικηνῶν
πόλιν πολιορκουμένην ἔτυχε μὲν ἐν Κελαιναῖς διατρίβων,
κρίνας δὲ τὴν κινδυνεύουσαν πόλιν ἰδίαν
κατασκευάσασθαι πρὸς τὰς μελλούσας ἐπιβολὰς
ἀπέλεξεν ἐξ ἁπάσης τῆς δυνάμεως τοὺς ἀρίστους,
2πεζοὺς μὲν δισμυρίους, ἱππεῖς δὲ τρισχιλίους. τούτους
δὲ ἀναλαβὼν ἐν τάχει προῆγε βοηθήσων τοῖς
Κυζικηνοῖς. βραχὺ δὲ τῶν καιρῶν ὑστερήσας
φανερὰν μὲν ἔσχε τὴν εἰς τὴν πόλιν εὔνοιαν, τῆς
3δὲ ὅλης ἐπιβολῆς ἀπέτυχε. πρὸς δὲ Ἀρριδαῖον
ἐξέπεμψε πρεσβευτάς, ἐγκαλῶν ὅτι πρῶτον μὲν
Ἑλληνίδα πόλιν σύμμαχον οὖσαν καὶ μηδὲν ἀδικοῦσαν
ἐτόλμησε πολιορκεῖν, ἔπειθ᾿ ὅτι φανερός
ἐστιν ἀποστατήσων καὶ τὴν σατραπείαν ἑαυτῷ
δυναστείαν κατασκευαζόμενος· τὸ δὲ τελευταῖον
προσέταττε τῆς σατραπείας παραχωρεῖν καὶ μίαν
λαβόντα πόλιν εἰς καταβίωσιν τὴν ἡσυχίαν ἄγειν.
4ὁ δ᾿ Ἀρριδαῖος διακούσας τῶν πρέσβεων καὶ τὸ
τῶν λόγων ὑπερήφανον καταμεμψάμενος οὐκ ἔφη
παραχωρήσειν τῆς σατραπείας, τὰς δὲ πόλεις φρουραῖς
διαλαμβάνων πειρᾶσθαι1 τοῖς ὅπλοις διαγωνίζεσθαι
πρὸς αὐτόν. ἀκολούθως δὲ ταῖς ἀποκρίσεσι
1Dindorf, followed by Fischer, reads πειράσεσθαι.154Book XVIII

Byzantium supplied all this quickly and willingly,
the 319 b.c. Cyziceni became confident and set themselves
courageously against the danger. They also launched ships of war at once and, coasting along the shore, recovered and brought back those who were in the country. Soon they had plenty of soldiers, and
after killing many of the besieging force, they rid
themselves of the siege. Thus Arrhidaeus,
outgeneralled by the Cyziceni, returned to his own satrapy
without accomplishing anything.
52. Antigonus happened to be tarrying in Celaenae when he learned that Cyzicus was being besieged. Deciding to get possession of the endangered city
in view of his forthcoming undertakings, he selected
the best from all his army, twenty thousand infantry
and three thousand cavalry. Taking these he set out in haste to aid the Cyziceni. He was a little too late, but he made his goodwill toward the city manifest, even though failing to gain his entire object. He sent envoys to Arrhidaeus, bringing against him these charges: first, that he had dared to besiege a Greek city that was an ally and not guilty of any offence; and second, that he clearly intended rebellion and was converting his satrapy into a private domain. Finally, he ordered him to retire from his satrapy and, retaining a single city as a residence, to
remain quiet. Arrhidaeus, however, after listening to the envoys and censuring the arrogance of their
words, refused to retire from his satrapy, and said that in occupying the cities with garrisons he was
making the first move in his war to a finish with Antigonus. In accordance with this decision, after making the
cities


155