Diodorus of Sicily

τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων Κλεόμβροτος ἔζη, πολλοὺς
ἔχων τοὺς συνασπίζοντας καὶ προθύμως πρὸ
αὐτοῦ ἀποθνήσκοντας, ἄδηλος ἦν ἡ ῥοπὴ τῆς νίκης·
ἐπεὶ δ᾿ οὗτος πάντα κίνδυνον ὑπομένων οὐκ
ἠδύνατο βιάσασθαι τοὺς ἀνθεστηκότας, ἡρωικῶς δὲ
μαχόμενος καὶ πολλοῖς τραύμασι περιπεσὼν ἐτελεύτησε,
τότε συνδρομῆς γενομένης περὶ τοῦ πτώματος
νεκρῶν πλῆθος ἐσωρεύθη.
56. Ἀναρχίας δὲ γενομένης περὶ τὸ κέρας, οἱ
μὲν περὶ τὸν Ἐπαμεινώνδαν βαρεῖς ἐγκείμενοι τοῖς
Λακεδαιμονίοις τὸ μὲν πρῶτον τῇ βίᾳ βραχὺ προέωσαν
ἐκ τῆς τάξεως τοὺς πολεμίους, οἱ δὲ Λακεδαιμόνιοι
περὶ τοῦ βασιλέως ἀγωνισάμενοι λαμπρῶς
τοῦ μὲν σώματος ἐγκρατεῖς ἐγένοντο, τῆς δὲ νίκης
2οὐκ ἴσχυσαν ἐφικέσθαι. τῶν γὰρ ἐπιλέκτων ὑπερβαλλομένων
ταῖς ἀνδραγαθίαις, καὶ τῆς ἀρετῆς καὶ
παρακλήσεως Ἐπαμεινώνδου πολλὰ συμβαλλομένης,
μόγις ἐβιάσθησαν οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι· τὸ μὲν
πρῶτον ἀναχωροῦντες τὴν τάξιν οὐ διέλυον,1 τὸ
δὲ τελευταῖον πολλῶν ἀναιρουμένων, τοῦ δὲ παραγγέλλοντος
ἡγεμόνος τετελευτηκότος, ἐγένετο παντελὴς
3τροπὴ τοῦ στρατοπέδου. οἱ δὲ περὶ τὸν
Ἐπαμεινώνδαν ἐπικείμενοι τοῖς φεύγουσι καὶ πολλοὺς
τῶν ἐναντίων κατακόψαντες ἀπηνέγκαντο
νίκην ἐπιφανεστάτην. συμβαλόντες γὰρ τοῖς ἀρίστοις
τῶν Ἑλλήνων, καὶ τοῖς ὀλίγοις τῶν πολλαπλασίων
παραδόξως περιγενόμενοι, μεγάλην δόξαν

1οὐ διέλυον Rhodoman, Madvig, διεφύλαττον Vogel: διέλυον
MSS., Dindorf, Bekker.108Book XV

as King Cleombrotus of the Lacedaemonians was alive 371/0 b.c. and had with him many comrades-in-arms who were quite ready to die in his defence, it was uncertain which way the scales of victory inclined; but when, though he shrank from no danger, he proved unable to bear down his opponents, and perished in an heroic resistance after sustaining many wounds, then, as masses of men thronged about his body, there was piled up a great mound of corpses.
56. There being no one in command of the wing, the heavy column led by Epameinondas bore down upon the Lacedaemonians, and at first by sheer force caused the line of the enemy to buckle somewhat; then, however, the Lacedaemonians, fighting gallantly about their king, got possession of his body, but were not strong enough to achieve victory. For as the corps of elite outdid them in feats of courage, and the valour and exhortations of Epameinondas contributed greatly to its prowess, the Lacedaemonians were with great difficulty forced back; at first, as they gave ground they would not break their formation, but finally, as many fell and the commander who would have rallied them had died, the army turned and fled in utter rout. Epameinondas’ corps pursued the fugitives,1 slew many who opposed them, and won for themselves a most glorious victory. For since they had met the bravest of the Greeks and with a small force had miraculously overcome many times their

1In the account of the battle, Diodorus fails to give any hint of cavalry action (see Xenophon, l.c. 10–13) which was co-ordinated with the rapid advance of the Theban corps d’ élite. This co-ordination (see Cary, Cambridge Ancient History, 6. 82), more perhaps than the denseness of the corps and the échelon formation of the Thebans, was a new factor in fighting later developed by Macedon.109