Diodorus of Sicily

τοὺς ἀφεστηκότας, πρῶτον μὲν τοὺς κομίσαντας
τὰ χρήματα συνέλαβε καὶ πρὸς τὸν Ἀρταξέρξην
ἀπέστειλε, μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα πολλὰς τῶν πόλεων καὶ
τοὺς ξενολογηθέντας στρατιώτας τοῖς ὑπὸ τοῦ βασιλέως
2πεμφθεῖσιν ἡγεμόσι παρέδωκεν. ὁμοίως δὲ
τούτῳ καὶ κατὰ τὴν Καππαδοκίαν ἐγένετο προδοσία,
καθ᾿ ἣν ἴδιόν τι καὶ παράδοξον συνέβη γενέσθαι.
Ἀρταβάζου γὰρ τοῦ βασιλέως στρατηγοῦ
μετὰ πολλῆς δυνάμεως ἐμβαλόντος εἰς τὴν Καππαδοκίαν,
ὁ μὲν ταύτης τῆς χώρας σατράπης Δατάμης
ἀντεστρατοπέδευσεν αὐτῷ, πολλοὺς μὲν
ἱππεῖς ἠθροικὼς δισμυρίους δὲ πεζοὺς μισθοφόρους
3ἔχων αὑτῷ1 συστρατεύοντας· ὁ δὲ κηδεστὴς τοῦ
Δατάμου τῶν ἱππέων ἀφηγούμενος, χάριν βουλόμενος
καταθέσθαι καὶ τῆς ἰδίας σωτηρίας ἅμα
προνοούμενος, ἀποστὰς νυκτὸς μετὰ τῶν ἱππέων
ἀπήλαυνε πρὸς τοὺς πολεμίους, συντεθειμένος πρὸς
Ἀρτάβαζον τῇ πρότερον ἡμέρᾳ περὶ τῆς προδοσίας.
4Δατάμης δὲ παρακαλέσας τοὺς μισθοφόρους καὶ
δωρεὰς ὑποσχόμενος, ἀνέζευξε πρὸς τοὺς ἀφεστηκότας.
καταλαβὼν δ᾿ αὐτοὺς ἤδη συνάπτοντας
τοῖς πολεμίοις, καὶ αὐτὸς προσπεσὼν ἅμα τοῖς
περὶ τὸν Ἀρτάβαζον καὶ τοῖς ἱππεῦσιν, ἔκτεινε
5τοὺς εἰς χεῖρας ἐρχομένους. ὁ δ᾿ Ἀρτάβαζος, τὸ



1PAL omit αὑτῷ.206Book XV

the hands of the Persians, he first arrested those who 362 b.c. brought the money and dispatched them to Artaxer-xes; then afterward he delivered many of the cities and the soldiers who had been hired to the commanding officers who had been sent by the King. In a similar manner, betrayal occurred also in Cappadocia, where a strange and unexpected thing took place. Artabazus,1 the King’s general, had invaded Cappadocia with a large army, and Datames,2 the satrap of the country, had taken the field against him, for he had collected many horsemen and had twenty thousand mercenary foot-soldiers serving with him. But the father-in-law of Datames, who commanded the cavalry, wishing to acquire favour and at the same time having an eye to his own safety, deserted at night and rode off with the cavalry to the enemy, having the day before made arrangements with Artabazus for the betrayal. Datames then summoned his mercenaries, promised them largess, and launched an attack upon the deserters. Finding them on the point of joining forces with the enemy and himself attacking at the same time Artabazus’ guard and the horsemen, he slew all who came to close quarters.


1Artabazus was the son of Pharnabazus (note 1, p. 202)
and Apamê, daughter of Artaxerxes (Plutarch, Artaxerxes,
27. 4; Xenophon, Hell. 5. 1. 28), born about 387 or later.
He married the sister of Memnon and Mentor (Book 16. 52. 4. about 362. For his history see Beloch, Griechische Geschichte2, 3 2. 147-149.2Datames was the son of Camisares who ruled over part of Cappadocia (see Life by Nepos). He was probably leader of an offensive of the satraps at the time of Tachos’ invasion of Syria (see Polyaenus, 7. 21. 3). It was probably in the summer of 359 that Artabazus invaded Cappadocia, and at the latest in the following winter that Datames was murdered by Ariobarzanes’ son Mithridates (Nepos, Datames, 10–11; Polyaenus, 7. 29. 1). For a longer account see Beloch, Griechische Geschichte2, 3. 2. 254-257; also Tarn, Cambridge Ancient History, 6. 20–21; Olmstead, History of the Persian Empire, 411 ff.207