Diodorus of Sicily

ἡγεῖτο μὲν οὖν Ἀμίλκας πάντων, ἔχων
τοὺς ἀεὶ περὶ ἑαυτὸν τεταγμένους, ἐπηκολούθει δὲ
Δεινοκράτης, τῶν ἱππέων εἰληφὼς τὴν ἡγεμονίαν.
6τὸ δὲ τῶν πεζῶν στρατόπεδον εἰς δύο φάλαγγας
διῄρητο, τήν τε τῶν βαρβάρων καὶ τὴν τῶν συμμαχούντων
Ἑλλήνων. παρηκολούθει δὲ καὶ πλῆθος
ὄχλου παντοδαπὸν ἐκτὸς τῆς τάξεως ὠφελείας
ἕνεκα, χρείαν μὲν στρατιωτικὴν οὐδεμίαν παρεχόμενον,
θορύβου δὲ καὶ ταραχῆς ἀλόγου γινόμενον
αἴτιον, ἐξ ὧν πολλάκις ὁλοσχερέστεροι συμβαίνουσι
7κίνδυνοι. καὶ τότε δὲ τῶν ὁδῶν στενῶν οὐσῶν
καὶ τραχειῶν οἱ μὲν τὰ σκευοφόρα κομίζοντες καὶ
τῶν ἐκτὸς τῆς τάξεως συνακολουθούντων τινὲς
ἐβάδιζον πρὸς ἀλλήλους φιλοτιμούμενοι περὶ τῆς
ὁδοιπορίας· στενοχωρουμένου δὲ τοῦ πλήθους καὶ
διὰ τοῦτό τισιν ἐγγενομένης ἁψιμαχίας καὶ πολλῶν
ἑκατέροις παραβοηθούντων κραυγὴ καὶ πολὺς
θόρυβος κατεῖχε τὸ στρατόπεδον.
8Καθ᾿ ὃν δὴ χρόνον οἱ κατειληφότες τὸν Εὐρύηλον
Συρακόσιοι μετὰ θορύβου προσιόντας τοὺς πολεμίους
αἰσθόμενοι καὶ τόπους ἔχοντες ὑπερδεξίους
9ὥρμησαν ἐπὶ τοὺς πολεμίους. καὶ τινὲς μὲν ἐπὶ
τοῖς ὑψηλοῖς ἑστῶτες ἔβαλλον τοὺς ἐπιόντας, τινὲς
δὲ τοὺς εὐκαίρους τῶν τόπων καταλαβόντες ἀπέκλειον
τῆς ὁδοῦ τοὺς βαρβάρους, ἄλλοι δὲ κατὰ τῶν
κρημνῶν τοὺς φεύγοντας ῥίπτειν ἑαυτοὺς ἠνάγκαζον·
διὰ γὰρ τὸ σκότος καὶ τὴν ἄγνοιαν ὑπελήφθησαν
μεγάλῃ δυνάμει παραγεγονέναι πρὸς τὴν
218Book XX

not be seen by the enemy. Now Hamilcar was in the 309 b.c. foremost place with those who were regularly arrayed about him, and he was followed by Deinocrates,1 who had received command of the cavalry. The main body of the foot-soldiers was divided into two phalanxes, one composed of the barbarians and one of the Greek allies. Outside the ranks a mixed crowd of rabble also followed along for the sake of booty, men who are of no use whatever to an army, but are the source of tumult and irrational confusion, from which the most extreme dangers often arise. And on this occasion, since the roads were narrow and rough, the baggage train and some of the camp-followers kept jostling each other as they competed for the right of way; and, since the crowd was pressed into a narrow space and for this reason some became involved in brawls and many tried to help each side, great confusion and tumult prevailed in the army.
At this point the Syracusans who had occupied Euryelus, perceiving that the enemy were advancing in confusion whereas they themselves occupied higher positions, charged upon their opponents.2 Some of them stood on the heights and sent missiles at those who were coming up, some by occupying advantageous positions blocked the barbarians from the passage, and others forced the fleeing soldiers to cast themselves down the cliffs; for on account of the darkness and the lack of information the enemy supposed that the Syracusans had arrived with a large force for the


1A Syracusan exile, cp. Book 19. 8. 6.2In spite of the picturesque details that follow, the fighting probably took place in the Anapus Valley, west and south of Euryelus and Epipolae (Beloch, Griechische Geschichte2, 4. 2. 192).219