Diodorus of Sicily

υἱὸς ἐβασίλευσεν ἔτη δεκαπέντε. ἔπειτα οἱ μὲν
Ἀρχίδάμου μισθοφόροι μετεσχηκότες τῆς τοῦ μαντείου
συλήσεως ὑπὸ τῶν Λευκανῶν κατηκοντίσθησαν,
ὁ δὲ Φάλαικος ἐκπεσὼν ἐκ τῆς Λύκτου
3Κυδωνίαν πολιορκεῖν ἐπεχείρησεν. κατασκευάσαντος
δὲ αὐτοῦ μηχανὰς πολιορκητικὰς καὶ προσάγοντος
τῇ πόλει κεραυνῶν πεσόντων αὗται μὲν ὑπὸ
τοῦ θείου πυρὸς κατεφλέχθησαν, τῶν δὲ μισθοφόρων
πολλοὶ παραβοηθοῦντες ταῖς μηχαναῖς ὑπὸ
τοῦ πυρὸς διεφθάρησαν· ἐν οἷς ἦν καὶ ὁ στρατηγὸς
4Φάλαικος. ἔνιοι δέ φασιν αὐτὸν προσκόψαντά τινι
τῶν μισθοφόρων ὑπὸ τούτου σφαγῆναι. οἱ δὲ
περιλειφθέντες τῶν μισθοφόρων ἀναληφθέντες ὑπὸ
Ἠλείων φυγάδων εἰς τὴν Πελοπόννησον ἐκομίσθησαν
καὶ μετὰ τούτων ἐπολέμουν πρὸς Ἠλείους.
5Ἀρκάδων δὲ συναγωνισαμένων τοῖς Ἠλείοις καὶ
μάχῃ νικησάντων τοὺς φυγάδας πολλοὶ μὲν τῶν
μισθοφόρων ἀνῃρέθησαν, οἱ δὲ περιλειφθέντες εἰς
τετρακισχιλίους ἐζωγρήθησαν. διελομένων δὲ τῶν
τε Ἀρκάδων καὶ Ἠλείων τοὺς αἰχμαλώτους οἱ
μὲν Ἀρκάδες τοὺς ἑαυτοῖς μερισθέντας ἅπαντας
ἐλαφυροπώλησαν, οἱ δ᾿ Ἠλεῖοι διὰ τὴν εἰς τὸ
μαντεῖον παρανομίαν ἀπέσφαξαν.
64. Οἱ μὲν οὖν τῆς τῆς ἱεροσυλίας μετασχόντες τοῦτον
τὸν τρόπον ὑπὸ τοῦ δαιμονίου τιμωρίας ἠξιώθησαν.
αἱ δ᾿ ἐπισημόταται πόλεις κοινωνήσασαι


414Book XVI

his son succeeded to the throne and ruled for fifteen1 346/5 b.c. years. After the death of Archidamus his mercenaries, who had participated in plundering the shrine, were shot down by the Lucanians, whereas Phalaecus, now that he had been driven out of Lyctus, attempted to besiege Cydonia. He had constructed siege engines and was bringing them up against the city when lightning descended and these structures were consumed by the divine fire, and many of the mercenaries in attempting to save the engines perished in the flames. Among them was the general Phalaecus. But some say that he offended one of the mercenaries and was slain by him. The mercenaries who survived were taken into their service by Eleian exiles, were then transported to the Peloponnese, and with these exiles were engaged in war against the people of Elis.2 When the Arcadians joined the Eleians in the struggle and defeated the exiles in battle, many of the mercenaries were slain and the remainder, about four thousand, were taken captive. After the Arcadians and the Eleians had divided up the prisoners, the Arcadians sold as booty all who had been apportioned to them, while the Eleians executed their portion because of the outrage committed against the oracle.
64. Now the participants in the sacrilege met in this fashion with their just retribution from the deity. And the most renowned cities because of their part


1Cp. chap. 88. 4, where nine years are allotted to Agis, as
also in Book 17. 63. 4. The dates of the reigns are Archidamus
III, 361–338; Agis II, 338–331. Agis fell in the battle
of Megalopolis in the autumn of 331. The error of fifteen
years seems to have arisen from the fact that in this passage
(placed under year 346) Diodorus records the death of Archi- damus (which occurred in 338) and the succession of Agis. From 346 to 331 would give fifteen years. (For a full discussion of the date of the battle of Megalopolis in relation to Alexander’s march see Beloch, 3. 2. § 130; also Tarn, Cambridge Ancient History, 6. 443–445.)2Cp. Demosthenes, 19. 260; Pausanias, 4. 28. 4 and 5. 4. 9. There seems to be no later reference in Diodorus to this war, which occurred about 343/2.415