Diodorus of Sicily
4αὐτὰς διασημαίνουσαι πλοῦτον. ἔγεμον δ᾿ αἱ μὲν
ἐπαύλεις πάντων τῶν πρὸς ἀπόλαυσιν, ὡς ἂν τῶν
ἐγχωρίων ἐν εἰρήνῃ πολυχρονίῳ τεθησαυρικότων
γεννημάτων ἀφθονίαν· ἡ δὲ χώρα ἡ μὲν ἦν ἀμπελόφυτος,
ἡ δὲ ἐλαιοφόρος καὶ τῶν ἄλλων τῶν
καρπίμων δένδρων ἀνάπλεως. ἐπὶ θάτερα δὲ μέρη
τὸ πεδίον ἐνέμοντο βοῶν ἀγέλαι καὶ ποῖμναι καὶ
τὰ πλησίον ἕλη φορβάδων ἵππων ἔγεμε. καθόλου
δὲ παντοία τις ἦν ἐν τοῖς τόποις εὐδαιμονία, τῶν
ἐπιφανεστάτων Καρχηδονίων διειληφότων τὰς κτήσεις
καὶ τοῖς πλούτοις πεφιλοκαληκότων πρὸς
5ἀπόλαυσιν. διόπερ οἱ Σικελιῶται τό τε τῆς χώρας
κάλλος καὶ τὴν εὐδαιμονίαν τὴν ἐν αὐτῇ θαυμάζοντες
μετέωροι ταῖς ἐλπίσιν ἐγένοντο, θεωροῦντες
ἄξια τῶν κινδύνων ἔπαθλα τοῖς νικῶσι προκείμενα.
6ὁ δ᾿ Ἀγαθοκλῆς ὁρῶν τοὺς στρατιώτας ἀναλαμβάνοντας
αὑτοὺς ἐκ τῆς ἀθυμίας καὶ προθύμους ὄντας
εἰς τοὺς κινδύνους ἐξ ἐφόδου προσέβαλλε τοῖς τείχεσιν.
ἀπροσδοκήτου δὲ τῆς ἐπιθέσεως· γενομένης
καὶ τῶν ἔνδον διὰ τὴν ἄγνοιαν καὶ τὴν τῶν πολέμων1
ἀπειρίαν ὀλίγον ὑποστάντων χρόνον εἷλε
τὴν πόλιν κατὰ κράτος· δοὺς δὲ τοῖς στρατιώταις
εἰς ἁρπαγὴν ἐνέπλησε τὴν δύναμιν ὠφελείας ἅμα
7καὶ θάρσους. εὐθὺ δὲ καὶ πρὸς τὸν Λευκὸν Τύνητα
καλούμενον ἀναζεύξας ἐχειρώσατο τὴν πόλιν, ἀπέχουσαν
Καρχηδόνος δισχιλίους σταδίους. ἀμφοτέρας




1πολεμικῶν Fischer.162Book XX

wealth of the people who possessed them. The farm 310 b.c. buildings were filled with everything that was needful for enjoyment, seeing that the inhabitants in a long period of peace had stored up an abundant variety of products. Part of the land was planted with vines, and part yielded olives and was also planted thickly with other varieties of fruit-bearing trees. On each side herds of cattle and flocks of sheep pastured on the plain, and the neighbouring meadows were filled with grazing horses. In general there was a manifold prosperity in the region, since the leading Carthaginians had laid out there their private estates and with their wealth had beautified them for their enjoyment. Therefore the Sicilians, amazed at the beauty of the land and at its prosperity, were buoyed up by expectation, for they beheld prizes commensurate with their dangers ready at hand for the victors; and Agathocles, seeing that the soldiers were recovering from their discouragement and had become eager for battle, attacked the city walls1 by direct assault. Since the onset was unforeseen and the inhabitants, because they did not know what was happening and because they had had no experience in the wars, resisted only a short time, he took the city by storm; and giving it over to his soldiers for pillage, he at a single stroke loaded his army with booty and filled it with confidence. Then, setting out immediately for White Tunis,2 as it is called, he subdued this city, which lies about two thousand stades from Carthage.

1Of Megalepolis.2The city cannot be certainly identified. If it is Tunis, as seems probable, it is distant from Carthage only about 12 miles. In any case, since the city in question must lie between Gape Ron and Carthage, the 2000 stades (about 240 miles) is certainly wrong (cp. Beloch, Griechische Geschichte2, 3. 2. 206).163