Diodorus of Sicily

τὴν πατρίδα γινομένην δοριάλωτον· ἐπεὶ δ᾿
ἀμετάθετον αὐτῶν τὴν ὁρμὴν ἑώρων, λάθρᾳ συμφρονήσαντες
ἐξέπεμψαν νυκτὸς πρεσβείαν πρὸς
Ἀντίγονον, ἐπαγγελλόμενοι τὸν Ἀλκέταν ἢ ζῶντα
5παραδώσειν ἢ τετελευτηκότα. ἠξίουν δ᾿ αὐτὸν
ἐφ᾿ ἡμέρας τινὰς προσβάλλοντα τῇ πόλει καὶ δι᾿
ἀκροβολισμῶν ἐλαφρῶν προαγόμενον τοὺς ἐκ τῆς
πόλεως ὑποχωρεῖν ὡς φεύγοντα· τούτου γὰρ γενομένου
καὶ τῶν νεωτέρων περὶ τὴν μάχην ἐκτὸς τῆς
πόλεως ἀσχολουμένων λήψεσθαι καιρὸν οἰκεῖον
6ταῖς ἰδίαις ἐπιβολαῖς. ὁ δ᾿ Ἀντίγονος πεισθεὶς
ὑπ᾿ αὐτῶν καὶ μακρὰν τῆς πόλεως μεταστρατοπεδεύσας
διὰ τῶν ἀκροβολισμῶν προεσπᾶτο τοὺς
7νέους εἰς τὸν ἐκτὸς1 τῆς πόλεως ἀγῶνα. οἱ δὲ πρεσβύτεροι
μεμονωμένον ὁρῶντες τὸν Ἀλκέταν καὶ
τῶν τε δούλων τοὺς πιστοτάτους καὶ τῶν ἀκμαζόντων
πολιτῶν ἐπιλέξαντες τοὺς μὴ συστρατευομένους
τῷ Ἀλκέτᾳ τὴν ἐπίθεσιν ἐποιήσαντο
κατὰ τὴν ἀπουσίαν τῶν νέων. ζωγρῆσαι μὲν οὖν
αὐτὸν οὐ κατίσχυσαν (ἔφθασε γὰρ αὑτὸν διαχειρισάμενος,
ὅπως μὴ ζῶν ὑποχείριος γένηται τοῖς
πολεμίοις), τὸ δὲ σῶμα αὐτοῦ θέντες ἐπὶ κλινίδιον
καὶ συγκατακαλύψαντες εὐτελεῖ τρίβωνι κατὰ τὰς
πύλας ἐξήνεγκαν καὶ λαθόντες τοὺς ἀκροβολιζομένους
παρέδωκαν Ἀντιγόνῳ.
47. Διὰ δὲ τῆς ἰδίας ἐπινοίας ἐκ τῶν κινδύνων
ἐξελόμενοι τὴν πατρίδα τὸν μὲν πόλεμον ἀπεστρέψαντο,2
τὴν δὲ πρὸς τοὺς νέους ἀλλοτριότητα
φυγεῖν οὐ κατίσχυσαν· οὗτοι γὰρ ἀπὸ τῆς μάχης
ἐπανελθόντες καὶ τὸ πεπραγμένον ἀκούσαντες πρὸς
τοὺς ἰδίους ἀπηγριώθησαν διὰ τὴν πρὸς Ἀλκέταν

1ἐκτὸς Reiske: ἐκ.2ἀπεστρέψαντο MSS., Fischer, ἀπετρίψαντο Wesseling, Dindorf.140Book XVIII

war for the sake of a single Macedonian; but when 319 b.c. they saw that the young men’s determination was not to be shaken, after taking counsel in secret, they sent an embassy to Antigonus by night, promising to surrender Alcetas either alive or dead. They asked him to attack the city for a number of days and, drawing the defenders forward by light skirmishing, to withdraw as if in flight. They said that, when this had happened and the young men were engaged in the battle at a distance from the city, they would seize a suitable occasion for their own undertaking. Antigonus, prevailed on by them, shifted his camp a long way from the city, and by skirmishing with the young men kept drawing them into battle outside the city. When the older men saw that Alcetas had been left alone, selecting the most trustworthy of the slaves and those of the citizens in the prime of life who were not working in his behalf, they made their attempt while the young men were still away. They could not, it is true, take him alive, for he laid hands on himself first in order not to come into the power of his enemies while still living; but his body, laid on a bier and covered with a coarse cloak, they carried out through the gates and delivered to Antigonus without attracting the attention of the skirmishers.
47. By thus delivering their state from danger by their own devices, they averted the war, but they could not escape the disaffection of the younger men; for as soon as these on their return from the fighting heard what had happened, they became enraged at their kinsfolk on account of their own excessive devotion


141