Diodorus of Sicily

χρήματα τῷ θεῷ ἀποδῶσιν οἱ Φωκεῖς καθιερῶσαι
τὴν χώραν τῶν ἀποστερούντων τὸν θεόν· ὁμοίως
δ᾿ ἔφασαν δεῖν καὶ τοὺς ἄλλους τοὺς καταδικασθέντας
ἐκτίνειν τὰ ὀφλήματα, ἐν οἷς ὑπῆρχον καὶ
Λακεδαιμόνιοι· ἐὰν δὲ μὴ ὑπακούωσι, κοινῇ ὑπὸ
4τῶν Ἑλλήνων μισοπονηρίας ἀξιοῦσθαι. τῶν δ᾿
Ἑλλήνων συνεπικυρούντων τὰ δόγματα τῶν Ἀμφικτυόνων
καὶ τῆς τῶν Φωκέων χώρας μελλούσης
καθιεροῦσθαι ὁ Φιλόμηλος, μέγιστον ἔχων ἐν τοῖς
Φωκεῦσιν ἀξίωμα, διελέχθη τοῖς ὁμοεθνέσι, διδάσκων
ὡς ἐκτῖσαι μὲν οὐ δύνανται τὰ χρήματα διὰ
τὸ μέγεθος τῆς καταδίκης, περιορᾶν δὲ καθιερουμένην
τὴν χώραν οὐ μόνον ἄνανδρον ὑπάρχειν, ἀλλὰ
καὶ κίνδυνον ἐπιφέρειν τῇ τῶν ἁπάντων τοῦ βίου
5ἀνατροπῇ.1 ἐπειρᾶτο δὲ καὶ τὰς κρίσεις τῶν Ἀμφικτυόνων
ἀδίκους δεικνύναι κατὰ τὸ δυνατόν· μικρᾶς
γὰρ παντελῶς χώρας κατεργασθείσης μεγίστας
ζημίας τεθεῖσθαι. συνεβούλευεν οὖν ταύτας ἀκύρους
ποιῆσαι καὶ μεγάλας ἀφορμὰς ἔχειν ἀπεφαίνετο
τοὺς Φωκεῖς κατὰ τῶν Ἀμφικτυόνων· τὸ γὰρ
παλαιὸν τοῦ μαντείου τὴν ἐξουσίαν καὶ προστασίαν
ἐσχηκέναι τούτους. καὶ μάρτυρα τὸν ἀρχαιότατον
καὶ μέγιστον τῶν ποιητῶν Ὅμηρον παρείχετο
λέγοντα
αὐτὰρ Φωκείων Σχεδίος καὶ Ἐπίστροφος ἦρχον,
οἳ Κυπάρισσον ἔχον Πυθῶνά τε πετρήεσσαν.
6διόπερ ἔφη δεῖν ἀμφισβητεῖν περὶ τῆς τοῦ μαντείου



1τῇ . . . ἀνατροπῇ PX; καὶ τῷ τῶν ἁπάντων βίῳ ἀνατροπήν
cet.Fischer suggests τῆς τῶν ἁπάντων κατὰ τὸν βίον
ἀνατροπῆς.302Book XVI

of the Council that if the Phocians did not pay the 355/4 b.c. money to the god, they should lay under a curse the land of those who were cheating the god. Likewise they declared that the others against whom judgements had been passed should discharge their fines, the Lacedaemonians being in this category, and if they did not obey, they should incur the common hatred of the Greeks for their knavery. When the Greeks all ratified the decisions of the Amphictyons and the territory of the Phocians was about to be placed under the curse, Philomelus, who had the highest reputation among the Phocians, harangued his fellow countrymen, explaining that they were unable to pay the money on account of the magnitude of the fine, and that to allow the territory to be cursed was not only cowardly but involved them in danger since it was the destruction of the means by which they all lived. He endeavoured also to prove that the judgements of the Amphictyons were unjust in the highest degree, since they had inflicted huge fines for the cultivation of what was a very small parcel of land. Accordingly he advised them to treat the fines as null and void and declared that the Phocians had strong grounds for their case against the Amphictyons: for in ancient times they had held control and guardianship of the oracle. As witness he offered the most ancient and greatest of all poets, Homer who said:
“Now over Phocians Schedius ruled and e’en
Epistrophus,
They dwelt in Cyparissus1 and in Pytho2
land
of rocks.”3
On this account he said they should enter a claim for


1Town near Delphi.2Homeric name for Delphi.3Iliad, 2. 517, 519.303