Diodorus of Sicily

τειχίσας τὸν Σαλγανέα1 συνήγαγεν ἐνταῦθα πᾶσαν
τὴν δύναμιν· ἤλπιζε γὰρ προσδέξασθαι τοὺς Χαλκιδεῖς,
οἵπερ μόνοι τῶν Εὐβοέων ὑπὸ τῶν πολεμίων
5ἐφρουροῦντο. ὁ δὲ Κάσανδρος ἀγωνιῶν ὑπὲρ
τῆς Χαλκίδος τὴν Ὠρεοῦ πολιορκίαν ἔλυσεν, εἰς
δὲ τὴν Χαλκίδα παρῆλθεν καὶ τὰς δυνάμεις μετεπέμπετο.
Ἀντίγονος δὲ πυθόμενος περὶ τὴν
Εὔβοιαν ἐφεδρεύειν ἀλλήλοις τὰ στρατόπεδα, μετεπέμψατο
τὸν Μήδιον εἰς τὴν Ἀσίαν μετὰ τοῦ
στόλου, εὐθὺς δὲ καὶ τὰς δυνάμεις ἀναλαβὼν προῆγεν
ἐφ᾿ Ἑλλησπόντῳ κατὰ τάχος, ὡς διαβησόμενος
εἰς Μακεδονίαν, ὅπως ἢ μένοντος Κασάνδρου
περὶ τὴν Εὔβοιαν αὐτὸς ἔρημον καταλάβῃ Μακεδονίαν
τῶν ἀμυνομένων ἢ τῇ βασιλείᾳ βοηθῶν ἀποβάλῃ
6τὰ κατὰ τὴν Ἑλλάδα πράγματα. ὁ δὲ Κάσανδρος
συνιδὼν τὴν ἐπίνοιαν αὐτοῦ Πλείσταρχον μὲν ἀπέλιπεν
ἐπὶ τῆς ἐν Χαλκίδι φρουρᾶς, αὐτὸς δὲ μετὰ
πάσης τῆς δυνάμεως ἀναζεύξας Ὠρωπὸν μὲν κατὰ
κράτος εἷλε, Θηβαίους δ᾿ εἰς τὴν αὑτοῦ συμμαχίαν
κατέστησεν· πρὸς δὲ τοὺς ἄλλους Βοιωτοὺς ἀνοχὰς
ποιησάμενος καὶ καταλιπὼν ἐπὶ τῆς Ἑλλάδος
στρατηγὸν Εὐπόλεμον ἀπῆλθεν εἰς Μακεδονίαν,
7ἀγωνιῶν περὶ τῆς τῶν πολεμίων διαβάσεως. ὁ δ᾿
Ἀντίγονος ἐπειδὴ κατήντησεν εἰς τὴν Προποντίδα,
διεπρεσβεύσατο πρὸς Βυζαντίους ἀξιῶν μετέχειν
τῆς συμμαχίας. παραγενομένων δὲ καὶ παρὰ
Λυσιμάχου πρεσβευτῶν καὶ παρακαλούντων μηδὲν
ποιεῖν μήτε κατ᾿ αὐτοῦ μήτε κατὰ Κασάνδρου τοῖς
μὲν Βυζαντίοις ἔδοξε μένειν ἐφ᾿ ἡσυχίας καὶ τηρεῖν
τὴν πρὸς ἀμφοτέρους εἰρήνην ἅμα καὶ φιλίαν. ὁ
δ᾿ Ἀντίγονος δυσχρηστούμενος ἐπὶ τούτοις, ἅμα

1Σαλγανέα Palmer: Σαλγονέα RX, Σαλμονέα F.46Book XIX

from Oreüs, fortified Salganeus,1 and gathered there 313 b.c. his entire force; for he hoped to be admitted by the Chalcidians, who alone of the Euboeans were garrisoned by the enemy. But Cassander, in his anxiety for Chalcis, gave up the siege of Oreüs, moved to Chalcis, and summoned his forces. When Antigonus heard that in Euboea the armed forces were watching each other, he recalled Medius to Asia with the fleet, and at once with his armies set out at top speed for the Hellespont as if intending to cross over into Macedonia, in order that, if Cassander remained in Euboea, he might himself occupy Macedonia while it was stripped of defenders, or that Cassander, going to the defence of his kingdom, might lose his supremacy in Greece. But Cassander, perceiving Antigonus’ plan, left Pleistarchus2 in command of the garrison in Chalcis and setting out himself with all his forces took Oropus by storm and brought the Thebans into his alliance. Then, after making a truce with the other Boeotians and leaving Eupolemus as general for Greece, he went into Macedonia, for he was apprehensive of the enemy’s crossing. As for Antigonus, when he came to the Propontis, he sent an embassy to the Byzantines, asking them to enter the alliance. But there had arrived envoys from Lysimachus also who were urging them to do nothing against either Lysimachus or Cassander; and the Byzantines decided to remain neutral and to maintain peace and friendship toward both parties. Antigonus, because he had been foiled in these undertakings and also because the winter season


1A town on the east coast of Boeotia, commanding the northern entrance of the Euripus (Strabo, 9. 2. 9).2A son of Antipater and brother of Cassander (Plutarch, Demetrius, 31. 5; cp. Book 20. 112; Pausanias, 1. 15. 1).47