Diodorus of Sicily

κατέλαβεν ἐν αὐτῇ τήν τε χρυσῆν ἀναδενδράδα
καὶ πλῆθος ἄλλων κατασκευασμάτων, τῶν1 πάντων
συναγομένων εἰς μύρια καὶ πεντακισχίλια
τάλαντα. ἠθροίσθη δ᾿ αὐτῷ καὶ ἄλλο πλῆθος χρημάτων
8ἔκ τε τῶν στεφάνων καὶ τῶν ἄλλων δωρεῶν,
ἔτι δὲ ἐκ τῶν λαφύρων· ταῦτα γὰρ ἦσαν πεντακισχίλια
τάλαντα, καὶ κατὰ τὴν Μηδίαν ἄλλα τοσαῦτα
χωρὶς τῶν ἐν Σούσοις θησαυρῶν, ὥστε τὰ
πάντα συναχθῆναι τάλαντα δισμύρια πεντακισχίλια.
Καὶ τὰ μὲν περὶ Ἀντίγονον ἐν τούτοις ἦν.
49. Ἡμεῖς δὲ διεληλυθότες τὰ κατὰ τὴν Ἀσίαν
πραχθέντα μεταβιβάσομεν τὸν λόγον ἐπὶ τὴν
Εὐρώπην καὶ τὰ συνεχῆ τῶν προειρημένων διέξιμεν.
ὁ γὰρ Κάσανδρος εἰς Πύδναν τῆς Μακεδονίας
συγκεκλεικὼς Ὀλυμπιάδα προσβολὰς μὲν
τοῖς τείχεσιν ἠδυνάτει ποιεῖσθαι διὰ τοὺς χειμῶνας,
περιστρατοπεδεύσας δὲ τὴν πόλιν καὶ χάρακα
βαλόμενος ἀπὸ θαλάσσης εἰς θάλασσαν, ἔτι
δὲ ἐφορμῶν τῷ λιμένι πάντα τὸν2 βουλόμενον
2ἐπικουρῆσαι διεκώλυεν. ταχὺ δὲ τῶν ἐπιτηδείων
ἐξαναλωθέντων τοσαύτην περὶ τοὺς ἔνδον κατεσκεύασεν
ἔνδειαν ὥστ᾿ ἐκλυθῆναι τὸ παράπαν· εἰς
τοῦτο γὰρ ἦλθον ἀνάγκης ὥστε τῷ μὲν στρατιώτῃ
σιτομετρεῖν χοίνικας πέντε τοῦ μηνός, τοῖς δ᾿
ἐλέφασι τοῖς κατακλεισθεῖσι διδόναι πρίοντας τὰς
δοκούς, τὰ δ᾿ ὑποζύγια καὶ τοὺς ἵππους κατακόψαι
3πρὸς διατροφήν. τοιαύτης δὲ περιστάσεως κατεχούσης
τὴν πόλιν καὶ τῆς Ὀλυμπιάδος ἔτι προσανεχούσης
ταῖς ἔξωθεν ἐλπίσιν οἱ μὲν ἐλέφαντες




1τῶν added by Dindorf.2τὸν added by Dindorf.362Book XIX

citadel of Susa, he found in it the golden climbing 316 b.c. vine1 and a great number of other objects of art, weighing all told fifteen thousand talents. There was collected for him, besides, a great amount of money from the crowns and the other gifts, and also from the spoils. This came to five thousand talents; and there was another equal amount in Media apart from the treasury in Susa, so that in all twenty-five thousand talents were gathered together.
Such was the state of the affairs of Antigonus.2
49. Now that we have completed the account of events in Asia, we shall turn our attention to Europe and set forth what took place there following the events previously described.3 Although Cassander had shut Olympias into Pydna in Macedonia, he was not able to assault the walls because of the winter storms, but by encamping about the city, throwing up a palisade from sea to sea, and blockading the port, he prevented any who might wish to aid the queen from doing so. And as the supplies were rapidly exhausted, he created such famine among those within that they were completely incapacitated. In truth, they were brought to such extreme need that they gave each soldier five choenices4 of grain per month, sawed up wood and fed the sawdust to the imprisoned elephants, and slaughtered the pack animals and horses for food. While the situation of the city was so serious and while Olympias was still clinging to hopes of rescue from outside, the elephants




1For the golden vine that stood with the golden plane tree in the chamber of the Persian king cp. Herodotus, 7. 27; Athenaeus, 12. 514 f.2Continued in chap. 55. 1.3Continued from chap. 36. 6. For the siege of Pydna cp. Justin, 14. 6. 1–5.4One choenix of grain was the normal daily ration in the Persian army (Herodotus, 7. 187; Diog. Laert. 8. 18).363