Diodorus of Sicily

ἀλλ᾿ εἰς φυσικάς τινας καὶ κατηναγκασμένας
περιστάσεις, οἱ δ᾿ εὐσεβῶς διακείμενοι πρὸς
τὸ θεῖον πιθανάς τινας αἰτίας ἀποδιδοῦσι τοῦ
συμβάντος, ὡς διὰ θεῶν μῆνιν γεγενημένης τῆς
συμφορᾶς τοῖς εἰς τὸ θεῖον ἀσεβήσασι· περὶ ὧν
καὶ ἡμεῖς ἀκριβῶς ἀναγράψαι πειρασόμεθα τῇ κατὰ
μέρος ἱστορίᾳ.
49. Κατὰ τὴν Ἰωνίαν ἐννέα πόλεις εἰώθεισαν
κοινὴν ποιεῖσθαι σύνοδον τὴν τῶν Πανιωνίων, καὶ
θυσίας συνθύειν ἀρχαίας καὶ μεγάλας Ποσειδῶνι
περὶ τὴν ὀνομαζομένην Μυκάλην ἐν ἐρήμῳ τόπῳ.
ὕστερον δὲ πολέμων γενομένων περὶ τούτους τοὺς
τόπους οὐ δυνάμενοι ποιεῖν τὰ Πανιώνια, μετέθεσαν
τὴν πανήγυριν εἰς ἀσφαλῆ τόπον, ὃς ἦν
πλησίον τῆς Ἐφέσου. πέμψαντες δὲ θεωροὺς Πυθώδε,
χρησμοὺς ἔλαβον ἀφιδρύματα λαβεῖν ἀπὸ
τῶν ἀρχαίων καὶ προγονικῶν αὐτοῖς βωμῶν ἐξ
Ἑλίκης τῆς1 ἐν τῷ τότε μὲν Ἰωνίας, νῦν δὲ
2Ἀχαΐας καλουμένης. οἱ μὲν οὖν Ἴωνες κατὰ τὸν
χρησμὸν ἔπεμψαν εἰς Ἀχαΐαν τοὺς ληψομένους τὰ
ἀφιδρύματα· οὗτοι δὲ πρὸς τὸ κοινὸν τῶν Ἀχαιῶν
διαλεχθέντες ἔπεισαν διδόναι τὰ ἀξιούμενα. οἱ δὲ
τὴν Ἑλίκην οἰκοῦντες, ἔχοντες παλαιὸν λόγιον ὅτι
τότε κινδυνεύσουσιν ὅταν Ἴωνες ἐπὶ τοῦ βωμοῦ
τοῦ Ποσειδῶνος θύσωσιν, ἀναλογιζόμενοι τὸν χρησμὸν
ἀντέλεγον τοῖς Ἴωσι περὶ τῶν ἀφιδρυμάτων,




1τῆς ἐν τῷ τότε μὲν Ἰωνίας, νῦν δὲ Ἀχαΐας καλουμένης] τῆς
ἐν τῇ τότε μὲν Ἰωνίᾳ, νῦν δὲ Ἀχαΐᾳ καλουμένῃ Madvig, Vogel.84Book XV

to certain natural circumstances determined by necessary 373/2 b.c. causes, whereas those who are disposed to venerate the divine power assign certain plausible reasons for the occurrence, alleging that the disaster was occasioned by the anger of the gods at those who had committed sacrilege. This question I too shall endeavour to deal with in detail in a special chapter of my history.1
49. In Ionia nine cities2 were in the habit of holding a common assemblage of all the Ionians and of offering sacrifices of great antiquity on a large scale to Poseidon in a lonely region near the place called Mycale. Later, however, as a result of the outbreak of wars in this neighbourhood, since they were unable to hold the Panionia there, they shifted the festival gathering to a safe place near Ephesus. Having sent an embassy to Delphi, they received an oracle telling them to take copies of the ancient ancestral altars at Helicê, which was situated in what was then known as Ionia,3 but is known now as Achaia. So the Ionians in obedience to the oracle sent men to Achaia to make the copies, and they spoke before the council of the Achaeans and persuaded them to give them what they asked. The inhabitants of Helicê, however, who had an ancient saying that they would suffer danger when Ionians should sacrifice at the altar of Poseidon, taking account of the oracle, opposed the Ionians in the matter of the copies, saying that the sanctuary was


1See on this subject Book 16. 61–64.2Herodotus (1. 145) has twelve Ionian cities and makes
the connection between Achaïa and Ionia. Helicê and Bura
are specially mentioned there as two places of refuge of the Ionians from the Achaeans. Cp. Strabo, 14. 1. 20 for the festival celebrated near Mycalê.3See chap. 48. 3 for earthquake and tidal wave. On the connection of Helicê and Bura with the Ionians see Strabo, 8. 7. 2 and 4: “after Bura, Helicê, whither the Ionians fled for refuge after they were conquered in battle by the Achaeans, and whence at last they were expelled” (L.C.L. l.c.).85