Diodorus of Sicily

δὲ συνηνάγκασαν φυγεῖν. ἀκατάσχετοι δὲ ταῖς
ὁρμαῖς γενόμενοι καὶ πρὸς πᾶσαν τὴν τῶν ἐναντίων
φάλαγγα διαγωνισάμενοι τοσοῦτον ταῖς εὐχειρίαις
καὶ ῥώμαις ὑπερεῖχον ὥσθ᾿ ἑαυτῶν μὲν ἀποβαλεῖν
μηθένα, τῶν δ᾿ ἐναντίων ἀνελεῖν μὲν ὑπὲρ τοὺς
πεντακισχιλίους, τρέψασθαι δὲ τοὺς πεζοὺς πάντας,
2ὄντας πολλαπλασίους. Εὐμενὴς δὲ πυθόμενος τὴν
μὲν ἀποσκευὴν ἡλωκέναι, τοὺς δ᾿ ἱππεῖς τοὺς μετὰ
Πευκέστου μὴ μακρὰν ἀπέχειν, ἐπεχείρησεν ἀθροίζειν
ἅπαντας καὶ πάλιν ἱππομαχεῖν πρὸς Ἀντίγονον·
ἤλπιζε γὰρ μάχῃ κρατήσας οὐ μόνον τὴν
ἰδίαν ἀποσκευὴν σώσειν, ἀλλὰ καὶ τὴν τῶν πολεμίων
3προσλήψεσθαι. τῶν δὲ περὶ τὸν Πευκέστην
οὐχ ὑπακουόντων, ἀλλὰ καὶ τοὐναντίον πορρωτέρω
τὴν ἀποχώρησιν ποιουμένων ἐπί τινα ποταμόν,1
ἅμα δὲ καὶ νυκτὸς καταλαμβανούσης ἠναγκάσθη
4συνεῖξαι2 τῷ καιρῷ. Ἀντίγονος δὲ τοὺς ἱππεῖς
εἰς δύο μέρη διελόμενος τοὺς μὲν αὐτὸς ἔχων
ἐφήδρευε τοῖς περὶ τὸν Εὐμενῆ, τὴν ὁρμὴν αὐτῶν
ἀποθεωρῶν, τοὺς δ᾿ ἄλλους παραδοὺς Πίθωνι
προσέταξεν ἐπιθέσθαι τοῖς ἀργυράσπισι μεμονωμένοις
5τῆς τῶν ἱππέων βοηθείας. ταχὺ δ᾿ αὐτοῦ
τὸ προσταχθὲν συντελοῦντος οἱ Μακεδόνες εἰς
πλινθίον ἑαυτοὺς ποιήσαντες ἀσφαλῶς ἀπεχώρησαν
ἐπὶ τὸν ποταμὸν καὶ τῶν περὶ τὸν Πευκέστην
κατηγόρουν ὡς αἰτίων γεγενημένων τῆς τῶν ἱππέων
ἥττης. καταντησάντων δὲ καὶ τῶν περὶ τὸν
Εὐμενῆ περὶ λύχνων ἁφὰς συνελθόντες ἐβουλεύοντο
6τί χρὴ πράττειν. οἱ μὲν οὖν σατράπαι τὴν
ταχίστην ἔφησαν δεῖν ἀποχωρεῖν εἰς τὰς ἄνω
σατραπείας, ὁ δ᾿ Εὐμενὴς ἀπεφαίνετο μένειν καὶ
διαγωνίζεσθαι, τῆς μὲν τῶν ἐναντίων φάλαγγος
1ποταμόυ Geer, cp. § 5, λόφον Reiske: τόπον.2ἠναγκάσθη συνεῖξαι Wesseling: ἠναγκάσθησαν εἶξαι.346Book XIX

flee. They were not to be checked in their charge 317/16 b.c. and engaged the entire opposing phalanx, showing themselves so superior in skill and strength that of their own men they lost not one, but of those who opposed them they slew over five thousand and routed the entire force of foot soldiers, whose numbers were many times their own. When Eumenes learned that his baggage train was taken but that the cavalry force of Peucestes was not far away, he tried to collect all his mounted men and renew the cavalry battle against Antigonus; for he hoped, if superior in battle, not only to save his own baggage, but also to capture that of the enemy. Since Peucestes, however, would not listen to him but on the contrary retired still farther to a certain river, and since night was now coming on, Eumenes was forced to yield to the situation. Antigonus divided his cavalry into two bodies with one of which he himself lay in wait for Eumenes, watching for his first move; but the other he gave to Pithon and ordered him to attack the Silver Shields now that they had been cut off from their cavalry support. When Pithon promptly carried out his orders, the Macedonians formed themselves into a square and withdrew safely to the river, where they accused Peucestes of being responsible for the defeat of the mounted forces. After Eumenes joined them at about the time for lighting lamps, they took counsel together what should be done. The satraps, indeed, said that it was necessary to retire to the upper satrapies as rapidly as possible, but Eumenes declared that they should stay and fight it out, for the phalanx of the



347