Diodorus of Sicily
2ποιήσωμεν τὰς κατὰ μέρος πράξεις. Ἁρπάλου
γὰρ τὸν ἐκ τῆς Ἀσίας δρασμὸν ποιησαμένου καὶ
καταπλεύσαντος εἰς Κρήτην μετὰ τῶν μισθοφόρων,
καθάπερ ἐν τῇ πρὸ ταύτης βύβλῳ δεδηλώκαμεν,
Θίβρων, εἷς τῶν φίλων νομιζόμενος,1 δολοφονήσας
τὸν Ἅρπαλον κύριος ἐγένετο τῶν τε χρημάτων καὶ
3τῶν στρατιωτῶν, ὄντων ἑπτακισχιλίων. ὁμοίως
δὲ καὶ τῶν νεῶν ἐγκρατὴς γενόμενος καὶ τοὺς
στρατιώτας εἰς ταύτας θέμενος κατέπλευσεν εἰς τὴν
χώραν τῶν Κυρηναίων. ἀνειληφὼς δὲ μεθ᾿ αὑτοῦ2
τοὺς ἐκ τῆς Κυρήνης φυγάδας καὶ τούτους ἔχων
καθηγουμένους τῆς ἐπιβολῆς3 διὰ τὴν τῶν τόπων
ἐμπειρίαν, ἀπαντησάντων τῶν Κυρηναίων καὶ
μάχης γενομένης ὁ Θίβρων νικήσας πολλοὺς μὲν
4ἀπέκτεινεν, οὐκ ὀλίγους δ᾿ ἐζώγρησε. κυριεύσας
δὲ τοῦ λιμένος καὶ πολιορκήσας καὶ καταπληξάμενος
τοὺς Κυρηναίους ἠνάγκασεν ὁμολογίας ποιήσασθαι
ὥστε αὐτοὺς δοῦναι ἀργυρίου τάλαντα
πεντακόσια, τῶν δὲ ἁρμάτων τὰ ἡμίση πρὸς τὰς
5στρατείας συνεκπέμπειν. διεπρεσβεύσατο δὲ καὶ
πρὸς τὰς ἄλλας πόλεις, ἀξιῶν συμμαχεῖν ὡς
μέλλοντος αὐτοῦ τὴν πλησιόχωρον Λιβύην καταστρέφεσθαι.
διήρπασε δὲ καὶ τῶν ἐμπόρων τὰ
καταληφθέντα χρήματα ἐν τῷ λιμένι καὶ τοῖς
στρατιώταις εἰς διαρπαγὴν ἔδωκεν, ἐκκαλούμενος
αὐτῶν τὰς προθυμίας εἰς τὸν πόλεμον.
1Hertlein reads ὀνομαζόμενος for νομιζόμενος.2μεθ᾿ αὑτοῦ Dindorf: μετ᾿ αὐτοῦ.3ἐπιβολῆς Wesseling and Dindorf: ἐπιβουλῆς MSS.,
Fischer.68Book XVIII

several series of events.1 When Harpalus had fled 322 b.c. from Asia and sailed to Crete with the mercenaries, as we have shown in the preceding Book,2 Thibron, who was regarded as one of his friends, treacherously murdered him and gained control of the money and the soldiers, who numbered seven thousand.3 He also took possession of the ships, embarked the soldiers on them, and sailed to the land of the Cyrenians. He had taken with him the exiles from Cyrenê and was using them as instructors in his project because of their knowledge of the locality. When the Cyrenians opposed him and a battle took place, Thibron was victorious, killing many and taking captive no small number. By gaining control of the harbour and besieging and frightening the Cyrenians, he forced them to come to terms, and to agree to give him five hundred talents of silver and to contribute half of their chariots to aid his campaign. He sent envoys, moreover, to the other cities, asking them to make an alliance on the ground that he was going to subdue the neighbouring parts of Libya. He also treated as spoil the property of the traders that had been captured in the port and gave it to his soldiers as plunder, calling forth their zeal for the war.
1The battle of Crannon probably took place in September, 322.(Plutarch, Camillus, 19; W. B. Dinsmoor, Archons of Athens in the Hellenistic Age, 329), but the settlement of Athens may not have been completed for several years (Cambridge Ancient History, 6. 458 ff.).2Cp. Book 17. 108. 4–8.3According to Pausanias (2. 33. 4), Harpalus was murdered either by his slaves or by a Macedonian named Pausanias. For other accounts of Thibron’s campaign against Cyrenê and his final defeat by Ptolemy cp. Arrian, FGrH, 156. 9. 16–19; Justin, 13. 6. 18; Marmor Parium for 322/1. In Book 17. 108. 6 and in Arrian the number of mercenaries is given as six thousand.69