Diodorus of Sicily
51. Ὁ δὲ Κάσανδρος ὁρῶν περὶ τὸν Ἀριστόνουν
ὑπάρχον ἀξίωμα διὰ τὴν παρ᾿ Ἀλεξάνδρου προαγωγὴν
καὶ σπεύδων ἐκ ποδῶν ποιεῖν τοὺς δυναμένους
νεωτερίζειν ἐπανεῖλε τὸν ἄνδρα διὰ τῶν
Κρατεύα συγγενῶν. προετρέψατο δὲ καὶ τοὺς οἰκείους
τῶν ἀνῃρημένων ὑπ᾿ Ὀλυμπιάδος ἐν κοινῇ
τῶν Μακεδόνων ἐκκλησίᾳ κατηγορεῖν τῆς προειρημένης
2γυναικός. ὧν ποιησάντων τὸ προσταχθὲν
καὶ τῆς μὲν Ὀλυμπιάδος οὔτε παρούσης οὔτε
ἐχούσης τοὺς ἀπολογησομένους οἱ μὲν Μακεδόνες
κατεγίνωσκον αὐτῆς θάνατον, ὁ δὲ Κάσανδρος
πέμψας τινὰς τῶν φίλων πρὸς τὴν Ὀλυμπιάδα
συνεβούλευε λάθρᾳ φυγεῖν, ἐπαγγελλόμενος αὐτῇ
ναῦν παρασκευάσειν καὶ διακομιεῖν εἰς τὰς Ἀθήνας.
3τοῦτο δ᾿ ἔπραττεν οὐ τῆς σωτηρίας προνοούμενος,
ἀλλ᾿ ἵνα καθ᾿ αὑτῆς φυγὴν καταγνοῦσα καὶ διαφθαρεῖσα
κατὰ τὸν πλοῦν δόξῃ δικαίᾳ περιπεπτωκέναι
τιμωρίᾳ· εὐλαβεῖτο γὰρ ἅμα καὶ τὸ περὶ αὐτὴν
4ἀξίωμα καὶ τὸ τῶν Μακεδόνων εὐμετάβολον. τῆς
δὲ Ὀλυμπιάδος οὐ φαμένης φεύξεσθαι, τοὐναντίον
δ᾿ ἑτοίμης οὔσης ἐν πᾶσι Μακεδόσι κριθῆναι ὁ
Κάσανδρος φοβηθεὶς μήποτε τὸ πλῆθος ἀκοῦον τῆς
βασιλίσσης ἀπολογουμένης καὶ τῶν Ἀλεξάνδρου
καὶ Φιλίππου πρὸς ἅπαν τὸ1 ἔθνος εὐεργεσιῶν
ἀναμιμνησκόμενον μετανοήσῃ, διακοσίους τῶν
στρατιωτῶν τοὺς ἐπιτηδειοτάτους ἀπέστειλε πρὸς
5αὐτήν, προστάξας ἀνελεῖν τὴν ταχίστην. οὗτοι
μὲν οὖν παρεισπεσόντες εἰς τὴν βασιλικὴν οἰκίαν,
ὡς ἴδον τὴν Ὀλυμπιάδα, καταιδεσθέντες τὸ περὶ
αὐτὴν ἀξίωμα πάλιν ἀπεχώρησαν ἄπρακτοι· οἱ δὲ

1τὸ added by Dindorf.368Book XIX
51. Cassander, seeing that Aristonoüs was respected 316 b.c. because of the preferment he had received from Alexander,1 and being anxious to put out of the way any who were able to lead a revolt, caused his death through the agency of the kinsfolk of Cratevas. He also urged the relatives of those whom Olympias had slain to accuse the aforesaid woman in the general assembly of the Macedonians. They did as he had ordered; and, although Olympias was not present and had none to speak in her defence, the Macedonians condemned her to death.2 Cassander, however, sent some of his friends to Olympias advising her to escape secretly, promising to provide a ship for her and to carry her to Athens. He acted thus, not for the purpose of securing her safety, but in order that she, condemning herself to exile and meeting death on the voyage, might seem to have met a punishment that was deserved; for he was acting with caution both because of her rank and because of the fickleness of the Macedonians. As Olympias, however, refused to flee but on the contrary was ready to be judged before all the Macedonians, Cassander, fearing that the crowd might change its mind if it heard the queen defend herself and was reminded of all the benefits conferred on the entire nation by Alexander and Philip, sent to her two hundred soldiers who were best fitted for such a task, ordering them to slay her as soon as possible. They, accordingly, broke into the royal house, but when they beheld Olympias, overawed by her exalted rank, they withdrew with their task unfulfilled. But the relatives of her victims,


1He had been one of the officers of the Bodyguard (Arrian, Anabasis, 6. 28. 4).2For the death of Olympias cp. Justin, 14. 6, 6–12, Pausanias, 9. 7. 2. Her death took place in the spring of 316.369