Diodorus of Sicily

ἐπὶ πᾶσι δὲ καὶ τὰ τῶν πειρατῶν πόρια
καὶ τὰ τῶν ἐμπόρων καὶ ἀγοραίων, ὑπεράγοντα
τῷ πλήθει, καθάπερ προείρηται, ὥστε πάντα τὸν
ἀνὰ μέσον τόπον τῆς τε νήσου καὶ τῆς ἀντικειμένης
παραλίας συμπεπληρωμένον φαίνεσθαι τοῖς πλοίοις
καὶ πολὺν φόβον καὶ κατάπληξιν παρέχεσθαι τοῖς
2ἀπὸ τῆς πόλεως θεωροῦσιν. οἱ μὲν γὰρ στρατιῶται
τῶν Ῥοδίων διειληφότες τὰ τείχη τὸν ἐπίπλουν
ἐκαραδόκουν τῶν πολεμίων, πρεσβῦται δὲ καὶ γυναῖκες
ἀπὸ τῶν οἰκιῶν ἀφεώρων, οὔσης1 τῆς πόλεως
θεατροειδοῦς, πάντες δὲ2 τό τε μέγεθος τοῦ στόλου
καὶ τὴν αὐγὴν τῶν ἀποστιλβόντων ὅπλων καταπληττόμενοι
περὶ τῶν ὅλων οὐ μετρίως ἠγωνίων.
3εἶθ᾿ ὁ μὲν Δημήτριος κατέπλευσεν εἰς τὴν νῆσον,
ἀποβιβάσας δὲ τὴν δύναμιν κατεστρατοπέδευσεν
πλησίον τῆς πόλεως, ἐκτὸς βέλους ποιησάμενος τὴν
παρεμβολήν. εὐθὺς δὲ τῶν πειρατῶν καὶ τῶν ἄλλων
τοὺς εὐθέτους ἐξέπεμψε πορθήσοντας τὴν νῆσον
4καὶ κατὰ γῆν καὶ κατὰ θάλατταν. ἐδενδροτόμησε
δὲ καὶ τὴν πλησίον χώραν καὶ καθεῖλε τὰς
ἐπαύλεις, ἐξ ὧν ὠχύρωσε τὴν στρατοπεδείαν, περιλαβὼν
τριπλῷ χάρακι καὶ σταυρώμασι πυκνοῖς καὶ
μεγάλοις, ὥστε τὴν τῶν πολεμίων βλάβην γίνεσθαι
τῶν ἰδίων ἀσφάλειαν. μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα πάσῃ τῇ
δυνάμει καὶ τοῖς πληρώμασιν ἔχωσεν ἐν ὀλίγαις
ἡμέραις τὸ μεταξὺ τῆς πόλεως διαλεῖπον πρὸς τὴν
ἔκβασιν καὶ κατεσκεύασε λιμένα ταῖς ναυσὶν
ἀρκοῦντα.
84. Οἱ δὲ Ῥόδιοι μέχρι μέν τινος πρέσβεις ἐκπέμποντες
ἠξίουν μηδὲν πρᾶξαι κατὰ τῆς πόλεως


1δὲ after οὔσης omitted by Dindorf.2δὲ added by Dindorf.360Book XX

also the cargo-ships of the pirates and of the merchants 305 b.c. and traders, which as we have already said, were exceedingly numerous, so that the whole space between the island and the opposite shore was seen to be filled with his vessels, which brought great fear and panic to those who were watching from the city. For the soldiers of the Rhodians, occupying their several positions on the walls, were awaiting the approach of the hostile fleet, and the old men and women were looking on from their homes, since the city is shaped like a theatre1; and all, being terrorstricken at the magnitude of the fleet and the gleam of the shining armour, were not a little anxious about the final outcome. Then Demetrius sailed to the island; and after disembarking his army, he took position near the city, setting up his camp out of range of missiles. He at once sent out fit and proper men from the pirates and others to plunder the island both by land and by sea. He also cut down the trees in the region near by and destroyed the farm buildings, and with this material he fortified the camp, surrounding it with a triple palisade and with great, close-set stockades, so that the loss suffered by the enemy became a protection for his own men. After this, using the whole army and the crews, he in a few days closed with a mole the space between the city and the exit, and made a port large enough for his ships.
84. For a time the Rhodians kept sending envoys and asking him to do nothing irreparable against the

1Cp. Book 19. 45. 3.361