Diodorus of Sicily
Τάδε ἔνεστιν ἐν τῇ ἐννεακαιδεκάτῃ τῶν
Διοδώρου Βύβλων
Τὰ πραχθέντα τοῖς Ἀντιγόνου καὶ Κασάνδρου στρατηγοῖς
περὶ τὴν Ἑλλάδα.
Κασάνδρου στρατεία εἰς τὴν Αἰτωλίαν καὶ τοὺς κατὰ
τὸν Ἀδρίαν τόπους.
Ἅλωσις περὶ Καρίαν τῆς ἀποσταλείσης ὑπὸ Κασάνδρου
δυνάμεως.
Ὡς οἱ φυγάδες τῶν Συρακουσίων Ἀκραγαντίνους
πείσαντες πολεμεῖν Ἀγαθοκλεῖ στρατηγὸν ἐκ Λακεδαίμονος
Ἀκρότατον μετεπέμψαντο.
Ὡς οὗτος μὲν παραλαβὼν τὴν ἡγεμονίαν τυραννικῶς1
ἄρχων διεγένετο, οἱ δ᾿ Ἀκραγαντῖνοι τὴν εἰρήνην ἐποιήσαντο
πρὸς τὸν δυνάστην.
Τὰ πραχθέντα Ῥωμαίοις περὶ τὴν Ἰαπυγίαν.
Καλλαντιανῶν ἀπόστασις ἀπὸ Λυσιμάχου καὶ τὰ
συμβάντα τοῖς ἐπὶ τὴν βοήθειαν ἀποσταλεῖσιν ὑπ᾿
Ἀντιγόνου.
Ὡς Φίλιππος ἀποσταλεὶς ὑπὸ Κασάνδρου στρατηγὸς
εἰς τὴν Αἰτωλίαν ἐνίκησεν Αἰτωλοὺς ἅμα καὶ τοὺς
Ἠπειρώτας.
Ὡς Ῥωμαῖοι μάχῃ νικήσαντες Σαμνίτας μετ᾿ ὀλίγον
Καμπανοὺς ἀποστάντας προσηγάγοντο.
1τυραννικῶς Rhodoman: καὶ εἰρηνικῶς.2Book XIX
Contents of the Nineteenth Book of Diodorus
The operations of the generals of Antigonus and of Cassander in Greece (chap. 66).
Cassander’s campaign in Aetolia and the country about the Adriatic (chaps. 67–68).
The capture in Caria of the army sent out by Cassander (chap. 68).1
How the Syracusan exiles, after persuading the people of Acragas to fight against Agathocles, sent for a general from Lacedaemon, Acrotatus (chap. 70).
How Acrotatus accepted the generalship and ruled as a tyrant; and how the Acragantines made peace with the dynast (chap. 71).
The Roman operations in Iapygia (chap. 72).
The revolt of the Callantians from Lysimachus, and what befell those who were dispatched to their aid by Antigonus (chap. 73).
How Philip, who had been sent as general into Aetolia by Cassander, defeated at one time the peoples of Aetolia and Epirus (chap. 74).2
How the Romans defeated the Samnites in battle, and a little later won back the Campanians who had revolted (chap. 76).
1The table of contents omits chap. 69: Antigonus’ preparations against Ptolemy.2Chap. 75 is omitted: operations of Antigonus in Asia Minor, and of Cassander in Greece.3