Diodorus of Sicily

δὲ ὀκτακοσίους, βέλη δὲ παντοδαπὰ καὶ καταπέλτας
ὀξυβελεῖς τε καὶ πετροβόλους καὶ τὴν ἄλλην χορηγίαν
2πᾶσαν τὴν ἀνήκουσαν πρὸς πολιορκίαν. ἄφνω
δὲ προσπεσὼν τῇ πόλει καὶ τὸν πολὺν ὄχλον ἀπολαβὼν1
ἐπὶ τῆς χώρας εἴχετο τῆς πολιορκίας καὶ
τοὺς ἐν τῇ πόλει καταπληξάμενος ἠνάγκαζε δέχεσθαι
φρουράν. οἱ δὲ Κυζικηνοὶ παραδόξου τῆς
ἐπιθέσεως γενομένης καὶ τῶν μὲν πλείστων ἐπὶ τῆς
χώρας ἀπειλημμένων, ὀλίγων δ᾿ ὄντων τῶν ὑπολελειμμένων
ἀπαράσκευοι παντελῶς ὑπῆρχον πρὸς
3τὴν πολιορκίαν. ὅμως δὲ κρίναντες ἀντέχεσθαι τῆς
ἐλευθερίας φανερῶς μὲν πρέσβεις ἐξέπεμψαν τοὺς
διαλεξομένους τῷ Ἀρριδαίῳ λῦσαι τὴν πολιορκίαν·
ποιήσειν γὰρ πάντα τὴν πόλιν Ἀρριδαίῳ πλὴν τοῦ
δέξασθαι φρουράν· λάθρᾳ δὲ τοὺς νέους ἀθροίζοντες
καὶ τῶν οἰκετῶν τοὺς εὐθέτους ἐπιλεγόμενοι καθώπλιζον
καὶ τὸ τεῖχος ἀνεπλήρουν τῶν ἀμυνομένων.2
4τοῦ δὲ Ἀρριδαίου βιαζομένου δέχεσθαι
φρουρὰν ἔφησαν βούλεσθαι τῷ δήμῳ προσανενεγκεῖν
περὶ τούτου. συγχωρήσαντος δὲ τοῦ σατράπου
λαβόντες ἀνοχὴν ταύτην τε τὴν ἡμέραν καὶ τὴν ἐπιοῦσαν
νύκτα βέλτιον παρεσκευάσαντο τὰ πρὸς τὴν
5πολιορκίαν. ὁ δ᾿ Ἀρριδαῖος καταστρατηγηθεὶς
καὶ τὸν οἰκεῖον ἑαυτῷ προέμενος καιρὸν διεσφάλη
τῆς ἐλπίδος· οἱ γὰρ Κυζικηνοὶ πόλιν ἔχοντες
ὀχυρὰν καὶ παντελῶς εὐφύλακτον ἀπὸ τῆς γῆς διὰ
τὸ χερρόνησον αὐτὴν εἶναι καὶ θαλαττοκρατοῦντες
6ῥᾳδίως ἠμύνοντο τοὺς πολεμίους. μετεπέμποντο
δὲ καὶ παρὰ Βυζαντίων στρατιώτας καὶ βέλη καὶ
τἄλλα τὰ χρήσιμα πρὸς τὴν πολιορκίαν· ὧν ἅπαντα


1ἀπολαβὼν Wesseling, καταλαβὼν Rhodoman: ἀναλαβὼν.2Dindorf reads ἀμυνουμένων.152Book XVIII

bowmen and slingers. He had also eight
hundred 319 b.c. horsemen, all kinds of missiles, catapults both for bolts and for stones, and all the other equipment proper for storming a city. After falling suddenly upon the city and intercepting a great
multitude in the outlying territory, he applied himself to the siege and, by terrifying those who were in the city, tried to force them to receive a garrison. Since the attack had been unexpected, most of the Cyziceni had been cut off in the country; and with only a few people left in the city, they were completely unprepared for the siege. Deciding, nevertheless, to maintain
their freedom, they openly sent envoys to confer with Arrhidaeus about raising the siege, saying that
the city would do anything for him except receive a garrison; but secretly, after assembling the
young men and selecting the slaves who were suitable for the purpose, they armed them and manned the wall with defenders. When Arrhidaeus insisted that
the city admit a garrison, the envoys said that they wished to consult the people in regard to this.
As the satrap agreed, they obtained a truce, and during that day and the following night they improved
their preparations for withstanding the siege. Arrhidaeus, outwitted, missed his opportunity and was
balked of his expected success; for since the Cyziceni possessed a city that was strong and very easy to defend from attacks by land thanks to its being a peninsula,
and since they controlled the sea, they easily warded off the enemy. Moreover, they sent for soldiers
from Byzantium and for missiles and whatever else was of use for withstanding the attack. When the
people of
153