Diodorus of Sicily

συνεχώρει, ἑαυτὴν δ᾿ ἀνακρεμάσασα τῇ ζώνῃ
κατέστρεψε τὸν βίον, οὔτε δακρύσασα τὴν αὑτῆς
τύχην οὔτε τῷ μεγέθει τῶν συμπτωμάτων ταπεινωθεῖσα.
8Ὀλυμπιὰς δὲ τούτων διαφθαρέντων
ἀνεῖλε μὲν τὸν Νικάνορα τὸν ἀδελφὸν τοῦ Κασάνδρου,
κατέστρεψε δὲ τὸν Ἰόλλου τάφον, μετερχομένη,
καθάπερ ἔφησε, τὸν Ἀλεξάνδρου θάνατον,
ἐπέλεξε δὲ καὶ τῶν Κασάνδρου φίλων τοὺς ἐπιφανεστάτους
ἑκατὸν Μακεδόνας, οὓς ἅπαντας ἀπέσφαξεν.
9ἐν τοιούτοις δὲ παρανομήμασι πληροῦσα
τὸν ἑαυτῆς θυμὸν ταχὺ πολλοὺς τῶν Μακεδόνων
ἐποίησε μισῆσαι τὴν ὠμότητα· πάντες γὰρ ἀνεμιμνήσκοντο
τῶν Ἀντιπάτρου λόγων, ὃς καθάπερ
χρησμῳδῶν ἐπὶ τῆς τελευτῆς παρεκελεύσατο μηδέποτε
συγχωρῆσαι γυναικὶ τῆς βασιλείας
προστατῆσαι.
Τὰ μὲν οὖν κατὰ Μακεδονίαν τοῦτον τὸν τρόπον
διοικηθέντα πρόδηλον εἶχε τὴν ἐσομένην
μεταβολήν.
12. Κατὰ δὲ τὴν Ἀσίαν Εὐμενὴς μὲν ἔχων τοὺς
ἀργυράσπιδας Μακεδόνας καὶ τὸν ἀφηγούμενον αὐτῶν
Ἀντιγένην παρεχείμασε μὲν τῆς Βαβυλωνίας
ἐν ταῖς ὀνομαζομέναις Καρῶν κώμαις, πρὸς δὲ
Σέλευκον καὶ Πίθωνα πρέσβεις ἀπέστειλεν, ἀξιῶν
βοηθεῖν τοῖς βασιλεῦσι καὶ μετ᾿ αὐτοῦ συναγωνίσασθαι
2πρὸς Ἀντίγονον. τούτων δ᾿ ὁ μὲν Πίθων τῆς



258Book XIX

as well as circumstances permitted, then ended her 317 b.c. life by hanging herself with her girdle, neither weeping for her own fate nor humbled by the weight of her misfortunes.1 After these two had been made away with, Olympias killed Nicanor, Cassander’s brother, and overturned the tomb of Iollas, avenging, as she said, the death of Alexander.2 She also selected the hundred most prominent Macedonians from among the friends of Cassander and slaughtered them all. But by glutting her rage with such atrocities, she soon caused many of the Macedonians to hate her ruthlessness; for all of them remembered the words of Antipater, who, as if uttering a prophecy on his death bed,3 advised them never to permit a woman to hold first place in the kingdom.
This situation, then, in the internal affairs of Macedonia gave clear indication of the impending revolution.4
12. In Asia5 Eumenes with the Macedonian Silver Shields and their commander Antigenes wintered in the villages of Babylonia known as the villages of the Carians.6 He sent embassies to Seleucus and Pithon asking them to aid the kings and to join him in the struggle against Antigonus. Of these men, Pithon





1Eurydicê died during the summer or fall of 317. She
was later given royal burial at Aegae by Cassander
(chap. 52. 5). For her death cp. Aelian, Varia Historia,
13. 36.2For the reports that Alexander was poisoned by order of Antipater cp. Book 17. 118, 1–2; Plutarch, Alexander, 77. 1; Curtius, 10. 10. 14–19; Arrian, Anabasis, 7. 27. Iollas was another brother of Cassander.3Cp. Book 18. 1. 1.4Continued in chap. 35.5Continued and in part repeated from Book 18. 73. 4.6The winter of 318/17. The villages of the Carians (or of the Carae) are probably the same as the villages “called the Carae” which Alexander passed through (Book 17. 110. 3) and are not to be identified with the Carae of chap. 91.1, which is the well-known city of Carrhae in Mesopotamia (Weissbach in P.-W., Realencyclopädie, 10. 1925, s.v. “Κάραι”).259