Diodorus of Sicily

καὶ τὰς ἡγεμονίας ἀναβιβάσαι καὶ τὴν δύναμιν
ἰσχυροποιῆσαι τῷ τε πλήθει καὶ ταῖς ἀρεταῖς
3τῶν ἡγεμόνων. συντελέσας δὲ τὰ δεδογμένα καὶ
μετὰ πολλῆς ἐπιμελείας περὶ τῶν ἀριστείων1 κρίσιν
ποιησάμενος καὶ πολλοὺς ἀπὸ τῆς μεγάλης ἡγεμονίας
ἐπὶ μεγάλας ἐξουσίας ἀναβιβάσας πάντας
τοὺς ἡγεμόνας εἰς ἀξίωμα μεῖζον καὶ στοργὴν ἰσχυρὰν
4πρὸς ἑαυτὸν προήγαγεν. ἐπεμελήθη δὲ καὶ
τῆς ἰδιωτικῆς τῶν στρατιωτῶν διατάξεως καὶ
πολλὰ πρὸς τὴν εὐχρηστίαν ἐπινοησάμενος ἐπὶ τὸ
κρεῖττον διωρθώσατο. κατασκευάσας δὲ πᾶσαν τὴν
στρατιὰν εὐνοίᾳ τε πρὸς τὸν ἡγούμενον διαφέρουσαν
καὶ πρὸς τὰ παραγγελλόμενα πειθαρχοῦσαν,
ἔτι δὲ ταῖς ἀνδραγαθίαις ὑπερβάλλουσαν, ἐπὶ τοὺς
ὑπολειπομένους ἀγῶνας ὥρμησεν.
5Εἰς δὲ τὴν Σουσιανὴν καταντήσας ἀκινδύνως παρέλαβε
τὰ περιβόητα ἐν Σούσοις βασίλεια, ἑκουσίως
Ἀβουλεύτου2 τοῦ σατράπου παραδόντος αὐτῷ
τὴν πόλιν, ὡς μὲν ἔνιοι γεγράφασι, προστάξαντος
Δαρείου τοῖς πεπιστευμένοις ὑπ᾿ αὐτοῦ. τοῦτο δὲ
πρᾶξαι τὸν βασιλέα τῶν Περσῶν, ὅπως ὁ μὲν
Ἀλέξανδρος εἰς περισπασμοὺς ἀξιολόγους καὶ παραλήψεις
ἐπιφανεστάτων3 πόλεων καὶ θησαυρῶν μεγάλων
ἐμπεσὼν ἐν ἀσχολίαις ὑπάρχῃ, ὁ δὲ Δαρεῖος
τῇ φυγῇ λαμβάνῃ χρόνον εἰς τὴν τοῦ πολέμου
παρασκευήν.
66. Ὁ δὲ Ἀλέξανδρος παραλαβὼν τὴν πόλιν καὶ
τοὺς ἐν τοῖς βασιλείοις θησαυροὺς εὗρεν ἀσήμου
χρυσοῦ καὶ ἀργύρου πλείω τῶν τετρακισμυρίων



1ἀριστείων F; ἀρίστων RX.2Ἀβουλήτου F.3ἐπιφανεστάτων Reiske; ἐπιφανεστάτας codd., which may
well be right.304Book XVII

officers and to strengthen the forces by the number 330/29 b.c. and the ability of the commanders. This he effected. He scrutinized closely the reports of good conduct and promoted many from a high military command to an even higher responsibility, so that by giving all the commanders greater prestige he bound them to himself by strong ties of affection. He also examined the situation of the individual soldiers and introduced many improvements by considering what was useful. He brought the whole force up to an outstanding devotion to its commander and obedience to his commands, and to a high degree of effectiveness, looking toward the battles to come.1
From there he entered Susianê without opposition and took over the fabulous palace of the kings. The satrap Abuleutes2 surrendered the city to him voluntarily, and some have written that he did this in compliance with orders given by Dareius to his trusted officials. The king of Persia hoped by this policy, it is suggested, that Alexander would be kept busy with dazzling distractions and the acquisition of brilliant cities and huge treasures, while he, Dareius, won time by his flight to prepare for a renewed warfare.3
66. Alexander entered the city and found the treasure in the palace to include more than forty thousand talents of gold and silver bullion, which the



1Curtius (5. 2. 2–7) describes these measures in more detail, but without satisfying our desire for specific military information. It may be that Alexander was re-organizing his dispositions in view of the impending mountain and steppe warfare, requiring increased fire-power and mobility (Rüstow-Köchly, op. cit. 252).2Curtius (5. 2. 8) and Arrian (3. 16. 9) give his name as Abulites, and say that Alexander left him in Susa as governor.3This rumour is not mentioned by the other Alexander historians, and its source is unknown.305