Diodorus of Sicily

κατέκοψε τῶν βαρβάρων ὑπὲρ τὰς ὀκτὼ
7μυριάδας. τὸ μὲν οὖν ἔθνος τῶν ὀνομαζομένων
Βραχμάνων τοιαύταις περιέπεσε συμφοραῖς· τῶν δὲ
λοιπῶν μεθ᾿ ἱκετηριῶν δεηθέντων τοὺς αἰτιωτάτους
κολάσας τοὺς λοιποὺς ἀπέλυσε1 τῶν ἐγκλημάτων.
ὁ δὲ βασιλεὺς Σάμβος μετὰ τριάκοντα ἐλεφάντων
φυγὼν εἰς τὴν πέραν τοῦ Ἰνδοῦ χώραν διέφυγε τὸν
κίνδυνον.
103. Τῆς δ᾿ ἐσχάτης τῶν Βραχμάνων πόλεως, ἣν
ὀνομάζουσιν Ἁρματήλια,2 πεφρονηματισμένης ἐπ᾿
ἀνδρείᾳ καὶ3 δυσχωρίαις ἀπέστειλεν ὀλίγους τῶν ψιλῶν,
προστάξας ἐξάπτεσθαι τῶν πολεμίων καὶ ἐὰν
2ἐπεξίωσιν4 ὑποφεύγειν. οὗτοι μὲν οὖν ὄντες πεντακόσιοι
καὶ προσμαχόμενοι τοῖς τείχεσι κατεφρονήθησαν.
ἐπεξελθόντων δ᾿ ἐκ τῆς πόλεως στρατιωτῶν
τρισχιλίων προσποιηθέντες καταπεπλῆχθαι πρὸς φυγὴν
3ὥρμησαν. ὁ δὲ βασιλεὺς μετ᾿ ὀλίγον ὑποστὰς
τοὺς διώκοντας τῶν βαρβάρων καὶ μάχην καρτερὰν
συστησάμενος οὓς μὲν ἀπέκτεινε τῶν βαρβάρων,
οὓς δ᾿ ἐζώγρησε.
Τῶν δὲ μετὰ τοῦ βασιλέως οὐκ ὀλίγοι τρωθέντες
4εἰς τοὺς ἐσχάτους ἦλθον κινδύνους· ὁ γὰρ τῶν βαρβάρων
σίδηρος5 κεχρισμένος ἦν φαρμάκου θανασίμου
δυνάμει, ᾗ πεποιθότες κατέβησαν εἰς τὴν διὰ
τῆς μάχης κρίσιν. κατεσκεύαστο δὲ ἡ τοῦ φαρμάκου





1ἀπέλυσεν ἐν εἰρήνῃ ἀφεὶς XQ.2Ἅρματα RX. Cp., however, chap. 103. 8.3καὶ ἐν F.4ὑπεξίωσιν X.5ἐπεὶ καὶ ὁ ἐν τοῖς βέλεσι σίδηρος F.414Book XVII

after destroying the cities, killed more than eighty 326/5 b.c. thousand of the natives.1 He inflicted a similar disaster upon the tribe of the Brahmins, as they are called; the survivors came supplicating him with branches in their hands, and punishing the most guilty he forgave the rest. King Sambus fled with thirty elephants into the country beyond the Indus and escaped.
103. The last city of the Brahmins, called Harmatelia,2 was proud of the valour of its inhabitants and of the strength of its location. Thither he sent a small force of mobile troops with orders to engage the enemy and retire if they came out against them. These were five hundred in number, and were despised when they attacked the walls.3 Some three thousand soldiers issued out of the city, whereupon Alexander’s task force pretended to be frightened and fled. Presently the king launched an unexpected attack against the pursuing natives and charging them furiously killed some of the natives, and captured others.
A number of the king’s forces were wounded, and these met a new and serious danger.4 The Brahmins had smeared their weapons with a drug of mortal effect; that was their source of confidence when they joined the issue of battle. The power of the drug




1According to Curtius (9. 8. 15), this was the figure given by Cleitarchus.2The name appears also as Harmata (Stephen of Byzantium). Cp. note 2 on the opposite page.3Curtius, 9. 8. 17–19 (“at the extremity of the realm of Sambus”); Arrian. 6. 16. 5. The same figures are given by Curtius, who identifies the “five hundred” as Agriani.4Curtius, 9. 8. 20–28; Justin, 12. 10. 1–3 (in the realms of King Ambus).415