Diodorus of Sicily

καταδουλούμενοι· πρός τε τὸ παράδοξον τῆς
τύχης, εἰ συμβαίη τὴν πόλιν ἁλῶναι, κατελείπετ᾿
αὐτοῖς πρὸς παραίτησιν τῆς τηρηθείσης ὑπ᾿ αὐτῶν
φιλίας ἀνάμνησις. ταῦτα μὲν οὖν τοῖς Ῥοδίοις
ἐπράχθη συνετῶς.
94. Δημητρίου δὲ διὰ τῶν μεταλλέων ὑπορύξαντος
τὸ τεῖχος τῶν αὐτομόλων τις ἐμήνυσε τοῖς
πολιορκουμένοις ὡς οἱ ταῖς ὑπονομαῖς χρώμενοι
2σχεδὸν ἐντός εἰσι τοῦ τείχους. διόπερ οἱ Ῥόδιοι
τάφρον ὀρύξαντες βαθεῖαν, παράλληλον τῷ δοκοῦντι
πεσεῖσθαι τείχει, ταχὺ καὶ αὐτοὶ ταῖς μεταλλείαις
χρώμενοι συνῆψαν ὑπὸ γῆν τοῖς ἐναντίοις καὶ διεκώλυσαν
3τῆς εἰς τοὔμπροσθεν πορείας. τῶν δὲ
διορυγμάτων παρ᾿ ἀμφοτέροις τηρουμένων ἐπεχείρησάν
τινες τῶν παρὰ τοῦ Δημητρίου διαφθείρειν
χρήμασι τὸν τεταγμένον ἐπὶ τῆς φυλακῆς ὑπὸ τῶν
Ῥοδίων Ἀθηναγόραν· οὗτος δ᾿ ἦν Μιλήσιος μὲν τὸ
γένος, ὑπὸ Πτολεμαίου δ᾿ ἐξαπεσταλμένος ἡγεμὼν
4τῶν μισθοφόρων. ἐπαγγειλάμενος δὲ προδώσειν
συνετάξαθ᾿ ἡμέραν καθ᾿ ἣν ἔδει παρὰ Δημητρίου
πεμφθῆναί τινα τῶν ἀξιολόγων ἡγεμόνων τὸν νυκτὸς
ἀναβησόμενον διὰ τοῦ ὀρύγματος εἰς τὴν
πόλιν, ὅπως κατασκέψηται τὸν τόπον τὸν μέλλοντα
5δέξασθαι τοὺς στρατιώτας. εἰς ἐλπίδας δὲ μεγάλας
ἀγαγὼν τοὺς περὶ Δημήτριον ἐμήνυσε τῇ βουλῇ·
καὶ πέμψαντος τοῦ βασιλέως τῶν περὶ αὑτὸν φίλων
Ἀλέξανδρον τὸν Μακεδόνα τοῦτον μὲν ἀναβάντα
διὰ τῆς διώρυχος συνέλαβον οἱ Ῥόδιοι, τὸν δ᾿
Ἀθηναγόραν ἐστεφάνωσαν χρυσῷ στεφάνῳ καὶ δωρεὰν
ἔδωκαν ἀργυρίου τάλαντα πέντε, σπεύδοντες
καὶ τῶν ἄλλων μισθοφόρων καὶ ξένων ἐκκαλεῖσθαι
τὴν πρὸς τὸν δῆμον εὔνοιαν.
392Book XX

constant in repaying favours; and as protection 304 b.c. against the sudden shift of fortune if the war should result in the capture of Rhodes, the Rhodians retained as a means of gaining mercy the memory of the friendship that they had preserved. These things, then, were done prudently by the Rhodians.
94. When Demetrius had undermined the wall by using his sappers, one of the deserters informed the besieged that those who were working underground were almost within the walls. Therefore the Rhodians by digging a deep trench parallel to the wall which was expected to collapse and by quickly undertaking mining operations themselves, made contact with their opponents underground and prevented them from advancing farther. Now the mines were closely watched by both sides, and some of Demetrius’ men tried to bribe Athenagoras, who had been given command of the guard by the Rhodians. This man was a Milesian by descent, sent by Ptolemy as commander of the mercenaries.1 Promising to turn traitor he set a day on which one of the ranking leaders should be sent from Demetrius to go by night through the mine up into the city in order to inspect the position where the soldiers would assemble. But after leading Demetrius on to great hopes, he disclosed the matter to the council; and when the king sent one of his friends, Alexander the Macedonian, the Rhodians captured him as he came up through the mine. They crowned Athenagoras with a golden crown and gave him a gift of five talents of silver, their object being to stimulate loyalty to the city on the part of the other men who were mercenaries and foreigners.
1Cp. chap. 88. 9.393