Diodorus of Sicily

Ὀλυνθίους. εἶθ᾿ οἱ μὲν Ὀλύνθιοι δύναμιν ἀξιόλογον
ἠθροικότες ἐπλεονέκτουν ἐν ταῖς μάχαις,
στρατιώτας πλείους ἔχοντες τῶν πολεμίων· οἱ δὲ
Λακεδαιμόνιοι δύναμιν ἀξιόλογον προχειρισάμενοι
κατέστησαν στρατηγὸν ἐπ᾿ αὐτῆς Τελευτίαν. οὗτος
δ᾿ ἦν ἀδελφὸς μὲν Ἀγησιλάου τοῦ βασιλέως,
θαυμαζόμενος δ᾿ ἐπ᾿ ἀρετῇ παρὰ τοῖς πολίταις.
2ἀναζεύξας οὖν μετὰ δυνάμεως ἐκ τῆς Πελοποννήσου
καὶ καταντήσας πλησίον τῆς Ὀλυνθίων
παρέλαβε τοὺς μετὰ Εὐδαμίδου στρατιώτας. γενόμενος
δὲ ἀξιόμαχος τὸ μὲν πρῶτον τὴν τῶν Ὀλυνθίων
χώραν ἐδῄωσε, καὶ συναγαγὼν πλῆθος λείας
ἐμέρισε τοῖς στρατιώταις· τῶν δὲ Ὀλυνθίων μετὰ
τῶν συμμάχων πανδημεὶ παραταξαμένων συνῆψε
μάχην. καὶ τὸ μὲν πρῶτον ἰσορρόπου τοῦ κινδύνου
γενομένου διεχωρίσθησαν· μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα γενομένης
μάχης ἰσχυρᾶς, αὐτός τε ὁ Τελευτίας ἔπεσε
λαμπρῶς ἀγωνισάμενος, καὶ τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων
ἀνῃρέθησαν πλείους τῶν χιλίων καὶ διακοσίων.
3τηλικαύτης δ᾿ εὐημερίας γενομένης τοῖς Ὀλυνθίοις,
οἱ μὲν Λακεδαιμόνιοι, βουλόμενοι διορθώσασθαι
τὸ γεγονὸς ἐλάττωμα, δυνάμεις ἁδροτέρας ἐκπέμπειν
παρεσκευάζοντο, οἱ δὲ Ὀλύνθιοι, νομίζοντες
μείζοσι δυνάμεσιν ἥξειν τοὺς Σπαρτιάτας καὶ τὸν
πόλεμον ἔσεσθαι πολυχρόνιον,1 σίτου τε παρασκευὰς
ἀξιολόγους ἐποιοῦντο καὶ παρὰ τῶν συμμάχων
στρατιώτας προσελαμβάνοντο.
22. Ἐπ᾿ ἄρχοντος δ᾿ Ἀθήνησι Δημοφίλου Ῥωμαῖοι
ἀντὶ τῶν ὑπάτων χιλιάρχους κατέστησαν
Πόπλιον Κορνήλιον, Λεύκιον Οὐεργίνιον, Λεύκιον
Παπίριον, Μάρκον Φούριον, Οὐαλέριον, Αὖλον

1πολυχρόνιον Wesseling: πολὺν χρόνον.6Book XV

the Olynthians, who had collected a considerable 382/1 b.c. force, had the better in the field because they had more soldiers than the enemy; but the Lacedaemonians, having made ready a considerable force, appointed Teleutias general in charge of it. Teleutias
was brother of King Agesilaüs and was greatly admired for his valour by his fellow citizens. He accordingly set out from the Peloponnese with an army and on arriving near the territory of the Olynthians took over the soldiers commanded by Eudamidas. Being now a match for the enemy, he began by plundering the Olynthian territory and dividing among his troops the booty that he had collected; but when the Olynthians and their allies in full force took the field, he gave battle. At first they drew apart after an even contest, but later a stubborn battle was fought in which Teleutias himself fell after a splendid fight and the Lacedaemonians lost more than twelve hundred men.1 After the Olynthians had met with so remarkable a success, the Lacedaemonians, wishing to repair the loss they had sustained, prepared to send out more numerous forces, while the Olynthians, judging that the Spartans would come with larger forces and that the war would last for a long time, prepared large supplies of grain and procured additional soldiers from their allies.
22. When Demophilus was archon at Athens, the 381/0 b.c. Romans elected as military tribunes with consular power Publius Cornelius, Lucius Verginius, Lucius Papirius, Marcus Furius, Valerius, Aulus Manlius, 
1See Xenophon, Hell. 5. 2. 37–3. 6.7