Diodorus of Sicily

ἅμα τῷ φωτὶ πρὸς τὴν ἐξ ἀρχῆς ἀποκατασταθῇ
τάξιν.
6Τὸ δὲ τοῦ θεοῦ ξόανον ἐκ σμαράγδων καί τινων
ἄλλων πολυτελῶν λίθων1 περιέχεται καὶ τὴν μαντείαν
ἰδιάζουσαν παντελῶς ποιεῖται. ἐπὶ νεὼς γὰρ
περιφέρεται χρυσῆς ὑπὸ ἱερέων ὀγδοήκοντα· οὗτοι
δ᾿ ἐπὶ τῶν ὤμων φέροντες τὸν θεὸν προάγουσιν
αὐτομάτως ὅπου2 ποτ᾿ ἂν ἄγῃ τὸ τοῦ θεοῦ νεῦμα
7τὴν πορείαν. συνακολουθεῖ δὲ πλῆθος παρθένων
καὶ γυναικῶν παιᾶνας ᾀδόντων κατὰ πᾶσαν τὴν
ὁδὸν καὶ πατρίῳ καθυμνούντων3 ᾠδῇ τὸν θεόν.
51. Τοῦ δ᾿ Ἀλεξάνδρου διὰ τῶν ἱερέων εἰσαχθέντος
εἰς τὸν νεὼν καὶ τὸν θεὸν κατανοήσαντος
ὁ μὲν προφητεύων ἀνὴρ πρεσβύτερος τὴν ἡλικίαν
προσελθὼν αὐτῷ, Χαῖρε, εἶπεν, ὦ παῖ· καὶ ταύτην
2παρὰ τοῦ θεοῦ ἔχε τὴν πρόσρησιν. ὁ δ᾿ ὑπολαβών,
Δέχομαι, φησίν, ὦ πάτερ, καὶ τὸ λοιπὸν κεκλήσομαι
σός. ἀλλ᾿ εἰπέ μοι4 εἴ μοι δίδως τὴν ἁπάσης
γῆς ἀρχήν. τοῦ δὲ ἱερέως προσελθόντος τῷ σηκῷ
καὶ τῶν ἀνδρῶν τῶν αἰρόντων τὸν θεὸν κινηθέντων
τεταγμένοις τισὶ τῆς φωνῆς συμβόλοις ὁ μὲν ἀνεῖπεν
βεβαίως αὐτῷ διδόναι τὸν θεὸν τὴν αἴτησιν, ὁ
δ᾿ Ἀλέξανδρος ὑπολαβών, Τὸ λοιπόν, εἶπεν, ὦ δαῖμον,
ἀπόφηναί μοι τῶν ζητουμένων, εἰ πάντας ἤδη




1πολυτελῶν λίθων added by Fischer, perhaps unnecessarily.2Dindorf corrected ὅπου to ὅποι.3Wesseling corrected ᾀδόντων and καθυμνούντων to ᾀδουσῶν
and καθυμνουσῶν. R. Laqueur (Hermes, 86, 1958, 261) also
would Leep the manuscript readings.4εἰπέ μοι supplied by Madvig; I am not sure that the
words are necessary.264Book XVII

and at daybreak once more the waters have returned 331/0 b.c. to their original temperature.
The image of the god is encrusted with emeralds and other precious stones, and answers those who consult the oracle in a quite peculiar fashion. It is carried about upon a golden boat by eighty priests, and these, with the god on their shoulders, go without their own volition wherever the god directs their path. A multitude of girls and women follows them singing paeans as they go and praising the god in a traditional hymn.1
51. When Alexander was conducted by the priests into the temple and had regarded the god for a while, the one who held the position of prophet, an elderly man, came to him and said, “Rejoice, son2; take this form of address as from the god also.” He replied, “I accept, father; for the future I shall be called thy son. But tell me if thou givest me the rule of the whole earth.” The priest now entered the sacred enclosure and as the bearers now lifted the god and were moved according to certain prescribed sounds of the voice,3 the prophet cried that of a certainty the god had granted him his request, and Alexander spoke again: “The last, O spirit, of my questions now answer; have I punished all those who were the



1Curtius, 4. 7. 23–24. The god gave his responses by nods and signs, as Callisthenes reported (Strabo, 17. 1. 43), just as did later the Apollo of Hierapolis (Lucian, De Dea Syria, 36). The temple procedure is quite typical of the Egyptian temples, where the god’s image was carried about in a boat-shaped litter or tray.2Curtius, 4. 7. 25; Justin, 11. 11. 2–12; Plutarch, Alexander, 27. 5.3It is not clear whose voice this was which uttered “symbols.” Perhaps the automatic movements of the bearers were symbols which could be interpreted in oral responses.265