Diodorus of Sicily

Ἡρακλέους γεγονότες ἡγεμόνες ἐτάχθησαν ἐπὶ
τῶν κεράτων, Κλεόμβροτός τε ὁ βασιλεὺς καὶ
Ἀρχίδαμος ὁ Ἀγησιλάου τοῦ βασιλέως υἱός, παρὰ
δὲ τοῖς Βοιωτοῖς Ἐπαμεινώνδας ἰδίᾳ τινὶ καὶ περιττῇ
τάξει χρησάμενος διὰ τῆς ἰδίας στρατηγίας
2περιεποιήσατο τὴν περιβόητον νίκην. ἐκλεξάμενος
γὰρ ἐξ ἁπάσης τῆς δυνάμεως τοὺς ἀρίστους ἐπὶ τὸ
ἕτερον μέρος ἔστησε, μεθ᾿ ὧν καὶ αὐτὸς ἔμελλε
διαγωνίζεσθαι· τοὺς δ᾿ ἀσθενεστάτους ἐπὶ τὸ ἕτερον
κέρας τάξας παρήγγειλεν αὐτοῖς φυγομαχεῖν καὶ
κατὰ τὴν ἔφοδον τῶν πολεμίων ἐκ τοῦ κατ᾿ ὀλίγον
ὑποχωρεῖν. διὸ καὶ λοξὴν ποιήσας τὴν φάλαγγα,
τῷ τοὺς ἐπιλέκτους ἔχοντι κέρατι ἔγνω κρίνειν τὴν
3μάχην. ὡς δ᾿ αἵ τε σάλπιγγες ἐσήμαινον παρ᾿
ἀμφοτέροις τὸ πολεμικὸν καὶ κατὰ τὴν πρώτην
ὁρμὴν συνηλάλαξαν αἱ δυνάμεις, οἱ μὲν Λακεδαιμόνιοι
τοῖς κέρασιν ἀμφοτέροις ἐπῆγον μηνοειδὲς
τὸ σχῆμα τῆς φάλαγγος πεποιηκότες, οἱ δὲ Βοιωτοὶ
τῷ μὲν ἑτέρῳ κέρατι ὑπεχώρουν, τῷ δὲ ἑτέρῳ
4δρόμῳ συνῆπτον τοῖς πολεμίοις. ὡς δὲ συνῆψαν
ἀλλήλοις εἰς χεῖρας, τὸ μὲν πρῶτον ἐκθύμως ἀμφοτέρων
ἀγωνιζομένων ἰσόρροπος ἦν ἡ μάχη, μετὰ
δὲ ταῦτα τῶν περὶ τὸν Ἐπαμεινώνδαν διά τε τὴν
ἀρετὴν καὶ τὴν πυκνότητα τῆς τάξεως πλεονεκτούντων
πολλοὶ τῶν Πελοποννησίων ἀνῃροῦντο.
οὐ γὰρ ὑπέμενον ὑπενέγκαι τὸ βάρος τῆς τῶν
ἐπιλέκτων ἀνδραγαθίας, ἀλλὰ τῶν ἀντιστάντων οἱ
μὲν ἔπιπτον, οἱ δὲ κατετραυματίζοντο, πάσας τὰς
5πληγὰς ἐναντίας λαμβάνοντες. ἕως μὲν οὖν ὁ βασιλεὺς
106Book XV

of Heracles were stationed as commanders of 371/0 b.c. the wings, namely Cleombrotus the king and Archiamus,1 son of the King Agesilaüs, while on the Boeotian side Epameinondas, by employing an unusual disposition of his own, was enabled through his own strategy to achieve his famous victory. He selected from the entire army the bravest men and stationed them on one wing, intending to fight to the finish with them himself. The weakest he placed on the other wing and instructed them to avoid battle and withdraw gradually during the enemy’s attack. So then, by arranging his phalanx in oblique formation, he planned to decide the issue of the battle by means of the wing in which were the élite. When the trumpets on both sides sounded the charge and the armies simultaneously with the first onset raised the battle-cry, the Lacedaemonians attacked both wings with their phalanx in crescent formation, while the Boeotians retreated on one wing, but on the other engaged the enemy in double-quick time. As they met in hand-to-hand combat, at first both fought ardently and the battle was evenly poised; shortly, however, as Epameinondas’ men began to derive advantage from their valour and the denseness of their lines, many Peloponnesians began to fall. For they were unable to endure the weight of the courageous fighting of the elite corps; of those who had resisted some fell and others were wounded, taking all the blows in front. Now as long

1See note on chap. 54. 6. It has been suggested that Xenophon, who fails to mention Epameinondas at Leuctra and represents Archidamus as being sent out after the battle, was attempting to belittle the part of Epameinondas as victor and to spare his best friend Agesilaüs, the father of Archidamus, the disgrace of his son’ s defeat. There is no evidence for this view.107