Diodorus of Sicily

τούτου βασιλείας κεκυριευκὼς ἦν, Μαύσωλος δὲ
Καρίας δυναστεύων καὶ πολλῶν ἐρυμάτων καὶ πόλεων
ἀξιολόγων κυριεύων ὧν ἑστίαν καὶ μητρόπολιν
συνέβαινεν εἶναι τὴν Ἁλικαρνασσόν, ἔχουσαν
ἀκρόπολιν ἀξιόλογον καὶ τὰ τῆς Καρίας βασίλεια·
πρὸς δὲ τούτοις Ὀρόντης μὲν τῆς Μυσίας σατράπης,
Αὐτοφραδάτης δὲ Λυδίας· τῶν δὲ Ἰώνων
ἄνευ1 Λύκιοί τε καὶ Πισίδαι καὶ Παμφύλιοι καὶ
Κίλικες, ἔτι δὲ καὶ Σύροι καὶ Φοίνικες καὶ σχεδὸν
4πάντες οἱ παραθαλάσσιοι. τηλικαύτης δ᾿ οὔσης
ἀποστάσεως, τὸ μὲν ἥμισυ τῶν προσόδων τῷ βασιλεῖ
κατελέλυτο, τὸ δὲ λοιπὸν οὐχ ἱκανὸν ἦν εἰς τὰς
τοῦ πολέμου χρείας.
91. Οἱ δ᾿ ἀφεστηκότες τοῦ βασιλέως ἐπὶ τὴν τῶν
ὅλων διοίκησιν εἵλοντο στρατηγὸν Ὀρόντην. οὗτος
δὲ παραλαβὼν τὴν ἡγεμονίαν καὶ χρήματα πρὸς ξενολογίαν,
δισμυρίοις στρατιώταις ἐνιαύσιον μισθόν,
ἐγένετο προδότης τῶν πιστευσάντων. ὑπολαβὼν
γὰρ παρὰ τοῦ βασιλέως δωρεῶν τε μεγάλων τεύξεσθαι
καὶ τῆς παραθαλασσίου πάσης παραλήψεσθαι
τὴν σατραπείαν, ἐὰν ἐγχειρίσῃ τοῖς Πέρσαις




1ἄνευ added by Capps; οἱ πολλοὶ added by Urlichs;
μετὰ δὲ τῶν Ἰ. or τῶν δ᾿ Ἰώνων σύμμαχοι suggested by Wesseling;
τῶν δ᾿ ἐθνῶν Dindorf; πλὴν δὲ Ἰώνων Vogel.204Book XV

possession of his kingdom, and Mausolus,1 overlord of 362/1 b.c. Caria, who was master of many strongholds and important cities of which the hearth and mother city was Halicarnassus, which possessed a famous acropolis and the royal palace of Caria; and, in addition to the two already mentioned, Orontes,2 satrap of Mysia, and Autophradates,3 satrap of Lydia. Apart from the lonians were Lycians, Pisidians, Pamphylians, and Cilicians, likewise Syrians, Phoenicians, and practically all the coastal peoples. With the revolt so extensive, half the revenues of the King were cut off and what remained were insufficient for the expenses of the. war.
91. The peoples who had revolted from the King chose as their general Orontes in charge of all branches of the administration. He, having taken over the command and funds needed for recruiting mercenaries, amounting to a year’s pay for twenty thousand men, proceeded to betray his trust. For suspecting that he would obtain from the King not only great rewards but would also succeed to the satrapy of all the coastal region if he should deliver the rebels into


1Mausolus, son of Hecatomnus of Mylasa who became
“dynast of Caria” about 390, succeeded his father about
377/6 (see Book 16. 36. 2) and married his sister Artemisia,
who succeeded him (Book 16. 36. 2; 45. 7). At first opposed
to Ariobarzanes, he later joined in the revolt against the
King. The monument erected to him by his widow is famous
as the Mausoleum.2Orontes was the son of Artasuras and husband of Rhodogunê,
daughter of the King (Xenophon, Anabasis, 2. 4. 8;
3. 4. 13; Plutarch, Artaxerxes, 27. 4). Though satrap of Armenia in 401 (Xenophon, op. cit. 3. 5. 17; 4. 3. 4), he had by this time probably lost Armenia (in spite of Trogus, Prol. 10) and was satrap of Mysia only, but hoped, as Diodorus says, to acquire the satrapy of all the coast cities (i.e. satrapy of Sardes) now under control of Autophradates, by his betrayal of the insurrection to the King. Since Autophradates also returned to his allegiance, his aims were frustrated only to be revived in 355. He probably died about 344. (See Beloch, Griechische Geschichte2 3. 2. 138–140; and supra, chap. 2. 2.)3Autophradates was probably satrap of Sardes in 392, then of the coastal cities only in 388, and later, after the death of Tiribazus, again re-established in Sardes until his death. (See for an account of him Beloch, Griechische Geschichte2, 3. 2. 135–136.)205