Diodorus of Sicily

στρατοπεδεύειν καταπεφρονηκότως περὶ Μυοῦντα,
τὴν μὲν ἀποσκευὴν ἀπέλιπε, τοὺς δὲ στρατιώτας
εὐζώνους παραλαβὼν νυκτὸς πορείαν σύντομον
ἐποιήσατο, προσπεσὼν δὲ τοῖς πολεμίοις ἑωθινῆς
φυλακῆς ἄφνω τῆς τε δυνάμεως ἄνευ μάχης ἐκυρίευσεν
καὶ αὐτὸν τὸν στρατηγὸν ἐζώγρησε. τηλικούτου
δ᾿ εὐτυχήματος γεγενημένου τὴν ἧτταν
3ἀναμαχήσασθαι διειλήφει. οὐ μὴν ἀλλὰ τὸν Πτολεμαῖον
ὑπολαμβάνων ἥξειν ἐπ᾿ αὐτὸν μετὰ πάσης
τῆς δυνάμεως, ἐστρατοπέδευσε προβλήματα τῆς
παρεμβολῆς ποιησάμενος ἕλη καὶ λίμνας. ἔγραψε
δὲ καὶ πρὸς τὸν πατέρα περὶ τοῦ γενομένου κατορθώματος,
παρακαλῶν1 αὐτὸν ἢ δύναμιν ἀποστεῖλαι
τὴν ταχίστην ἢ καὶ αὐτὸν παραβαλεῖν εἰς τὴν
4Συρίαν. ὁ δ᾿ Ἀντίγονος ἐτύγχανε μὲν ὢν ἐν Κελαιναῖς
τῆς Φρυγίας, κομισάμενος δὲ τὴν ἐπιστολὴν
ἐχάρη διαφερόντως ἐπὶ τῷ δοκεῖν τὸν υἱὸν νέον
ὄντα κατωρθωκέναι δι᾿ αὑτοῦ καὶ φαίνεσθαι βασιλείας
ἄξιον. αὐτὸς δὲ τὴν δύναμιν ἀναλαβὼν
ἀνέζευξεν ἐκ τῆς Φρυγίας καὶ τὸν Ταῦρον ὑπερβαλὼν
ὀλίγαις ἡμέραις συνέμιξε τοῖς περὶ τὸν
5Δημήτριον. Πτολεμαῖος δὲ πυθόμενος τὴν Ἀντιγόνου
παρουσίαν καὶ συναγαγὼν τοὺς ἡγεμόνας καὶ
φίλους ἐβουλεύετο πότερον συμφέρει μένειν καὶ
ἀγωνίζεσθαι περὶ τῶν ὅλων κατὰ Συρίαν ἢ προάγειν
εἰς Αἴγυπτον καὶ πολεμεῖν ἐκεῖθεν, καθάπερ
6καὶ πρότερον Περδίκκᾳ. πάντες οὖν συνεβούλευον
μὴ διακινδυνεύειν πρὸς δύναμιν πολλαπλασίονα
καὶ θηρίων πλῆθος, ἔτι δὲ στρατηγὸν ἀήττητον·



1καὶ before παρακαλῶν omitted by Dindorf.84Book XIX

was carelessly encamped at Myus,1 left his baggage 312 b.c. behind and with his soldiers in light equipment made a forced march; then, falling suddenly upon the enemy during the early morning watch,2 he captured the army without a battle and took the general himself prisoner.3 By achieving such a success he believed that he had wiped out the defeat. Nevertheless, assuming that Ptolemy would march against him with all his army, he went into camp, using as the outworks of his defence swamps and marshes. He also wrote to his father about the success that had been gained, urging him either to send an army as soon as possible or to cross over into Syria himself. Antigonus chanced to be in Celaenae in Phrygia; and, on receiving the letter, he rejoiced greatly that his son, young as he was, seemed to have got out of his difficulties by himself and to have shown himself worthy to be a king. He himself with his army set out from Phrygia, crossed the Taurus, and within a few days joined Demetrius. Ptolemy, however, on hearing of the arrival of Antigonus, called together his leaders and friends and took counsel with them whether it was better to remain and reach a final decision in Syria or to withdraw to Egypt and carry on the war from there as he had formerly done against Perdiccas.4 Now all advised him not to risk a battle against an army that was many times stronger and had a larger number of elephants as well as against an unconquered general; for, they said, it would



1Myus in Syria is otherwise unknown.2i.e. the last watch of the night.3This victory is minimized by Pausanias, 1. 6. 5. According to Plutarch (Demetrius, 6. 3), Demetrius restored Cilles and his staff to Ptolemy alive, thus repaying Ptolemy for his generosity after Gaza (chap. 85. 3).4Cp. Book 18. 33–35.85