Diodorus of Sicily

τρίτην δὲ αὐτοῦ συνδιαβαίνοντος τοῦ Πλειστάρχου
χειμὼν ἐπεγενήθη τηλικοῦτος ὥστε τὰ πλεῖστα τῶν
4σκαφῶν καὶ τῶν σωμάτων διαφθαρῆναι· καὶ γὰρ
ἡ κομίζουσα ναῦς ἑξήρης τὸν στρατηγὸν συνεκλύσθη
καὶ τῶν ἐν αὐτῇ πλεόντων οὐκ ἐλαττόνων
ἢ πεντακοσίων τρεῖς πρὸς τοῖς τριάκοντα μόνον
διεσώθησαν. ἐν δὲ τούτοις ἦν καὶ ὁ Πλείσταρχος,
ναυαγίου μὲν ἐπειλημμένος, εἰς δὲ τὴν γῆν ἡμιθανὴς
ἐκβεβρασμένος. οὗτος μὲν οὖν ἀποκομισθεὶς εἰς
Ἡράκλειαν καὶ προσαναλαβὼν ἐκ τῆς ἀτυχίας τὸ
σῶμα πρὸς Λυσίμαχον εἰς τὴν χειμασίαν ἀνέζευξε,
ἀποβεβληκὼς τὸ πλεῖον τῆς δυνάμεως.
113. Ἐν δὲ ταῖς αὐταῖς ἡμέραις καὶ Πτολεμαῖος
ὁ βασιλεὺς ἀναζεύξας ἐξ Αἰγύπτου μετὰ δυνάμεως
ἀξιολόγου τὰς μὲν ἐν τῇ Κοίλῃ Συρίᾳ πόλεις ἁπάσας
ὑποχειρίους ἐποιήσατο· Σιδῶνα δὲ πολιορκοῦντος
αὐτοῦ τινες παρῆσαν ἀπαγγέλλοντες ψευδῶς ὅτι
παρατάξεως γενομένης τοῖς βασιλεῦσιν οἱ μὲν περὶ
Λυσίμαχον καὶ Σέλευκον ἡττηθέντες ἀποκεχωρήκασιν
εἰς τὴν Ἡράκλειαν, Ἀντίγονος δὲ νενικηκὼς
2προσάγει μετὰ δυνάμεως ἐπὶ Συρίας. παραλογισθεὶς
οὖν ὑπὸ τούτων καὶ πεισθεὶς ἀληθῆ τὴν
προσαγγελίαν εἶναι, πρὸς μὲν τοὺς Σιδωνίους εἰς
τέτταρας μῆνας ἀνοχὰς ἐποιήσατο, τὰς δὲ χειρωθείσας
πόλεις φρουραῖς ἀσφαλισάμενος ἐπανῆλθε
3μετὰ τῆς δυνάμεως εἰς Αἴγυπτον. ἅμα δὲ τούτοις
πραττομένοις ἔνιοι1 τῶν παρὰ Λυσιμάχῳ στρατιωτῶν
αὐτομολήσαντες ἦλθον2 ἐκ τῆς χειμασίας παρ᾿
Ἀντίγονον, Αὐταριάται μὲν δισχίλιοι, Λύκιοι δὲ
καὶ Παμφύλιοι περὶ ὀκτακοσίους. τούτοις μὲν οὖν
Ἀντίγονος φιλανθρώπως προσενεχθεὶς τούς τε μισθοὺς

1ἔνιοι Capps: οἱ.2ἦλθον added by Rhodoman.442Book XX

set sail with the third group, so great a tempest rose 302 b.c. that most of the vessels and the men on them were lost; and indeed the large warship1 that carried the general sank, and of the not less than five hundred men who sailed in her, only thirty-three were saved. Among these was Pleistarchus who, holding to a piece of wreckage, was cast ashore half dead. He was carried to Heraclea and after recovering from the misfortune went to Lysimachus at winter quarters, having lost the larger part of his army.
113. During these same days King Ptolemy, setting out from Egypt with an army of considerable size, subjugated all the cities of Coelê-Syria; but while he was besieging Sidon certain men came to him with the false report that a battle had taken place between the kings in which Lysimachus and Seleucus had been defeated, that they had withdrawn to Heraclea, and that Antigonus, after winning the victory, was advancing with an army against Syria. Consequently Ptolemy, deceived by them and believing that their report was true, made a four-month’s truce with the Sidonians, secured with garrisons the cities that he had captured, and went back to Egypt with his army. At the same time as this was taking place, some of the soldiers of Lysimachus, having left their winter quarters as deserters, went over to Antigonus, namely two thousand Autariatae and about eight hundred Lycians and Pamphylians. Now Antigonus, receiving these men



1The hexeres was probably a ship with a single row of oars on each side, each oar manned by six men, rather than a ship with six superimposed banks of oars on each side. Cp. Tarn, Hellenistic and Naval Developments, 122–141.443