Diodorus of Sicily

βοηθεῖν τῷ θεῷ καὶ τοὺς Φωκεῖς ὡς ἱεροσύλους
κολάζειν, οἱ δὲ πρὸς τὴν τῶν Φωκέων βοήθειαν
ἀπέκλινον.
29. Σχιζομένης δὲ τῆς τῶν ἐθνῶν καὶ πόλεων
αἱρέσεως τῷ μὲν ἱερῷ βοηθεῖν ἔγνωσαν Βοιωτοὶ
καὶ Λοκροὶ καὶ Θετταλοὶ καὶ Περραιβοί, πρὸς δὲ
τούτοις Δωριεῖς καὶ Δόλοπες, ἔτι δὲ Ἀθαμᾶνες
καὶ Ἀχαιοὶ1 Φθιῶται καὶ Μάγνητες, ἔτι δὲ Αἰνιᾶνες
καί τινες ἕτεροι, τοῖς δὲ Φωκεῦσι συνεμάχουν
Ἀθηναῖοι καὶ Λακεδαιμόνιοι καί τινες ἕτεροι τῶν
2Πελοποννησίων. προθυμότατα δὲ συνέπραττον οἱ
Λακεδαιμόνιοι2 διὰ τοιαύτας αἰτίας. ἐν τῷ Λευκτρικῷ
πολέμῳ Θηβαῖοι καταπολεμήσαντες τοὺς
πολεμίους δίκην ἐπήνεγκαν εἰς Ἀμφικτύονας κατὰ
τῶν Σπαρτιατῶν, ὅτι Φοιβίδας ὁ Σπαρτιάτης κατελάβετο
τὴν Καδμείαν, καὶ διετιμήσαντο τὸ ἀδίκημα
ταλάντων πεντακοσίων. καταδικασθέντων δὲ
τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων καὶ τὴν δίκην οὐκ ἐκτινόντων
κατὰ τὸν ὡρισμένον ἐκ τῶν νόμων καιρὸν οἱ Θηβαῖοι
πάλιν δίκην ἐπήνεγκαν διπλοῦ τοῦ ἀδικήματος.
3τῶν δ᾿ Ἀμφικτυόνων χιλίοις ταλάντοις
καταδικασάντων οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι διὰ τὸ μέγεθος
τοῦ ὀφλήματος ὁμοίας τοῖς Φωκεῦσι τὰς ἀποφάσεις
ἐποιοῦντο, λέγοντες ἀδίκως ὑπὸ τῶν Ἀμφικτυόνων
4καταδεδικάσθαι. διόπερ κοινοῦ ὄντος τοῦ συμφέροντος
οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι κατ᾿ ἰδίαν μὲν ὤκνουν
ὑπὲρ τῆς καταδίκης ἄρασθαι πόλεμον, διὰ δὲ τοῦ




1So Wesseling: Ἀχαιοὶ καὶ Φθιῶται.2So Wesseling: οἱ Λακ. καί τινες ἕτεροι.318Book XVI

punish the Phocians as temple-robbers, while others 354/8 b.c. inclined toward giving the Phocians assistance.1
29. As tribes and cities were divided in their choice, the Boeotians, Locrians, Thessalians, and Perrhaebians decided to aid the shrine, and in addition the Dorians and Dolopians, likewise the Athamanians, Achaeans of Phthiotis, and the Magnesians, also the Aenianians and some others; while the Athenians,2 Lacedaemonians, and some others of the Peloponnesians fought on the side of the Phocians. The Lacedaemonians co-operated most eagerly for the following reasons. In the Leuctrian War3 the Thebans, after defeating the enemy, brought suit before the Amphictyons against the Spartans, the charge being that Phoebidas the Spartan had seized the Cadmeia,4 and the Amphictyons assessed a fine of five hundred talents for the offence. Then when the Lacedaemonians had had judgement entered against them and failed to pay the fine during the period set by the laws, the Thebans again brought suit, this time for double damages. When the Amphictyons set the judgement at a thousand talents, the Lacedaemonians, on account of the large amount of the fine, made declarations similar to those of the Phocians, saying that an unjust judgement had been rendered against them by the Amphictyons. Wherefore, though their interests were now common, the Lacedaemonians hesitated to begin war by themselves on account of the adverse judgement, but thought that it was more




1Chapters 27–28 cover much the same ground as 23–24. Diodorus, chaps. 23–40, is the principal source for the Sacred War. Short sketches appear in Pausanias, 10. 2 and in Justin, 8. 1–2.2See Demosthenes, 19. 61.3Book 15. 53–56.4See Book 15. 20. 2.319