Diodorus of Sicily

ἐν ἀπορρήτοις, ἵν᾿ ἐάν ποτε καιρὸν λάβωσι καταλάβωνται
τὴν Καδμείαν. τοιαύτης δὲ γενομένης
παραγγελίας, Φοιβίδας ὁ Σπαρτιάτης, τεταγμένος
ἐπί τινος ἡγεμονίας καὶ δύναμιν ἄγων ἐπὶ Ὀλυνθίους,
κατελάβετο τὴν Καδμείαν. ἀγανακτούντων
δὲ τῶν Θηβαίων καὶ μεθ᾿ ὅπλων συνδραμόντων,
συνάψας μάχην αὐτοῖς καὶ νικήσας τριακοσίους
μὲν τοὺς ἐπιφανεστάτους τῶν Θηβαίων ἐφυγάδευσε,
τοὺς δὲ λοιποὺς καταπληξάμενος καὶ φρουρὰν
ἰσχυρὰν ἐγκαταστησάμενος, ἐπὶ τὰς ἰδίας πράξεις
ἀπηλλάγη. οἱ δὲ Λακεδαιμόνιοι διὰ τὴν πρᾶξιν
ταύτην ἀδοξοῦντες παρὰ τοῖς Ἕλλησι, τὸν μὲν
Φοιβίδαν ἐζημίωσαν χρήμασι, τὴν δὲ φρουρὰν οὐκ
3ἐξῆγον ἐκ τῶν Θηβῶν· οἱ μὲν οὖν Θηβαῖοι τοῦτον
τὸν τρόπον τὴν αὐτονομίαν ἀποβαλόντες ἠναγκάσθησαν
ὑποταγῆναι τοῖς Λακεδαιμονίοις· τῶν δ᾿
Ὀλυνθίων διαπολεμούντων πρὸς Ἀμύνταν τὸν
τῶν Μακεδόνων βασιλέα, Λακεδαιμόνιοι τὸν μὲν
Φοιβίδαν ἀπέστησαν τῆς ἡγεμονίας, Εὐδαμίδαν
δὲ τὸν ἀδελφὸν τοῦ Φοιβίδα κατέστησαν στρατηγόν.
δόντες δ᾿ αὐτῷ τρισχιλίους ὁπλίτας ἐξαπέστειλαν
διαπολεμήσοντα1 τὸν πρὸς Ὀλυνθίους
πόλεμον.2
21. Οὗτος δ᾿ ἐμβαλὼν εἰς τὴν χώραν τῶν
Ὀλυνθίων κοινῇ μετ᾿ Ἀμύντου διεπολέμει πρὸς





1διαπολεμήσοντα] πολεμήσοντα Vogel (cp. chap. 19. 3).2τὸν πρὸς Ὀλ. πόλεμον (see chap. 23. 2): τοὺς Ὀλ. πόλεμον
P, τοὺς Ὀλ. πολέμους AF, τοὺς πρὸς Ὀλ. πολέμους K, τοὺς πρὸς
τοὺς Ὀλ. πολέμους L.4Book XV

to their commanders, if ever they found an opportunity, 382/1 b.c. to take possession of the Cadmeia. Acting under these instructions, Phoebidas the Spartan, who had been assigned to a command and was leading an expeditionary force against Olynthus, seized the Cadmeia.1 When the Thebans, resenting this act, gathered under arms, he joined battle with them and after defeating them exiled three hundred of the most eminent Thebans. Then after he had terrorized the rest and had stationed a strong garrison in the Cadmeia, he went off on his own business. For this act the Lacedaemonians, being now discredited in the eyes of the Greeks,2 punished Phoebidas with a fine but would not remove the garrison from Thebes. So the Thebans in this way lost their independence and were compelled to take orders from the Lacedaemonians. As the Olynthians continued the war against Amyntas,3 king of the Macedonians, the Lacedaemonians relieved Phoebidas of his command, and installed Phoebidas’ brother Eudamidas as general. Giving him three thousand hoplites, they dispatched him to carry on the war against the Olynthians.
21. Eudamidas4 struck into the territory of the Olynthians and, in conjunction with Amyntas, continued to wage war upon the Olynthians. Thereupon



1See Xenophon, Hell. 5. 2. 25–31.2The reaction of the Greek world and the punishment
of Phoebidas are recounted in Isocrates, Panegyricus. 126: Xenophon, Hell. 5. 4. 1; Plutarch, Pelopidas, 6 and De Genio Socratis, 576 a; Nepos, Pelopidas, 1; and Polybius, 4. 27. 4.3This was Amyntas III, king of Macedonia 393–369. Through the opposition of a pretender Argaeüs and the Illyrians, Amyntas had been confined to a small portion of his realm. By the aid of the Thessalians he had succeeded in ousting Argaeüs. Amyntas now looked for help from Sparta to recover the lost portion of his kingdom. (See Xenophon, Hell. 5. 2. 11–19 and chap. 19.)4According to Xenophon (Hell. 5.2.24), Eudamidas was sent against the Olynthians before the occupation of the Cadmeia.5