Diodorus of Sicily

τὴν Λιβύην γέγονεν αὕτη καὶ τὸν Εὐριπίδην δείξαι
τις ἂν μαρτυροῦντα· λέγει γὰρ
τίς τοὔνομα τὸ ἐπονείδιστον βροτοῖς1
οὐκ οἶδε Λαμίας τῆς Λιβυστικῆς γένος;
42. Ὁ δ᾿ οὖν2 Ὀφέλλας ἀναλαβὼν τὴν δύναμιν
προῆγεν διὰ τῆς ἀνύδρου καὶ θηριώδους ἐπιπόνως·
οὐ μόνον γὰρ ὕδατος ἐσπάνιζεν, ἀλλὰ καὶ τῆς
ξηρᾶς τροφῆς ἀπολιπούσης ἐκινδύνευσεν ἅπαν ἀπολέσαι
2τὸ στρατόπεδον. δακέτων δὲ θηρίων παντοίων
ἐπεχόντων τὰ περὶ τὰς Σύρτεις ἔρημα καὶ
τῶν πλείστων ὀλέθριον ἐχόντων τὸ δῆγμα πολλῇ
τῇ συμφορᾷ περιέπιπτον, ἀβοήθητον ἔχοντες τὴν
ἐκ τῶν ἰατρῶν καὶ φίλων ἐπικουρίαν. καὶ γὰρ
ἔνιοι τῶν ὄφεων ὁμοίαν ἔχοντες τὴν χρόαν τῇ κατ᾿
αὐτοὺς οὔσῃ χώρᾳ τὴν ἰδίαν φύσιν ἀπροόρατον
ἐποίουν· οἷς πολλοὶ διὰ τὴν ἄγνοιαν ἐπιβαίνοντες
δήγμασι θανατηφόροις περιέπιπτον. τέλος δὲ κατὰ
τὴν ὁδοιπορίαν πλεῖον ἢ δύο μῆνας κακοπαθήσαντες
μόγις διήνυσαν πρὸς τοὺς περὶ Ἀγαθοκλέα καὶ
βραχὺ διαχωρίσαντες ἀπ᾿ ἀλλήλων τὴν δύναμιν
κατεστρατοπέδευσαν.
3Εἶθ᾿ οἱ μὲν Καρχηδόνιοι πυθόμενοι τὴν τούτων
παρουσίαν κατεπλάγησαν, ὁρῶντες τηλικαύτην δύναμιν
κατ᾿ αὐτῶν ἥκουσαν· ὁ δ᾿ Ἀγαθοκλῆς ἀπαντήσας
τοῖς περὶ τὸν Ὀφέλλαν καὶ φιλοφρόνως
ἅπαντα χορηγήσας τούτους μὲν ἠξίου τὴν στρατιὰν
ἀναλαμβάνειν ἐκ τῆς κακοπαθείας, αὐτὸς δὲ ἐπιμείνας
ἡμέρας ὀλίγας καὶ κατασκεψάμενος ἕκαστα
τῶν πραττομένων ἐν τῇ παρεμβολῇ τῶν παρόντων,

1None of the attempts to heal this limping verse is convincing.2δ᾿ οὖν Dindorf: γοῦν R, γ᾿ οὖν XF.254Book XX

as a witness that she was born in Libya, for he says: 308 b.c. “Who does not know the name of Lamia, Libyan in race, a name of greatest reproach among mortals?”1
42. Now Ophellas with his army was advancing with great difficulty through a waterless land filled with savage creatures; for not only did he lack water, but since dry food also gave out, he was in danger of losing his entire army. Fanged monsters of all kinds infest the desert near the Syrtis, and the bite of most of these is fatal; therefore it was a great disaster into which they were fallen since they were not helped by remedies supplied by physicians and friends. For some of the serpents, since they had a skin very like in appearance to the ground that was beneath them, made their own forms invisible; and many of the men, treading upon these in ignorance, received bites that were fatal. Finally, after suffering great hardships on the march for more than two months, they with difficulty completed the journey to Agathocles and encamped, keeping the two forces a short distance apart.
The Carthaginians, on hearing of their presence, were panic stricken, seeing that so great a force had arrived against them; but Agathocles, going to meet Ophellas and generously furnishing all needed supplies, begged him to relieve his army from its distress.2 He himself remained for some days and carefully observed all that was being done in the camp of the




1The play from which this fragment comes is not known. Cp. Nauck, Trag, Gr. Frag., Euripides, 922.2According to Justin, 22. 7. 5, Agathocles went so far in showing his friendship as to have Ophellas adopt one of his sons.255