Diodorus of Sicily

δὲ Πτολεμαῖος ὁ Ἀλωρίτης δολοφονήσας παρέλαβε
τὴν βασιλείαν καὶ τοῦτον ὁμοίως Περδίκκας ἐπανελόμενος
ἐβασίλευσεν. τούτου δὲ παρατάξει μεγάλῃ
λειφθέντος ὑπὸ Ἰλλυριῶν καὶ πεσόντος ἐπὶ τῆς
χρείας Φίλιππος ὁ ἀδελφὸς διαδρὰς ἐκ τῆς ὁμηρίας
5παρέλαβε τὴν βασιλείαν κακῶς διακειμένην. ἀνῄρηντο
μὲν γὰρ ἐν τῇ παρατάξει Μακεδόνων πλείους
τῶν τετρακισχιλίων, οἱ δὲ λοιποὶ καταπεπληγμένοι
τὰς τῶν Ἰλλυριῶν δυνάμεις περίφοβοι καθειστήκεισαν
6καὶ πρὸς τὸ διαπολεμεῖν ἀθύμως εἶχον. ὑπὸ
δὲ τὸν αὐτὸν καιρὸν Παίονες μὲν πλησίον τῆς Μακεδονίας
οἰκοῦντες ἐπόρθουν τὴν χώραν καταφρονοῦντες
τῶν Μακεδόνων, Ἰλλυριοὶ δὲ μεγάλας δυνάμεις
ἤθροιζον καὶ στρατεύειν εἰς τὴν Μακεδονίαν παρεσκευάζοντο,
Παυσανίας δέ τις τῆς βασιλικῆς συγγενείας
κοινωνῶν ἐπεβάλλετο διὰ τοῦ Θρᾳκῶν
βασιλέως ἐπὶ τὴν Μακεδονικὴν βασιλείαν κατιέναι.
ὁμοίως δὲ καὶ Ἀθηναῖοι πρὸς Φίλιππον ἀλλοτρίως
ἔχοντες κατῆγον ἐπὶ τὴν βασιλείαν Ἀργαῖον καὶ
στρατηγὸν ἀπεστάλκεισαν Μαντίαν ἔχοντα τρισχιλίους
μὲν ὁπλίτας, ναυτικὴν δὲ δύναμιν ἀξιόλογον.
3. Οἱ δὲ Μακεδόνες διά τε τὴν ἐν τῇ μάχῃ συμφορὰν
καὶ διὰ τὸ μέγεθος τῶν ἐπιφερομένων
κινδύνων ἐν ἀπορίᾳ τῇ μεγίστῃ καθειστήκεισαν.
ἀλλ᾿ ὅμως τηλικούτων φόβων καὶ κινδύνων ἐφεστώτων





238Book XVI

But Ptolemy of Alorus1 assassinated him and succeeded 360/59 b.c. to the throne and then in similar fashion Perdiccas2 disposed of him and ruled as king. But when he was defeated in a great battle by the Illyrians3 and fell in the action, Philip his brother, who had escaped from his detention as a hostage, succeeded to the kingdom,4 now in a bad way. For the Macedonians had lost more than four thousand men in the battle, and the remainder, panic-stricken, had become exceedingly afraid of the Illyrian armies and had lost heart for continuing the war. About the same time the Paeonians, who lived near Macedonia, began to pillage their territory, showing contempt for the Macedonians, and the Illyrians began to assemble large armies and prepare for an invasion of Macedonia, while a certain Pausanias,5 who was related to the royal line of Macedon, was planning with the aid of the Thracian king6 to join the contest for the throne of Macedon. Similarly, the Athenians too, being hostile to Philip, were endeavouring to restore Argaeus7 to the throne and had dispatched Mantias as general with three thousand hoplites and a considerable naval force.
3. The Macedonians because of the disaster sustained in the battle and the magnitude of the dangers pressing upon them were in the greatest perplexity. Yet even so, with such fears and dangers threatening



1See Book 15. 71. 1.2See Book 15. 77. 5.3Bardylis was the name of their formidable king (Pickard-Cambridge,
Cambridge Ancient History, 6. 205).4He was only ἐπίτροπος, regent, for Perdiccas’ son Amyntas
III (P.-W. Realencyclopädie, 19. 2266–2267). Under
Perdiccas, after his return from Thebes, he had administered
a district of Macedonia. (See Pickard-Cambridge, Cambridge
Ancient History, 6. 204.)5See Aeschines, False Embassy, 26–27. He had striven for the crown at the death of Alexander II. (See F. Geyer, Makedonien bis zur Thronsbesteigung Philipps II, Beiheft 19 der Historischen Zeitschrift, 1930. 132.)6Berisades (?), Beloch, Griechische Geschichte2, 3. 1. 225, note 1.7See Book 14. 92. 4 and Beloch, l.c., also p. 102. Also Geyer, op. cit. 139.239