Diodorus of Sicily

οὐ γὰρ περὶ τούτων ἔφασαν διαφέρεσθαι πρὸς
Ἀντίγονον, ἀλλ᾿ ὅτι τοῦ πολέμου γενομένου κοινοῦ
πρότερον μὲν πρὸς Περδίκκαν, ὕστερον δὲ πρὸς
Εὐμενῆ τὰ μέρη τῆς δορικτήτου χώρας οὐκ ἀποδοίη
τοῖς φίλοις καὶ συνθέμενος φιλίαν1 πρὸς αὐτὸν τοὐναντίον
ἀφέλοιτο τὴν σατραπείαν τῆς Βαβυλωνίας
4Σελεύκου παρὰ πάντα τὰ δίκαια. ὁ δὲ Πτολεμαῖος
τοὺς μὲν ἁλόντας στρατιώτας ἀποστείλας εἰς Αἴγυπτον
προσέταξεν ἐπὶ τὰς νομαρχίας2 διελεῖν, αὐτὸς
δὲ θάψας τῶν ἰδίων τοὺς ἐν τῇ μάχῃ τελευτήσαντας
ἅπαντας μεγαλοπρεπῶς μετὰ τῆς δυνάμεως ἐπῄει
τῶν κατὰ Φοινίκην πόλεων τὰς μὲν πολιορκῶν, τὰς
5δὲ πειθοῖ προσαγόμενος. Δημήτριος δὲ δύναμιν
οὐκ ἔχων ἀξιόχρεων πρὸς μὲν τὸν πατέρα βυβλιαφόρον
ἀπέστειλεν, ἀξιῶν βοηθεῖν τὴν ταχίστην·
αὐτὸς δὲ παρελθὼν εἰς Τρίπολιν τῆς Φοινίκης μετεπέμπετό
τε τοὺς ἐκ Κιλικίας στρατιώτας καὶ τῶν
ἄλλων ὅσοι παρεφύλαττον ἢ πόλεις ἢ φρούρια μακρὰν
ἀφεστῶτα τῶν πολεμίων.
86. Πτολεμαῖος δὲ κρατῶν τῶν ὑπαίθρων Σιδῶνα
μὲν προσηγάγετο, τῆς δὲ Τύρου πλησίον
στρατοπεδεύσας παρεκάλεσεν Ἀνδρόνικον τὸν
φρούραρχον παραδοῦναι τὴν πόλιν καὶ δωρεάς τε
2καὶ τιμὰς ἁδρὰς ἐπηγγείλατο δοῦναι. ὁ δὲ φήσας
μηδενὶ τρόπῳ προδώσειν τὴν δεδομένην ὑπ᾿ Ἀντιγόνου
καὶ Δημητρίου πίστιν, ἐλοιδόρησε φορτικῶς
τὸν Πτολεμαῖον. ὕστερον δὲ στασιασάντων τῶν
στρατιωτῶν ἐκπεσὼν ἐκ Τύρου καὶ γενόμενος ὑποχείριος
προσεδόκα μὲν τιμωρίας τεύξεσθαι διά τε


1φιλίαν Hertlein: πάλιν.2νομαρχίας Wesseling: ναυαρχίας.68Book XIX

court; for, they said, it was not about these that 312 b.c. they were at variance with Antigonus but because, although he and they had made war in common, first against Perdiccas and later against Eumenes, he had not turned over to his companions their share of the captured territory, and again because, after making a compact of friendship with Seleucus, he had nevertheless taken away from him his satrapy of Babylonia contrary to all right. Ptolemy sent the captured soldiers off into Egypt, ordering them to be distributed among the nomes; but he himself, after giving a magnificent burial to all those of his own men who had died in the battle, went with his forces against the cities of Phoenicia, besieging some of them and winning others by persuasion. But Demetrius, since he did not have a sufficiently strong army, sent a messenger to his father, asking him to aid him as quickly as possible. He himself, moving to Tripolis in Phoenicia, summoned the soldiers from Cilicia and also those of his other men who were guarding cities or strongholds far removed from the enemy.
86. Ptolemy, after he had gained control of the open country, first won Sidon to his side; and then, camping near Tyre, he summoned Andronicus,1 the commander of the garrison, to surrender the city, and he promised to give him gifts and abundant honours. Andronicus, however, said that he would in no wise betray the trust that had been placed in him by Antigonus and Demetrius, and he vilely insulted Ptolemy. Later, when his soldiers mutinied and he was expelled from the city and fell into the hands of Ptolemy, he expected to receive punishment both

1Cp. chap. 69. 1.69