Diodorus of Sicily

ἐπιβαλόμενοι καὶ σφαλέντες1 ἀνῃρέθησαν.
5παρὰ δὲ τοῖς Φλιασίοις πολλῶν φυγαδευομένων
καὶ καταλαβομένων ἐπὶ τῆς χώρας φρούριον ὀχυρὸν
καὶ πλῆθος μισθοφόρων ἀθροισάντων, ἐγένετο μάχη
πρὸς τοὺς ἐκ τῆς πόλεως, καὶ νικησάντων τῶν
φυγάδων ἀνῃρέθησαν τῶν Φλιασίων ὑπὲρ τοὺς
τριακοσίους. ὕστερον δὲ προδόντων τῶν φυλάκων
τοὺς φυγάδας, κρατήσαντες οἱ Φλιάσιοι τῶν φυγάδων
ἀνεῖλον πλείους τῶν ἑξακοσίων, τοὺς δὲ
λοιποὺς ἐκβαλόντες ἐκ τῆς χώρας ἠνάγκασαν
φυγεῖν εἰς Ἄργος. αἱ μὲν οὖν κατὰ Πελοπόννησον
πόλεις ἐν τοιαύταις συμφοραῖς ἦσαν.
41. Ἐπ᾿ ἄρχοντος δ᾿ Ἀθήνησι Σωκρατίδου Ῥωμαῖοι
ἀντὶ τῶν ὑπάτων χιλιάρχους κατέστησαν
τέτταρας, Κόιντον Σερουίλιον,2 Σερούιον3 Κορνήλιον,
ἔτι δὲ Σπόριον Παπίριον.4 ἐπὶ δὲ τούτων
Ἀρταξέρξης ὁ βασιλεὺς ἐστράτευσεν ἐπ᾿ Αἰγυπτίους
ἀφεστηκότας ἀπὸ Περσῶν. ἡγοῦντο δὲ
τῶν δυνάμεων Φαρνάβαζος μὲν τῶν βαρβαρικῶν,
Ἰφικράτης δ᾿ ὁ Ἀθηναῖος τῶν μισθοφόρων, ὄντων
δισμυρίων. ὁ δ᾿ ἀνὴρ οὗτος μετάπεμπτος ἐπὶ τὴν
στρατηγίαν ὑπὸ τοῦ βασιλέως ἐτάχθη διὰ τὴν ἐν
2τῷ στρατηγεῖν ἀρετήν. ἔτη δὲ πλείω τοῦ Φαρναβάζου
κατανηλωκότος περὶ τὰς παρασκευάς, ὁ μὲν
Ἰφικράτης ὁρῶν αὐτὸν ἐν μὲν τῷ λέγειν ὄντα
δεινόν, ἐν δὲ τοῖς πραττομένοις νωχελῆ, παρρησίᾳ
πρὸς αὐτὸν ἐχρήσατο, φήσας θαυμάζειν πῶς ἐν


1σφαλέντες Dindorf: σταλέντες PAHL, γνωσθέντες FJK.2Σερουίλιον P: Κράσσον Σερουίλιον.3Σερούιον added by Rhodoman (cp. Livy, 6. 22. 1).4Παπίριον PA: Παπύριον καὶ Φάβιον Ἄλβον.60Book XV

a number who tried to effect a revolution but failed 375/4 b.c. were killed. Among the Phliasians, when many who were in exile had seized a stronghold in the country and gathered a considerable number of mercenaries, a battle was fought against the city party, and, when the exiles won the victory, over three hundred of the Phliasians were slain. Later, as the sentinels betrayed the exiles, the Phliasians got the upper hand and executed more than six hundred exiles, while they drove the rest out of the country and compelled them to take refuge in Argos. Such were the disasters that afflicted the Peloponnesian cities.
41. When Socratides was archon at Athens, the 374/3 b.c. Romans elected four military tribunes with consular power, Quintus Servilius, Servius Cornelius, and Spurius Papirius. During their term of office King Artaxerxes sent an expedition against the Egyptians,1 who had revolted from Persia. The leaders of the army were Pharnabazus, commanding the barbarian contingent, and Iphicrates2 the Athenian, commanding the mercenaries, who numbered twenty thousand. Iphicrates, who had been summoned for the campaign by the King, was given the assignment because of his strategic skill. After Pharnabazus had wasted several years making his preparations, Iphicrates, perceiving that though in talk he was clever, he was sluggish in action, frankly told him that he marvelled that





1Other accounts: Nepos, Iphicrates, 2. 4; Trogus, Prologue to 10; Plutarch, Artaxerxes, 24; Polyaenus, 3. 9. 38, 56, 59.2See chap. 29. 3–4 for Artaxerxes’ request for the services of Iphicrates.61