Diodorus of Sicily

μὲν τὴν Ἑλληνικὴν ἀγωγὴν καὶ δίαιταν, ἐν δὲ
ταῖς ἐσχατιαῖς τῆς βασιλείας ἐξερριμμένοι, ζῶντος
μὲν τοῦ βασιλέως ὑπέμενον διὰ τὸν φόβον, τελευτήσαντος
2δὲ ἀπέστησαν. συμφρονήσαντες δὲ καὶ
ἑλόμενοι στρατηγὸν Φίλωνα τὸν Αἰνιᾶνα δύναμιν
ἀξιόλογον συνεστήσαντο. πεζοὺς μὲν γὰρ εἶχον
πλείους τῶν δισμυρίων, ἱππεῖς δὲ τρισχιλίους,
πάντας δὲ τῶν κατὰ τὸν πόλεμον ἀγώνων πολλάκις
πεῖραν εἰληφότας καὶ διαφόρους ταῖς ἀνδραγαθίαις.
3Περδίκκας δὲ πυθόμενος τὴν τῶν Ἑλλήνων ἀπόστασιν
ἐκλήρωσεν ἐκ τῶν Μακεδόνων πεζοὺς μὲν
τρισχιλίους, ἱππεῖς δὲ ὀκτακοσίους. τοῦ δὲ πλήθους
ἑλόμενος στρατηγὸν Πίθωνα τὸν σωματοφύλακα
μὲν Ἀλεξάνδρου γεγονότα, φρονήματος δὲ
πλήρη καὶ δυνάμενον στρατηγεῖν παρέδωκε τούτῳ
τοὺς ἀποκληρωθέντας. δοὺς δ᾿ αὐτῷ πρὸς τοὺς
σατράπας ἐπιστολάς, ἐν αἷς γεγραμμένον ἦν στρατιώτας
δοῦναι τῷ Πίθωνι μυρίους μὲν πεζούς,
ἱππεῖς δὲ ὀκτακισχιλίους, ἐξαπέστειλεν ἐπὶ τοὺς
4ἀποστάντας. ὁ δὲ Πίθων μεγαλεπίβολος ὢν ἀσμένως
ὑπήκουσεν εἰς τὴν στρατείαν, διανοούμενος
τοὺς μὲν Ἕλληνας ταῖς φιλανθρωπίαις προσάγεσθαι,
τὴν δὲ δύναμιν τῇ τούτων συμμαχίᾳ μεγάλην
ποιήσας ἰδιοπραγεῖν καὶ τῶν ἄνω σατραπειῶν
5δυναστεύειν. ὁ δὲ Περδίκκας ὑφορώμενος αὐτοῦ
τὴν ἐπιβολὴν διεκελεύσατο καταπολεμήσαντα τοὺς
ἀφεστηκότας ἅπαντας ἀποκτεῖναι καὶ τὰ λάφυρα
διαδοῦναι τοῖς στρατιώταις.
Ὁ δὲ Πίθων ἀναζεύξας μετὰ τῶν δεδομένων
αὐτῷ στρατιωτῶν καὶ παρὰ τῶν σατραπῶν προσλαβόμενος
τοὺς συμμάχους ἧκεν μετὰ πάσης τῆς
δυνάμεως ἐπὶ τοὺς ἀφεστηκότας. διὰ δέ τινος
30Book XVIII

they longed for the Greek customs and manner of 323 b.c. life and were cast away in the most distant part of the kingdom, yet submitted while the king was alive through fear; but when he was dead they rose in revolt.1 After they had taken counsel together and elected Philon the Aenianian as general, they raised a considerable force. They had more than twenty thousand foot soldiers and three thousand horse, all of whom had many times been tried in the contests of war and were distinguished for their courage. When Perdiccas heard of the revolt of the Greeks, he drew by lot from the Macedonians three thousand infantry and eight hundred horsemen. As commander of the whole he selected Pithon, who had been of the Bodyguard of Alexander, a man full of spirit and able to command, and assigned to him the troops that had been drawn. After giving him letters for the satraps, in which it was written that they should furnish Pithon ten thousand footmen and eight thousand horsemen, he sent him against the rebels. Pithon, who was a man of great ambition, gladly accepted the expedition, intending to win the Greeks over through kindness, and, after making his army great through an alliance with them, to work in his own interests and become the ruler of the upper satrapies. But Perdiccas, suspecting his design, gave him definite orders to kill all the rebels when he had subdued them, and to distribute the spoils to the soldiers.
Pithon, setting out with the troops that had been given to him and receiving the auxiliaries from the satraps, came upon the rebels with all his forces.

1For earlier unrest in these satrapies see Book 17. 99. 5–6; Curtius, 9. 7. 1–11.31