Diodorus of Sicily

φωνὴν διάφορον ἢ πρότερον εἰώθει φθέγγεσθαι.
3τὸν δ᾿ ἐπιστατοῦντα ταῖς αἰξὶ θαυμάσαι
τὸ παράδοξον καὶ προσελθόντα τῷ χάσματι καὶ
κατιδόντα οἷόνπερ ἦν ταὐτὸ παθεῖν ταῖς αἰξίν·
ἐκείνας τε γὰρ ὅμοια ποιεῖν τοῖς ἐνθουσιάζουσι καὶ
τοῦτον προλέγειν τὰ μέλλοντα γίνεσθαι. μετὰ δὲ
ταῦτα τῆς φήμης παρὰ τοῖς ἐγχωρίοις διαδοθείσης
περὶ τοῦ πάθους τῶν προσιόντων τῷ χάσματι
πλείους ἀπαντᾶν ἐπὶ τὸν τόπον, διὰ δὲ τὸ παράδοξον
πάντων ἀποπειρωμένων τοὺς αἰεὶ πλησιάζοντας
ἐνθουσιάζειν. δι᾿ ἃς αἰτίας θαυμαστωθῆναί1
τε τὸ μαντεῖον καὶ νομισθῆναι τῆς Γῆς εἶναι τὸ
4χρηστήριον. καὶ χρόνον μέν τινα τοὺς βουλομένους
μαντεύεσθαι προσιόντας τῷ χάσματι ποιεῖθαι τὰς
μαντείας ἀλλήλοις· μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα πολλῶν καθαλλομένων
εἰς τὸ χάσμα διὰ τὸν ἐνθουσιασμὸν καὶ
πάντων ἀφανιζομένων δόξαι τοῖς κατοικοῦσι περὶ
τὸν τόπον, ἵνα μηδεὶς κινδυνεύῃ, προφῆτίν τε μίαν
πᾶσι καταστῆσαι γυναῖκα καὶ διὰ ταύτης γίνεσθαι
τὴν χρησμολογίαν. ταύτῃ δὲ κατασκευασθῆναι
μηχανὴν ἐφ᾿ ἣν ἀναβαίνουσαν ἀσφαλῶς ἐνθουσιάζειν
5καὶ μαντεύεσθαι τοῖς βουλομένοις. εἶναι δὲ
τὴν μηχανὴν τρεῖς ἔχουσαν βάσεις, ἀφ᾿ ὧν αὐτὴν
τρίποδα κληθῆναι· σχεδὸν δὲ πάντας τούτου τοῦ2
κατασκευάσματος ἀπομιμήματα γίνεσθαι τοὺς ἔτι
καὶ νῦν κατασκευαζομένους χαλκοῦς τρίποδας. ὃν
μὲν οὖν τρόπον εὑρέθη τὸ μαντεῖον καὶ δι᾿ ἃς αἰτίας
ὁ τρίπους κατεσκευάσθη ἱκανῶς εἰρῆσθαι νομίζω.

1θαυμαστωθῆναι X: θαυμασθῆναι cet.2πάντας τούτου τοῦ Capps: παντὸς τοῦ.310Book XVI

quite different from what it was formerly wont to 355/4 b.c. emit. The herdsman in charge of the goats marvelled at the strange phenomenon and having approached the chasm and peeped down it to discover what it was, had the same experience as the goats,1 for the goats began to act like beings possessed and the goatherd also began to foretell future events. After this as the report was bruited among the people of the vicinity concerning the experience of those who approached the chasm, an increasing number of persons visited the place and, as they all tested it because of its miraculous character, whosoever approached the spot became inspired. For these reasons the oracle came to be regarded as a marvel and to be considered the prophecy-giving shrine of Earth. For some time all who wished to obtain a prophecy approached the chasm and made their prophetic replies to one another; but later, since many were leaping down into the chasm under the influence of their frenzy and all disappeared, it seemed best to the dwellers in that region, in order to eliminate the risk, to station one woman there as a single prophetess for all and to have the oracles told through her. And for her a contrivance was devised which she could safely mount, then become inspired and give prophecies to those who so desired. And this contrivance has three supports and hence was called a tripod, and, I dare say, all the bronze tripods which are constructed even to this day are made in imitation of this contrivance.2 In what manner, then, the oracle was discovered and for what reasons the tripod was devised I think I have told




1See Plutarch, De defectu oraculorum, 42; Justin, 24. 6.2Schol. on Aristophanes, Plutus, 9.311