Diodorus of Sicily

λόφον τινὰ κατειλημμένους, καὶ καθόλου πολὺν
2φόβον τοῖς Κορκυραίοις ἐπέστησεν. Ἀθηναῖοι δὲ
καὶ πάλαι μὲν ἀπεστάλκεισαν Τιμόθεον τὸν Κόνωνος
ἐπὶ βοήθειαν τοῖς Κορκυραίοις μετὰ νεῶν ἑξήκοντα·
οὗτος δὲ πρὸ τῆς συμμαχίας ταύτης πλεύσας
ἐπὶ Θρᾴκης, καὶ πολλὰς πόλεις ἐπὶ συμμαχίαν
προσκαλεσάμενος, προσέθηκε τριάκοντα τριήρεις·
3τότε δὲ καθυστερῶν τῆς τῶν Κορκυραίων συμμαχίας
τὸ μὲν πρῶτον ἀπέβαλε τὴν στρατηγίαν, τοῦ
δήμου χαλεπῶς πρὸς αὐτὸν διατεθέντος· ὡς δὲ
παρέπλευσεν εἰς τὰς Ἀθήνας, ἄγων πρέσβεων
πλῆθος τῶν τὴν συμμαχίαν συντιθεμένων καὶ τριάκοντα
τριήρεις προστεθεικώς, πάντα δὲ τὸν στόλον
εὖ κατεσκευακὼς πρὸς τὸν πόλεμον, μετενόησεν ὁ
δῆμος καὶ πάλιν αὐτῷ τὴν στρατηγίαν ἀποκατέστησεν.
4προσκατεσκεύαζον1 δὲ καὶ ἄλλας2 τριήρεις
τετταράκοντα, ὥστε3 τὰς πάσας4 γίνεσθαι
ἑκατὸν καὶ τριάκοντα· ἐποιοῦντο δὲ καὶ σίτου καὶ
βελῶν καὶ τῶν ἄλλων τῶν εἰς πόλεμον χρησίμων
ἀξιολόγους παρασκευάς. κατὰ δὲ τὸ παρὸν στρατηγὸν
ἑλόμενοι Κτησικλέα μετὰ στρατιωτῶν πεντακοσίων
ἐξέπεμψαν βοηθήσοντα τοῖς Κορκυραίοις.
5οὗτος δὲ λάθρᾳ νυκτὸς ἔλαθε τοὺς πολιορκοῦντας
εἰσπλεύσας εἰς Κόρκυραν· καὶ καταλαβὼν τοὺς ἐν
τῇ πόλει πρὸς μὲν ἀλλήλους στασιάζοντας, τὰ δὲ
κατὰ τὸν πόλεμον κακῶς διοικοῦντας, τὰς μὲν
στάσεις διέλυσε, τῆς δὲ πόλεως πολλὴν ἐπιμέλειαν
ποιησάμενος εὐθαρσεῖς ἐποίησε τοὺς πολιορκουμένους.


1προσκατεσκεύαζον Dindorf: προκατασκευάζων.2τὰς before ἄλλας deleted by Dindorf.3ὥστε Reiske: ὡς καὶ.4ἄλλας before πάσας deleted by Reiske.78Book XV

a contingent on land which had seized a certain 374/3 b.c. hill, and generally terrorized the Corcyraeans. The Athenians had some time previously dispatched Timotheüs, Conon’s son, with sixty ships to aid Corcyra. He, however, before intervening in their favour, had sailed to the region of Thrace. Here he summoned many cities to join the alliance, and added thirty triremes to his fleet. At this point, because he was too late to assist Corcyra, he was at first deprived of his command as a result of his loss of popularity. Later, however, when he sailed along the Attic coast to Athens, bringing with him a great number of envoys from states which were ready to conclude an alliance with Athens, having added thirty triremes to his fleet and put the whole fleet in good trim for the war, the people repented and reinstated1 him in his command. They furthermore equipped forty additional triremes, so that altogether he had one hundred thirty; they also provided liberal stores of food, engines of war, and other supplies needed for war. To meet the immediate emergency, they chose Ctesicles2 general and sent him with five hundred soldiers to aid the Corcyraeans. He arrived there secretly by night and sailed into Corcyra undetected by the besiegers. Finding the inhabitants of the city at strife with one another and handling military matters badly, he composed the dissensions, devoted much attention to the city’s business, and heartened





1Timotheüs was not reinstated though he was acquitted in this cause célèbre. See Xenophon, Hell. 6. 2. 13; Nepos, Timotheus, 4; Demosthenes, 49. 9 f., 22.2See chap. 46. 3 and Xenophon, op. cit. 2. 10.79