Diodorus of Sicily

κινδύνων ὑπὸ τῶν ἐνηθληκότων τοῖς δεινοῖς ῥᾳδίως
ἡττηθήσεσθαι, τοὺς δὲ κατὰ Λιβύην συμμάχους,
βαρυνομένους τοῖς προστάγμασιν ἐκ πολλῶν χρόνων,
λήψεσθαι καιρὸν τῆς ἀποστάσεως, τὸ δὲ
μέγιστον, διαρπάσειν ἀπροσδοκήτως ἐπιφανεὶς
χώραν ἀπόρθητον καὶ διὰ τὴν τῶν Καρχηδονίων
εὐδαιμονίαν πεπληρωμένην παντοίων ἀγαθῶν, τὸ
δ᾿ ὅλον ἀπὸ τῆς πατρίδος καὶ πάσης Σικελίας
περισπάσειν τοὺς βαρβάρους καὶ πάντα τὸν πόλεμον
μετάξειν εἰς τὴν Λιβύην· ὅπερ καὶ συνετελέσθη.
4. Τὴν γὰρ ἐπίνοιαν ταύτην οὐδενὶ τῶν φίλων
δηλώσας τῆς μὲν πόλεως ἐπιμελητὴν Ἄντανδρον
τὸν ἀδελφὸν κατέστησε μετὰ τῆς ἱκανῆς φυλακῆς,
αὐτὸς δὲ τῶν στρατιωτῶν ἐπιλέγων τοὺς εὐθέτους
κατέγραφε, τοῖς μὲν πεζοῖς παραγγέλλων ἑτοίμους
εἶναι μετὰ τῶν ὅπλων, τοῖς δ᾿ ἱππεῦσι διακελευόμενος
ἔχειν μεθ᾿ ἑαυτῶν χωρὶς τῆς πανοπλίας
ὑπηρέσιον καὶ χαλινόν, ὅπως, ὅταν ἵππων κυριεύσῃ,
τοὺς ἀναβησομένους ἑτοίμους ἔχειν, τὰ πρὸς τὴν
2χρείαν ἐξηρτυμένους· κατὰ γὰρ τὴν προγεγενημένην
ἧτταν τῶν μὲν πεζῶν ἀπωλώλεισαν οἱ πλείους, οἱ
δ᾿ ἱππεῖς ὑπῆρχον διασεσωσμένοι σχεδὸν ἅπαντες,
ὧν τοὺς ἵππους οὐκ ἠδύνατο διακομίζειν εἰς τὴν
3Λιβύην. ἵνα δὲ χωρισθέντος αὐτοῦ μὴ νεωτερίζωσιν
οἱ Συρακόσιοι, διεζεύγνυε τὰς συγγενείας
ἀπ᾿ ἀλλήλων καὶ μάλιστα ἀδελφοὺς ἀπ᾿ ἀδελφῶν
καὶ πατέρας ἀπὸ παίδων, τοὺς μὲν ἐπὶ τῆς πόλεως


150Book XX

easily be defeated by men who had been trained in 310 b.c. the school of danger; that the Libyan allies of the Carthaginians, who had for a long time resented their exactions, would grasp an opportunity for revolt; most important of all, that by appearing unexpectedly, he would plunder a land which had not been ravaged and which, because of the prosperity of the Carthaginians, abounded in wealth of every kind; and in general, that he would divert the barbarians from his native city and from all Sicily and transfer the whole war to Libya. And this last, indeed, was accomplished.
4. Disclosing this intention to none of his friends, he set up his brother Antander1 as curator of the city with an adequate garrison; and he himself selected and enrolled those of the soldiers who were fit for service, bidding the infantry be ready with their arms, and giving special orders to the cavalry that, in addition to their full armour, they should have with them saddle-pads and bridles, in order that, when he got possession of horses, he might have men ready to mount them, equipped with what was needed for the service; for in the earlier defeat the greater part of the foot-soldiers had been killed, but almost all the horsemen had survived uninjured,2 whose horses he was not able to transport to Libya. In order that the Syracusans might not attempt a revolution after he had left them, he separated relatives from each other, particularly brothers from brothers and fathers from sons, leaving the one group


1He was probably an older brother: in 317 b.c. he was one of the Syracusan generals in the war with the Bruttii, and Agathocles was only a chiliarch (Book 19. 3. 3). He later wrote a biography of Agathocles (Book 21. 16. 5).2Agathocles’ losses in the battle at the Himeras River are given in Book 19. 109. 5 as not less than 7000 men.151