Diodorus of Sicily

τὰς κατασκευασθείσας μηχανάς, ὥστε γίνεσθαι τὸ
ἔργον ἐπὶ μῆκος μεσοπυργίων ἓξ καὶ πύργων ἑπτά.
τὸ δ᾿ ἠθροισμένον πλῆθος τῶν τεχνιτῶν καὶ τῶν
τοῖς ἔργοις προσιόντων οὐ πολὺ ἐλείπετο τῶν τρισμυρίων.
92. Διόπερ τῇ πολυχειρίᾳ τάχιον τῆς προσδοκίας
ἁπάντων ἐπιτελουμένων φοβερὸς ἦν ὁ Δημήτριος
τοῖς Ῥοδίοις. οὐ μόνον γὰρ τὰ μεγέθη τῶν μηχανῶν
καὶ τὸ πλῆθος τῆς ἠθροισμένης δυνάμεως
ἐξέπληττεν αὐτούς, ἀλλὰ καὶ τὸ τοῦ βασιλέως βίαιον
2καὶ φιλότεχνον ἐν ταῖς πολιορκίαις. εὐμήχανος γὰρ
ὢν καθ᾿ ὑπερβολὴν ἐν ταῖς ἐπινοίαις καὶ πολλὰ
παρὰ τὴν τῶν ἀρχιτεκτόνων τέχνην παρευρίσκων
ὠνομάσθη μὲν πολιορκητής, τὴν δ᾿ ἐν ταῖς προσβολαῖς
ὑπεροχὴν καὶ βίαν τοιαύτην εἶχεν ὥστε
δόξαι μηδὲν οὕτως ὀχυρὸν εἶναι τεῖχος ὃ δύναιτ᾿
ἂν τὴν ἀπ᾿ ἐκείνου τοῖς πολιορκουμένοις ἀσφάλειαν
3παρέχεσθαι. ἦν δὲ καὶ κατὰ τὸ μέγεθος τοῦ
σώματος καὶ κατὰ τὸ κάλλος ἡρωικὸν ἀποφαίνων
ἀξίωμα, ὥστε καὶ τοὺς ἀφικνουμένους τῶν ξένων
θεωροῦντας εὐπρέπειαν κεκοσμημένην ὑπεροχῇ βασιλικῇ
θαυμάζειν καὶ παρακολουθεῖν ἐν ταῖς ἐξόδοις
4ἕνεκεν τῆς θέας. ἐπὶ δὲ τούτοις ὑπῆρχε καὶ τῇ
ψυχῇ μετέωρος καὶ μεγαλοπρεπὴς καὶ καταφρονῶν
οὐ τῶν πολλῶν μόνον, ἀλλὰ καὶ τῶν ἐν ταῖς δυναστείαις
ὄντων, καὶ τὸ πάντων ἰδιώτατον, κατὰ
μὲν τὴν εἰρήνην ἐν μέθαις διέτριβε καὶ συμποσίοις
ἔχουσιν ὀρχήσεις καὶ κώμους καὶ τὸ σύνολον ἐζήλου
τὴν μυθολογουμένην ποτὲ γενέσθαι κατ᾿ ἀνθρώπους
τοῦ Διονύσου διάθεσιν, κατὰ δὲ τοὺς πολέμους
ἐνεργὸς ἦν καὶ νήφων, ὥστε παρὰ πάντας τοὺς
ἐργατευομένους ἐναγώνιον παρέχεσθαι τὸ σῶμα καὶ
386Book XX

had prepared, wide enough so that it covered a front 304 b.c. of six curtains and seven towers. The number of craftsmen and labourers collected was not much less than thirty thousand.
92. As everything, therefore, because of the many hands was finished sooner than was expected. Demetrius was regarded with alarm by the Rhodians; for not only did the size of the siege engines and the number of the army which had been gathered stun them, but also the king’s energy and ingenuity in conducting sieges. For, being exceedingly ready in invention and devising many things beyond the art of the master builders, he was called Poliorcetes1; and he displayed such superiority and force in his attacks that it seemed that no wall was strong enough to furnish safety from him for the besieged. Both in stature and in beauty he displayed the dignity of a hero, so that even those strangers who had come from a distance, when they beheld his comeliness arrayed in royal splendour, marvelled at him and followed him as he went abroad in order to gaze at him. Furthermore, he was haughty in spirit and proud and looked down not only upon common men but also upon those of royal estate; and what was most peculiar to him, in time of peace he devoted his time to winebibbing and to drinking bouts accompanied by dancing and revels, and in general he emulated the conduct said by mythology to have been that of Dionysus among men; but in his wars he was active and sober, so that beyond all others who practised this profession he devoted both body

1i.e. “stormer of cities.” Cp. Plutarch, Demetrius, 2–4, for his character.387