Diodorus of Sicily

πλεῖστοι μὲν γεγηρακότες, ἠκρωτηριασμένοι δὲ
πάντες, οἱ μὲν χεῖρας, οἱ δὲ πόδας, οἱ δὲ ὦτα καὶ
4ῥῖνας· τῶν δ᾿ ἐπιστήμας ἢ τέχνας εἰδότων καὶ ἐν
παιδείᾳ προκεκοφότων τὰ μὲν ἄλλα τῶν ἀκρωτηρίων
ἀπεκέκοπτο,1 αὐτὰ δὲ μόνα τὰ συνεργοῦντα
πρὸς τὰς ἐπιστήμας ἀπελέλειπτο· ὥστε πάντας
ὁρῶντας τὰ τῆς ἡλικίας ἀξιώματα καὶ τὰς περιεχούσας
τὰ σώματα συμφορὰς ἐλεεῖν τὰς τύχας2
τῶν ἀκληρούντων, μάλιστα δὲ αὐτὸν τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον
συμπαθῆ γενέσθαι τοῖς ἠτυχηκόσι καὶ μὴ
δύνασθαι κατασχεῖν τὰ δάκρυα.
5Ἀναβοησάντων δὲ ἅμα ἁπάντων καὶ τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον
ἀξιούντων ἀμῦναι ταῖς ἰδίαις συμφοραῖς ὁ
μὲν βασιλεὺς προσκαλεσάμενος τοὺς προεστηκότας
καὶ τῆς αὑτοῦ μεγαλοψυχίας ἀξίως τιμήσας ἐπηγγείλατο
πολλὴν πρόνοιαν ποιήσασθαι τῆς ἐπ᾿ οἶκον
6ἀνακομιδῆς.3 οἱ δὲ συνελθόντες καὶ βουλευσάμενοι
προέκριναν τὴν αὐτόθι μονὴν τῆς εἰς οἶκον ἀνακομιδῆς.
ἀνασωθέντας μὲν γὰρ αὑτοὺς διασπαρήσεσθαι
κατ᾿ ὀλίγους καὶ περιόντας ἐν ταῖς πόλεσιν
ἐπονείδιστον ἕξειν τὴν ἐκ τῆς τύχης ἐπήρειαν· μετ᾿
ἀλλήλων δὲ βιοῦντας, τὴν ὁμοίαν συμφορὰν ἔχοντας,
παραμύθιον ἕξειν τῆς ἰδίας ἀκληρίας τὴν τῶν ἄλλων
7τῆς ἀκληρίας ὁμοιότητα. διὸ καὶ πάλιν ἐντυχόντες
τῷ βασιλεῖ καὶ τὴν ἰδίαν κρίσιν δηλώσαντες ἐδέοντο
πρὸς ταύτην τὴν ὑπόστασιν οἰκείαν παρέχεσθαι
8βοήθειαν. ὁ δὲ Ἀλέξανδρος συγκαταθέμενος τοῖς
δεδογμένοις τρισχιλίας μὲν ἑκάστῳ δραχμὰς ἐδωρήσατο



1ἀπεκέκοπτο Dindorf; ἀπέκοπτον RX; ἀπέκοπτεν F.2ψυχὰς RX.3The order of words is that of Dindorf. The manuscripts read προσκαλεσάμενος τοὺς προεστηκότας ἐπηγγείλατο πολλὴν πρόνοιαν ποιήσασθαι (ποιήσεσθαι F) καὶ τῆς αὐτοῦ μεγαλοψυχίας ἀξίως τιμήσας φροντίδα ποιήσασθαι (ποιήσειν RX) τῆς ἐπ᾿ οἶκον ἀνακομιδῆς.316Book XVII

number, most of them elderly. All had been mutilated 330/29 b.c. some lacking hands, some feet, and some ears and noses. They were persons who had acquired skills or crafts and had made good progress in their instruction; then their other extremities had been amputated and they were left only those which were vital to their profession. All the soldiers, seeing their venerable years and the losses which their bodies had suffered, pitied the lot of the wretches. Alexander most of all was affected by them and unable to restrain his tears.
They all cried with one voice and besought Alexander to help them in their misfortunes. The king called their leaders to come forward and, greeting them with a respect in keeping with his own greatness of spirit, promised to make it a matter of utmost concern that they should be restored to their homes. They gathered to debate the matter, and decided that it would be better for them to remain where they were rather than to return home. If they were brought back safely, they would be scattered in small groups, and would find their abuse at the hands of Fortune an object of reproach as they lived on in their cities. If, however, they continued living together, as companions in misfortune, they would find a solace for their mutilation in the similar mutilation of the others. So they again appeared before the king, told him of their decision, and asked him to give them help appropriate to this proposal. Alexander applauded their decision and gave each of them three


317