Diodorus of Sicily

εἰς τὴν Φοινίκην ἐστρατοπέδευσεν οὐ μακρὰν
5τῆς Σιδῶνος. οἱ δὲ Σιδώνιοι κεχρονικότος τοῦ
βασιλέως περὶ τὰς παρασκευὰς σίτου τε καὶ ὅπλων
καὶ βελῶν πολλὴν ἐπιμέλειαν ἐποιήσαντο.1 ὁμοίως
οὖν τὴν πόλιν τάφροις τριπλαῖς μεγάλαις καὶ τειχῶν
6ὑψηλῶν κατασκευαῖς περιειλήφεισαν. εἶχον δὲ καὶ
στρατιωτῶν ἱκανὸν πλῆθος πολιτικῶν ἐν γυμνασίαις2
καὶ πόνοις ἐνηθληκὸς καὶ ταῖς τῶν σωμάτων
εὐεξίαις καὶ ῥώμαις διαφέρον. πλούτῳ δὲ καὶ ταῖς
ἄλλαις χορηγίαις ἡ πόλις πολὺ προεῖχε τῶν κατὰ
τὴν Φοινίκην πόλεων, τὸ δὲ μέγιστον τριήρεις καὶ
πεντήρεις εἶχε πλείους τῶν ἑκατόν.
45. Ὁ δὲ Τέννης3 κοινωσάμενος τὴν προδοσίαν
Μέντορι τῷ στρατηγῷ τῶν ἐξ Αἰγύπτου μισθοφόρων
τοῦτον μὲν ἀπέλιπε τηροῦντα μέρος τῆς
πόλεως καὶ συνεργοῦντα τοῖς περὶ τὴν προδοσίαν
ἐγχειρουμένοις, αὐτὸς δὲ μετὰ στρατιωτῶν πεντακοσίων
προῆγεν ἐκ τῆς πόλεως, προσποιούμενος
ἐπὶ κοινὴν τῶν Φοινίκων σύνοδον ἀπαντᾶν· ἦγε
δὲ μεθ᾿ ἑαυτοῦ τοὺς ἐπιφανεστάτους τῶν πολιτῶν
2ἑκατὸν ὡς συμβούλους. ἐπεὶ δὲ πλησίον ἦσαν τοῦ
βασιλέως, συναρπάσας τοὺς ἑκατὸν παρέδωκε τῷ
Ἀρταξέρξῃ. ὁ δὲ βασιλεὺς ἀποδεξάμενος αὐτὸν
ὡς φίλον τοὺς μὲν ἑκατὸν ὡς αἰτίους ὄντας τῆς
ἀποστάσεως κατηκόντισε, πεντακοσίων δὲ τῶν
πρώτων Σιδωνίων μεθ᾿ ἱκετηριῶν ἀπαντησάντων
ἀνεκαλέσατο τὸν Τέννην καὶ ἐπηρώτησεν εἰ δύναται
τὴν πόλιν αὐτῷ παραδοῦναι· σφόδρα γὰρ ἔσπευδε
μὴ δι᾿ ὁμολογίας τὴν Σιδῶνα παραλαβεῖν, ὅπως
ἀπαραιτήτοις συμφοραῖς περιβαλὼν τοὺς Σιδωνίους
τῇ τούτων τιμωρίᾳ καταπλήξηται τὰς ἄλλας

1Fischer suggests ἐπεποίητο.2So Fischer (cp. Pollux, 10. 20. 4): γυμνασίοις.3Τέννης Μέντωρ X, which omits Μέντορι.360Book XVI

and reached Phoenicia, encamped not far from Sidon. 351/0 b.c. As for the Sidonians, while the King had been slow to move, they attended assiduously to the preparation of food, armour, and missiles. Likewise they had encompassed their city with huge triple ditches and constructions of lofty walls. They had also an ample number of citizen soldiers well trained in exercises and hard work and of superior bodily condition and strength. In wealth and in other resources the city far excelled the other cities of Phoenicia and, most important of all, it had more than a hundred triremes and quinqueremes.
45. Tennes, having confided his scheme for betrayal to Mentor1 the commander of the mercenaries from Egypt, left him to guard a portion of the city and to act in concert with his agents handling the betrayal, while he himself, with five hundred men, marched out of the city, pretending that he was going to a common meeting of the Phoenicians, and he took with him the most distinguished of the citizens, to the number of one hundred, in the role of advisers. When they had come near the King he suddenly seized the hundred and delivered them to Artaxerxes. The King, welcoming him as a friend, had the hundred shot as instigators of the revolt, and when five hundred of the leading Sidonians carrying olive branches as suppliants approached him, he summoned Tennes and asked him if he was able to deliver the city to him; for he was very eager not to receive Sidon on the terms of a capitulation, since his aim was to overwhelm the Sidonians with a merciless disaster and to strike terror into the




1Cp. chap. 42. 2.361