Diodorus of Sicily
2χωρὶς γὰρ τῶν συμμάχων καὶ τῶν ἐκ
Συρακουσσῶν καταγραφέντων εἰς τὴν στρατείαν
μισθοφόρους ἐπιλέκτους εἶχε πεζοὺς μὲν μυρίους,
ἱππεῖς δὲ τρισχιλίους πεντήκοντα. ἐποιήσατο δὲ
καὶ παρασκευὴν ὅπλων καὶ βελῶν παντοδαπῶν,
εἰδὼς τοὺς Καρχηδονίους ἐπιτετιμηκότας τῷ
Ἀμίλκᾳ περὶ τῶν συνθηκῶν συντόμως δὲ πρὸς
αὐτὸν τὸν πόλεμον ἐξοίσοντας.
Καὶ τὰ μὲν περὶ Σικελίαν ἐν τούτοις τοῖς χρόνοις
τοιαύτην ἔσχε τὴν κατάστασιν.
3Κατὰ δὲ τὴν Ἰταλίαν Σαμνῖται διαπολεμοῦντες
Ῥωμαίοις ἔτη πλείονα περὶ τῆς ἡγεμονίας Πληστικὴν
μὲν φρουρὰν ἔχουσαν Ῥωμαϊκὴν ἐξεπολιόρκησαν,
Σωρανοὺς δ᾿ ἔπεισαν κατασφάξαι μὲν τοὺς
παρ᾿ αὐτοῖς Ῥωμαίους, συμμαχίαν δὲ πρὸς Σαμνίτας
4συνθέσθαι. μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα Ῥωμαίων Σατικόλαν
πολιορκούντων ἐπεφάνησαν μετὰ δυνάμεως
ἁδρᾶς, σπεύδοντες λῦσαι τὴν πολιορκίαν· γενομένης
οὖν μάχης ἰσχυρᾶς πολλοὶ μὲν παρ᾿ ἀμφοτέρων
ἀνῃρέθησαν, τέλος δὲ ἐπὶ τοῦ προτερήματος ἐγένοντο
Ῥωμαῖοι. μετὰ δὲ τὴν μάχην ἐκπολιορκήσαντες
τὴν πόλιν ἐπῄεσαν ἀδεῶς τὰ πλησίον
5πολίσματα καὶ χωρία προσαγόμενοι. τοῦ δὲ
πολέμου περὶ τὰς ἐν Ἀπουλίᾳ πόλεις συνεστῶτος
οἱ μὲν Σαμνῖται πάντας τοὺς ἐν ἡλικίᾳ1 στρατείας
ὄντας καταγράψαντες ἐστρατοπέδευσαν πλησίον τῶν
6πολεμίων, ὡς περὶ τῶν ὅλων κριθησόμενοι. ἃ δὴ
πυθόμενος ὁ δῆμος τῶν Ῥωμαίων καὶ διαγωνιάσας




1ἡλικίᾳ Hertlein: ἡλικίαις.28Book XIX

considerable army. Indeed, without counting the 314 b.c. allies and those of the Syracusans who had enlisted for military service, he had a picked mercenary force comprising ten thousand foot soldiers and thirty-five hundred horse. Moreover, he prepared a store of weapons and of missiles of all kinds, since he knew that the Carthaginians, who had censured Hamilcar for the terms of peace,1 would shortly wage war against him.
This was the situation of Sicilian affairs at this time.2
In Italy3 the Samnites, fighting bitterly against the Romans for supremacy in a struggle lasting many years, took by siege Plesticê,4 which had a Roman garrison, and persuaded the people of Sora to slay the Romans who were among them and to make an alliance with themselves. Next, as the Romans were besieging Saticula, the Samnites suddenly appeared with a strong army intent on raising the siege. A great battle then took place in which many were slain on both sides, but eventually the Romans gained the upper hand. After the battle the Romans carried the siege of the city to completion and then advanced at will, subjecting the near-by towns and strongholds. Now that the struggle for the cities of Apulia5 had been joined, the Samnites enrolled all who were of age for military service and encamped near the enemy as if intending to decide the whole issue. When the Roman people learned



1Hamilcar was accused of treason but died before the
trial was completed (Justin, 22. 3. 2–7).2Continued in chap. 102.3Continued from chap. 65. 7; cp. Livy, 9. 21–23.4The location of this town, called Plistica or Postia in the MSS. of Livy, is not known.5So the MSS., but Sora is in south-eastern Latium, Saticula on the frontier between Campania and Samnium, and Laustolae covers the shore road from Latium to Campania. Perhaps we should read “Campania.”29