Diodorus of Sicily

ἐν τοῖς ἔμπροσθεν χρόνοις δεκάτην ἀποστέλλειν
τῷ θεῷ πάντων τῶν εἰς πρόσοδον πιπτόντων·
ὕστερον δὲ μεγάλους κτησάμενοι πλούτους καὶ
προσόδους ἀξιολογωτέρας λαμβάνοντες μικρὰ παντελῶς
ἀπέστελλον, ὀλιγωροῦντες τοῦ δαιμονίου.
διὰ δὲ τὴν συμφορὰν ταύτην εἰς μεταμέλειαν
ἐλθόντες πάντων τῶν ἐν τῇ Τύρῳ θεῶν ἐμνημόνευον.
3ἔπεμψαν δὲ καὶ τοὺς ἐκ τῶν ἱερῶν χρυσοῦς
ναοὺς τοῖς1 ἀφιδρύμασι πρὸς τὴν ἱκεσίαν, ἡγούμενοι
μᾶλλον ἐξιλάσεσθαι τὴν τοῦ θεοῦ μῆνιν τῶν ἀναθημάτων
4πεμφθέντων ἐπὶ τὴν παραίτησιν. ᾐτιῶντο
δὲ καὶ τὸν Κρόνον αὑτοῖς ἐναντιοῦσθαι, καθ᾿ ὅσον
ἐν τοῖς ἔμπροσθεν χρόνοις θύοντες τούτῳ τῷ θεῷ
τῶν υἱῶν τοὺς κρατίστους ὕστερον ὠνούμενοι
λάθρᾳ παῖδας καὶ θρέψαντες ἔπεμπον ἐπὶ τὴν
θυσίαν· καὶ ζητήσεως γενομένης εὑρέθησάν τινες
τῶν καθιερουργημένων ὑποβολιμαῖοι γεγονότες.
5τούτων δὲ λαβόντες ἔννοιαν καὶ τοὺς πολεμίους
πρὸς τοῖς τείχεσιν ὁρῶντες στρατοπεδεύοντας ἐδεισιδαιμόνουν
ὡς καταλελυκότες τὰς πατρίους τῶν
θεῶν τιμάς. διορθώσασθαι δὲ τὰς ἀγνοίας σπεύδοντες
διακοσίους μὲν τῶν ἐπιφανεστάτων παίδων
προκρίναντες ἔθυσαν δημοσίᾳ· ἄλλοι δ᾿ ἐν διαβολαῖς
ὄντες ἑκουσίως ἑαυτοὺς ἔδοσαν, οὐκ ἐλάττους ὄντες
6τριακοσίων. ἦν δὲ παρ᾿ αὐτοῖς ἀνδριὰς Κρόνου
χαλκοῦς, ἐκτετακὼς τὰς χεῖρας ὑπτίας ἐγκεκλιμένας
ἐπὶ τὴν γῆν, ὥστε τὸν ἐπιτεθέντα τῶν παίδων



1<αὐτοῖς> τοῖς ἀφ. Fischer, <αὐτοῖς> ἀφ. Wesseling, <σὺν>
τοῖς ἀφ. Madvig.178Book XX

period to send to the god a tenth of all that was paid 310 b.c. into the public revenue; but later, when they had acquired great wealth and were receiving more considerable revenues, they sent very little indeed, holding the divinity of little account. But turning to repentance because of this misfortune, they bethought them of all the gods of Tyre. They even sent from their temples in supplication the golden shrines with their images,1 believing that they would better appease the wrath of the god if the offerings were sent for the sake of winning forgiveness. They also alleged that Cronus2 had turned against them inasmuch as in former times they had been accustomed to sacrifice to this god the noblest of their sons, but more recently, secretly buying and nurturing children, they had sent these to the sacrifice; and when an investigation was made, some of those who had been sacrificed were discovered to have been supposititious. When they had given thought to these things and saw their enemy encamped before their walls, they were filled with superstitious dread, for they believed that they had neglected the honours of the gods that had been established by their fathers. In their zeal to make amends for their omission, they selected two hundred of the noblest children and sacrificed them publicly; and others who were under suspicion sacrificed themselves voluntarily, in number not less than three hundred. There was in their city a bronze image of Cronus, extending its hands, palms up and sloping toward the ground, so that each of the children when placed


1These golden shrines containing images of the gods,
which are called offerings just below, seem to have been
dedications in the temples in Carthage. One may compare the silver shrines of Diana of Ephesus made and sold in large numbers in that city in the first century after Christ, Luke, Acts of the Apostles, 19. 24–27.2i.e. Baal, or Moloch.179