Diodorus of Sicily

πεμφθεὶς ὑπὸ τῶν περὶ Σέλευκον ἐκ Κύπρου πλεύσας
5κατῆρεν εἰς Κεγχρεάς, ἀκούσας δὲ τὴν Ἀλεξάνδρου
μετάθεσιν καὶ θεωρῶν μηδὲν ὑπάρχον
πολέμιον σύστημα τὸν πλοῦν ἐπὶ Παμφυλίας ἐποιήσατο.
ἐντεῦθεν δὲ παρακομισθεὶς εἰς Ἀφροδισιάδα
τῆς Κιλικίας, ὡς1 ἤκουσεν ὅτι Θεόδοτος
μὲν ὁ Ἀντιγόνου ναύαρχος ἐκ Πατάρων τῆς Λυκίας
παραπλεῖ ταῖς ἀπὸ Ῥόδου ναυσίν, ἐχούσαις
ἀπὸ Καρίας πληρώματα, καὶ διότι Περίλαος μετὰ
στρατιωτῶν παράγει πεζῇ, παρεχόμενος τῷ στόλῳ
τῆς ἀγωγῆς τὴν ἀσφάλειαν ἀμφοτέρους κατεστρατήγησε.
6τοὺς μὲν γὰρ στρατιώτας ἀποβιβάσας
ἔκρυψεν ἐν εὐθέτῳ τόπῳ, καθ᾿ ὃν ἀναγκαῖον
ἦν τοὺς πολεμίους τὴν πάροδον ποιήσασθαι, αὐτὸς
δὲ πάσαις ταῖς ναυσὶν ἐπιπλεύσας καὶ πρὸ αὑτοῦ
λαβὼν ἀκρωτήριον ἐπετήρει τὴν τῶν πολεμίων
παρουσίαν. ἐμπεσόντων δὲ πρῶτον τῶν πεζῶν εἰς
τὴν ἐνέδραν συνέβη τόν τε Περίλαον ἁλῶναι καὶ
τῶν ἄλλων τοὺς μὲν πεσεῖν μαχομένους, οὓς δὲ
7ζωγρηθῆναι. ἐπιχειρούντων δὲ τῶν ἀπὸ Ῥόδου
νεῶν παραβοηθεῖν τοῖς ἰδίοις ἐπιπλεύσας ὁ Πολύκλειτος
ἄφνω συντεταγμένῳ τῷ στόλῳ ῥᾳδίως
ἐτρέψατο τεταραγμένους τοὺς πολεμίους. διόπερ
συνέβη τάς τε ναῦς ἁλῶναι πάσας καὶ τῶν ἀνδρῶν
οὐκ ὀλίγους, ἐν οἷς καὶ αὐτὸν τὸν Θεόδοτον τραυματίαν
γενόμενον μετ᾿ ὀλίγας ἡμέρας τελευτῆσαι.
8Πολύκλειτος μὲν οὖν χωρὶς κινδύνων τηλικαῦτα
πλεονεκτήσας ἀπέπλευσεν εἰς Κύπρον, ἐντεῦθεν δ᾿
εἰς Πηλούσιον· ὁ δὲ Πτολεμαῖος τοῦτον μὲν ἐπαινέσας
δωρεαῖς μεγάλαις ἐτίμησε καὶ πολὺ μᾶλλον
προῆγεν ὡς ἀρχηγὸν γεγονότα μεγάλου προτερήματος,
τὸν δὲ Περίλαον καὶ τῶν ἄλλων αἰχμαλώτων
1ὡς added by Reiske.408Book XIX

had been sent by Seleucus from Cyprus, sailed into 315 b.c. Cenchreae, but when he heard of Alexander’s change in allegiance and saw that there was no hostile force in existence, he sailed for Pamphylia. He sailed along the coast from Pamphylia to Aphrodisias in Cilicia; and, hearing that Theodotus, the admiral of Antigonus, was sailing from Patara in Lycia in Rhodian ships with Carian crews, and that Perilaüs was accompanying him with an army on land, thus securing the safety of the fleet in its voyage, he outgeneraled both of them. Disembarking his soldiers, he concealed them in a suitable place where it was necessary for the enemy to pass, and he himself sailed near with all his ships, taking cover behind a promontory while awaiting the coming of the enemy. The army was first to fall into the ambush; Perilaüs was captured, some of the rest fell while fighting, and others were taken prisoners. When the Rhodian ships tried to go to the aid of their own forces, Polycleitus sailed up suddenly with his fleet drawn up for battle and easily routed the disorganized enemy. The result was that all the ships were captured and a considerable number of the men also, among them Theodotus himself, who was wounded and a few days later died. After Polycleitus had gained so great an advantage without danger, he sailed away to Cyprus and thence to Pelusium. Ptolemy praised him, honoured him with great gifts, and gave him much greater preferment as having been the author of an important victory. He released Perilaüs and some


409