Diodorus of Sicily
2εἰς τὸν μῦν. τῷ δ᾿ Εὐμήλῳ χρησμὸς ἦν τὴν
φερομένην οἰκίαν φυλάξασθαι. ὅθεν πάλιν οὗτος
εἰς οἰκίαν οὐκ εἰσῄει προχείρως μὴ προδιερευνησάντων
τῶν παίδων τὴν ὀροφὴν καὶ τὰ θεμέλια.
τελευτήσαντος δὲ αὐτοῦ διὰ τὴν ὀχουμένην ἐπὶ τοῦ
τεθρίππου σκηνὴν ἕκαστος ὑπελάμβανε τετελέσθαι
τὸν χρησμόν.
3Καὶ περὶ μὲν τῶν ἐν τῷ Βοσπόρῳ πραχθέντων
ἅλις ἡμῖν ἐχέτω.
Κατὰ δὲ τὴν Ἰταλίαν οἱ τῶν Ῥωμαίων ὕπατοι
μετὰ δυνάμεως ἐμβαλόντες εἰς τὴν πολεμίαν1 ἐνίκησαν
μάχῃ Σαμνίτας περὶ τὸ καλούμενον Τάλιον.
τῶν δ᾿ ἡττηθέντων καταλαμβανομένων τὸν Ἱερὸν
λόφον ὀνομαζόμενον τότε μὲν τῆς νυκτὸς ἐπιλαβούσης
οἱ Ῥωμαῖοι πρὸς τὴν ἰδίαν στρατοπεδείαν
ἀπεχώρησαν, τῇ δ᾿ ὑστεραίᾳ πάλιν μάχης γενομένης
πολλοὶ μὲν ἀνῃρέθησαν τῶν Σαμνιτῶν,
αἰχμάλωτοι δ᾿ ἐλήφθησαν ὑπὲρ τοὺς δισχιλίους
4καὶ διακοσίους. τοιούτων δὲ προτερημάτων γενομένων
τοῖς Ῥωμαίοις ἀδεῶς ἤδη τῶν ὑπαίθρων
συνέβαινε κυριεύειν τοὺς ὑπάτους καὶ τὰς ἀπειθούσας
τῶν πόλεων χειροῦσθαι. Καταράκταν μὲν οὖν
καὶ Κεραυνιλίαν ἐκπολιορκήσαντες φρουροὺς ἐπέθηκαν,
τῶν δ᾿ ἄλλων τινὰς πείσαντες προσηγάγοντο.
27. Ἐπ᾿ ἄρχοντος δ᾿ Ἀθήνησι Δημητρίου τοῦ
Φαληρέως τὴν ὕπατον ἀρχὴν ἐν Ῥώμῃ παρέλαβον
Κόιντος Φάβιος τὸ δεύτερον καὶ Γάιος Μάρκιος.



1πολεμίαν Burger, Ἀπουλίαν Kaerst. Καμπανίαν Binneboessel:
Ἰταλίαν.210Book XX

“mouse.”1 In the case of Eumelus the warning was 310 b.c. that he should be on guard against the house that is on the move.2 Therefore he never afterward entered a house freely unless his servants had previously examined the roof and the foundations. But when he died because of the canopy that was carried on the four-horse chariot, all agreed that the prophecy had been fulfilled.
Concerning the events that took place in the Bosporus, let this suffice us.
In Italy the Roman consuls with an army invaded the hostile territory3 and defeated the Samnites in battle at the place called Talium. When the defeated had occupied the place named the Holy Mount, the Romans for the moment withdrew to their own camp since night was coming on; but on the next day a second battle was waged in which many of the Samnites were killed and more than twenty-two hundred were taken prisoners. After such successes had been won by the Romans, it came to pass that their consuls from then on dominated the open country with impunity and overcame the cities which did not submit. Taking Cataracta and Ceraunilia by siege, they imposed garrisons upon them, but some of the other cities they won over by persuasion.4
27. When Demetrius of Phalerum was archon in 309 b.c. Athens, in Rome Quintus Fabius received the consulship for the second time and Gaius Marcius for the




1The word μῦς is found in medical writers with the mean- ing “muscle.” Cp. the Latin musculus, literally “little mouse.”2Literally, “the house that moves itself,” or “the house that is moved.”3The campaign that follows is not mentioned in other sources and the places named are all unknown. The narrative is continued from Book 19. 105. 5.4Continued in chap. 35. 1.211