Diodorus of Sicily

καὶ θεῶν θυσίαις τὸν Φίλιππον ὥσπερ τὸν ταῦρον
4ἐστεμμένον σφαγήσεσθαι. οὐ μὴν ἀλλὰ δόξας
συμμαχεῖν αὐτῷ τοὺς θεοὺς περιχαρὴς ἦν ὡς τῆς
Ἀσίας ὑπὸ Μακεδόνας ἐσομένης αἰχμαλώτου.
Εὐθὺς οὖν θυσίας μεγαλοπρεπεῖς ἐπετέλει τοῖς
θεοῖς καὶ τῆς θυγατρὸς Κλεοπάτρας τῆς ἐξ Ὀλυμπιάδος
συνετέλει γάμους καὶ ταύτην Ἀλεξάνδρῳ
συνῴκισε τῷ βασιλεῖ τῶν Ἠπειρωτῶν, ἀδελφῷ δὲ
5ὄντι γνησίῳ τῆς Ὀλυμπιάδος. ἅμα δὲ ταῖς τῶν
θεῶν τιμαῖς βουλόμενος ὡς πλείστους τῶν Ἑλλήνων
μετασχεῖν τῆς εὐωχίας ἀγῶνάς τε μουσικοὺς
μεγαλοπρεπεῖς ἐποίει καὶ λαμπρὰς ἑστιάσεις τῶν
6φίλων καὶ ξένων. διόπερ ἐξ ἁπάσης τῆς Ἑλλάδος
μετεπέμπετο τοὺς ἰδιοξένους καὶ τοῖς ἑαυτοῦ φίλοις
παρήγγειλε παραλαμβάνειν τῶν ἀπὸ τῆς ξένης
γνωρίμων ὡς πλείστους. σφόδρα γὰρ ἐφιλοτιμεῖτο
φιλοφρονεῖσθαι πρὸς τοὺς Ἕλληνας καὶ διὰ1 τὰς
δεδομένας αὐτῷ τῆς ὅλης ἡγεμονίας τιμὰς ταῖς2
προσηκούσαις ὁμιλίαις ἀμείβεσθαι.
92. Τέλος δὲ πολλῶν πανταχόθεν πρὸς τὴν πανήγυριν
συρρεόντων καὶ τῶν ἀγώνων καὶ γάμων
συντελουμένων ἐν Αἰγέαις τῆς Μακεδονίας οὐ μόνον
κατ᾿ ἄνδρα τῶν ἐπιφανῶν ἐστεφάνωσαν αὐτὸν
χρυσοῖς στεφάνοις, ἀλλὰ καὶ τῶν ἀξιολόγων πόλεων
αἱ πλείους, ἐν αἷς ἦν καὶ ἡ τῶν Ἀθηναίων.
2ἀναγορευομένου δὲ τοῦ στεφάνου τούτου διὰ τοῦ
κήρυκος τὸ τελευταῖον εἶπεν, ἄν τις ἐπιβουλεύσας
Φιλίππῳ τῷ βασιλεῖ καταφύγῃ πρὸς Ἀθηναίους,
1The usual idiom does not require this preposition with ἀμείβεσθαι.2ταῖς added by Fischer (cp. Books 5. 73. 3; 17. 81. 2; 18. 8. 5 et passim).90Book XVI

bull, would be stabbed to death while decked with a 336/5 b.c. garland. In any event, he thought that the gods supported him and was very happy to think that Asia would be made captive under the hands of the Macedonians.
Straightway he set in motion plans for gorgeous sacrifices to the gods joined with the wedding of his daughter Cleopatra, whose mother was Olympias; he had given her in marriage to Alexander king of Epirus, Olympias’s own brother.1 He wanted as many Greeks as possible to take part in the festivities in honour of the gods, and so planned brilliant musical contests and lavish banquets for his friends and guests. Out of all Greece he summoned his personal guest-friends and ordered the members of his court to bring along as many as they could of their acquaintances from abroad. He was determined to show himself to the Greeks as an amiable person and to respond to the honours conferred when he was appointed to the supreme command with appropriate entertainment.
92. So great numbers of people flocked together from all directions to the festival, and the games and the marriage were celebrated in Aegae in Macedonia. Not only did individual notables crown him with golden crowns but most of the important cities as well, and among them Athens. As this award was being announced by the herald, he ended with the declaration that if anyone plotted against King Philip and fled to Athens for refuge, he would be delivered




1Justin, 9. 6. 1.91