Diodorus of Sicily

ἁπασῶν ἐκχωρήσωσιν Ἰλλυριοί, οἱ μὲν πρέσβεις
ἐπανῆλθον ἄπρακτοι, ὁ δὲ Βάρδυλις πιστεύων ταῖς
τε προγεγενημέναις νίκαις καὶ ταῖς τῶν Ἰλλυριῶν
ἀνδραγαθίαις ἀπήντα τοῖς πολεμίοις μετὰ τῆς δυνάμεως·
εἶχεν δὲ πεζοὺς μὲν μυρίους ἐπιλέκτους,
5ἱππεῖς δὲ εἰς πεντακοσίους. ὡς δ᾿ ἤγγιζον ἀλλήλοις
τὰ στρατεύματα καὶ μετὰ βοῆς πολλῆς συνέρραξαν
εἰς τὴν μάχην, ὁ μὲν Φίλιππος ἔχων τὸ δεξιὸν
κέρας καὶ τοὺς ἀρίστους τῶν Μακεδόνων συναγωνιζομένους
τοῖς μὲν ἱππεῦσι παρήγγειλεν παριππεῦσαι
καὶ πλαγίοις ἐμβαλεῖν τοῖς βαρβάροις, αὐτὸς
δὲ κατὰ στόμα τοῖς πολεμίοις ἐπιπεσὼν καρτερὰν
6συνεστήσατο μάχην. οἱ δ᾿ Ἰλλυριοὶ συντάξαντες
ἑαυτοὺς εἰς πλινθίον ἐρρωμένως συνεστήσαντο1 τὸν
κίνδυνον. καὶ τὸ μὲν πρῶτον ἐπὶ πολὺν χρόνον ἦν
ἰσόρροπος ἡ μάχη διὰ τὴν ὑπερβολὴν τῆς παρ᾿
ἀμφοτέροις ἀνδραγαθίας, καὶ πολλῶν μὲν ἀναιρουμένων
ἔτι δὲ πλειόνων τιτρωσκομένων ὁ κίνδυνος
δεῦρο κἀκεῖσε τὰς ῥοπὰς ἐλάμβανεν, ταλαντευόμενος
αἰεὶ ταῖς τῶν ἀγωνιζομένων ἀρεταῖς· μετὰ
δὲ ταῦτα τῶν ἱππέων ἐκ πλαγίου καὶ κατὰ νώτου
βιαζομένων, τοῦ δὲ Φιλίππου μετὰ τῶν ἀρίστων
ἡρωικῶς ἀγωνισαμένου συνηναγκάσθη τὸ πλῆθος
7τῶν Ἰλλυριῶν πρὸς φυγὴν ὁρμῆσαι. γενομένης δὲ
τῆς διώξεως ἐπὶ πολὺν τόπον καὶ πολλῶν κατὰ
τὴν φυγὴν ἀναιρεθέντων ὁ μὲν Φίλιππος ἀνακαλεσάμενος
τῇ σάλπιγγι τοὺς Μακεδόνας καὶ στήσας
τρόπαιον ἔθαψεν τῶν ἰδίων τοὺς τετελευτηκότας,
οἱ δ᾿ Ἰλλυριοὶ διαπρεσβευσάμενοι καὶ τῶν Μακεδονικῶν
πόλεων πασῶν ἐκχωρήσαντες ἔτυχον τῆς

1So MSS. here and Book 15. 86. 1; Fischer reads ὑπεστ.,
cp. Wesseling and Book 12. 61. 3.246Book XVI

from all the Macedonian cities, the envoys returned 859/8 b.c. without having accomplished their purpose, and Bardylis, relying upon his previous victories and the gallant conduct of the Illyrians, came out to meet the enemy with his army; and he had ten thousand picked infantry soldiers and about five hundred cavalry. When the armies approached each other and with a great outcry clashed in the battle, Philip, commanding the right wing, which consisted of the flower of the Macedonians serving under him, ordered his cavalry to ride past the ranks of the barbarians and attack them on the flank, while he himself falling on the enemy in a frontal assault began a bitter combat.1 But the Illyrians, forming themselves into a square, courageously entered the fray. And at first for a long while the battle was evenly poised because of the exceeding gallantry displayed on both sides, and as many were slain and still more wounded, the fortune of battle vacillated first one way then the other, being constantly swayed by the valorous deeds of the combatants; but later as the horsemen pressed on from the flank and rear and Philip with the flower of his troops fought with true heroism, the mass of the Illyrians was compelled to take hastily to flight. When the pursuit had been kept up for a considerable distance and many had been slain in their flight, Philip recalled the Macedonians with the trumpet and erecting a trophy of victory buried his own dead, while the Illyrians, having sent ambassadors and withdrawn from all the Macedonian cities, obtained peace. But

1See chap. 8. 1; Justin, 7. 6. 7 and Frontinus, Strategemata, 2. 3. 2. Beloch has a critical account of this battle, which he places near Monastir, in Griechische Geschichte2, 3. 1. 226, note 2. He believes that the plan of battle was Parmenio’s.247