Diodorus of Sicily

τῶν ἔργων καὶ περὶ τε τὴν ταφὴν τῶν τελευτησάντων
καὶ τὴν θεραπείαν τῶν τραυματιῶν
4ἐγίνετο. καθ᾿ ὃν δὴ χρόνον οἱ κατὰ τὴν πόλιν
ἄνεσιν λαβόντες τῆς ἀπὸ τῶν μηχανῶν βίας ᾠκοδόμησαν
τρίτον τεῖχος μηνοειδές, περιλαμβάνοντες
τῇ μὲν περιφερείᾳ πάντα τὸν κινδυνεύοντα τόπον
τοῦ τείχους· οὐδὲν δ᾿ ἧττον καὶ τάφρῳ βαθείᾳ περιέλαβον
τὸ πεπτωκὸς τοῦ τείχους, ὅπως μὴ δύνηται
ῥᾳδίως ὁ βασιλεὺς ἐξ ἐφόδου μετὰ βάρους εἰσπεσεῖν
5εἰς τὴν πόλιν. ἐξέπεμψαν δὲ καὶ ναῦς τῶν ἄριστα
πλεουσῶν, Ἀμύνταν ἐπιστήσαντες ἡγεμόνα, ὃς ἐκπλεύσας
πρὸς τὴν Περαίαν τῆς Ἀσίας ἐπεφάνη
παραδόξως πειραταῖς τισιν ἀπεσταλμένοις ὑπὸ Δημητρίου.
οὗτοι δ᾿ εἶχον ἄφρακτα τρία, κράτιστοι
δοκοῦντες εἶναι τῶν τῷ βασιλεῖ συστρατευόντων.
γενομένης δ᾿ ἐπ᾿ ὀλίγον χρόνον ναυμαχίας οἱ Ῥόδιοι
βιασάμενοι τῶν νεῶν αὐτάνδρων ἐκυρίευσαν, ἐν οἷς
6ἦν καὶ Τιμοκλῆς ὁ ἀρχιπειρατής. ἐπέπλευσαν δὲ
καὶ τῶν ἐμπόρων τισὶ καὶ παρελόμενοι κέλητας
οὐκ ὀλίγους γέμοντας σίτου τούτους τε καὶ τὰ τῶν
πειρατῶν ἄφρακτα κατήγαγον εἰς τὴν Ῥόδον νυκτός,
7λαθόντες τοὺς πολεμίους. ὁ δὲ Δημήτριος
ἐπισκευάσας τὰ πεπονηκότα τῶν ἔργων προσέβαλλε
τῷ τείχει τὰς μηχανὰς καὶ πᾶσι τοῖς βέλεσιν ἀφειδῶς
χρώμενος τοὺς μὲν ἐπὶ ταῖς ἐπάλξεσιν ἐφεστῶτας
ἀνεῖρξε, τοῖς δὲ κριοῖς τύπτων τὸ συνεχὲς τοῦ
τόπου δύο μὲν μεσοπύργια κατέβαλε, περὶ δὲ τὸν
πύργον τὸν ἀνὰ μέσον τούτων φιλοτιμουμένοις τοῖς
ἐκ τῆς πόλεως ἰσχυροὶ καὶ συνεχεῖς ἐκ διαδοχῆς
ἀγῶνες ἐγίνοντο, ὥστε καὶ τὸν στρατηγὸν αὐτῶν
400Book XX

been damaged, and devoted himself to the burial 304 b.c. of the dead and the care of the wounded. Meanwhile the people of the city, having gained a respite from the violent attacks of the siege engines, constructed a third crescent-shaped wall and included in its circuit every part of the wall that was in a dangerous condition; but none the less they dug a deep moat around the fallen portion of the wall so that the king should not be able to break into the city easily by an assault with a heavily armed force. They also sent out some of their fastest ships, installing Amyntas as commander; he, sailing to Peraea1 in Asia, suddenly confronted some pirates who had been sent out by Demetrius. These had three deckless ships and were supposed to be the strongest of the pirates who were fighting as allies of the king. In the brief naval battle that ensued, the Rhodians overpowered the foe and took the ships with their crews, among whom was Timocles, the chief pirate. They also encountered some of the merchants and, seizing a fair number of light craft loaded with grain, they sent these and the undecked ships of the pirates to harbour in Rhodes by night, escaping the notice of the enemy. Demetrius, after he had repaired such of his equipment as was damaged, brought his siege engines up to the wall. By using all his missiles without stint, he drove back those who were stationed on the battlements, and striking with his rams a continuous portion of the wall, he overthrew two curtains; but as the city’s forces fought obstinately for the tower that was between them, there were bitter and continuous encounters, one after another, with the

1Literally, “the opposite land,” the Rhodian territory in Caria directly opposite the island.401