Diodorus of Sicily
ΒΙΒΛΟΣ ΠΕΝΤΕΚΑΙΔΕΚΑΤΗ
20. Ἐπ᾿ ἄρχοντος δ᾿ Ἀθήνησιν Εὐάνδρου1 Ῥωμαῖοι
κατέστησαν ἀντὶ τῶν ὑπάτων χιλιάρχους ἕξ,
Κόιντον Σολπίκιον, Γάιον Φάβιον, Κόιντον Σερουίλιον,
Πόπλιον Κορνήλιον.2 ἐπὶ δὲ τούτων Λακεδαιμόνιοι
κατελάβοντο τὴν Καδμείαν ἐν ταῖς
Θήβαις διά τινας τοιαύτας αἰτίας. ὁρῶντες τὴν
Βοιωτίαν ἔχουσαν πόλεών τε πλῆθος καὶ τοὺς
κατοικοῦντας αὐτὴν ἄνδρας ὑπάρχοντας ἀνδρείᾳ
διαφόρους, ἔτι δὲ τὰς Θήβας ἐχούσας παλαιὸν
ἀξίωμα καὶ τὸ σύνολον ὥσπερ ἀκρόπολίν τινα τῆς
Βοιωτίας οὖσαν, εὐλαβοῦντο μήποτε καιροῦ παραφανέντος
οἰκείου τῆς ἡγεμονίας ἀντιποιήσηται·
2διόπερ τοῖς ἡγεμόσιν οἱ Σπαρτιᾶται παρήγγελλον





1Ἀθήνησιν Εὐάνδρου Meursius (Demosthenes, Contra Tim.
138): Ἀθήνησι μὲν Εὐάνδρου P, Ἀθήνησι Μενάνδρου Vulgate.2Κόϊντον σερουΐλιον πόπλιον κορνήλιον P, Σερουίλιον Κορνήλιον
A, Σερουίλιον Κορνήλιον Πόπλιον Οὔγωνα Σέξστον Ἄνινον καὶ
Γάιον Μάρκον cet. Corrected in part from Book 14. 110. 1 and
Livy, 5. 36.2Book XV
20. When Evander was archon at Athens, the 382/1 b.c. Romans elected six1 military tribunes with consular power, Quintus Sulpicius, Gaius Fabius, Quintus Servilius, Publius Cornelius. During their term of office, the Lacedaemonians took possession of the Cadmeia in Thebes for the following reasons. Seeing that Boeotia had a large number of cities and that her inhabitants were men of outstanding valour, while Thebes,2 still retaining her renown of ancient times, was, generally speaking, the citadel of Boeotia, they were mindful of the danger that Thebes, if a suitable occasion arose, might claim the leadership of Greece. Accordingly the Spartans gave secret instructions3
1Only four mentioned by name—a frequent inconsistency.2Sparta had been successful in stripping Thebes of much
of her strength in Boeotia by dissolving the Boeotian League at the time of the King’s Peace. Thebes was beginning to assert her strength again by withholding the help due Sparta in her action against Olynthus (see Xenophon, Hell. 5. 2. 27).3Diodorus alone speaks of these secret instructions which have no existence in Xenophon’s fuller account. In fact Xenophon expressly says (5. 2. 32) ὅτι οὐ προσταχθέντα ὑπὸ τῆς πόλεως ταῦτα ἐπεπράχει. But then we must remember Xenophon’s pro-Spartan bias. Plutarch, Agesilaüs, 23, 24, virtually admits the complicity of Agesilaüs, and Ed. Meyer, Geschichte des Altertums, 5. 298, accepts the notion of a secret commission, as does Laistner, The Greek World from 479 to 323 b.c., p. 190.3