Diodorus of Sicily
10ἔχουσι1 τῆς νίκης. ὁ δ᾿ οὖν Ἀντίγονος διὰ ταύτης
τῆς ἐπινοίας ἐκώλυσε μὲν τοὺς πολεμίους προάγειν
εἰς τοὔμπροσθεν, αὑτῷ δὲ δοὺς ἄνεσιν εἰς τὸ
προσδέξασθαι τὴν δύναμιν, ἐπειδὴ τὸ στρατόπεδον
ἧκεν, ἅπαν ἐξέταξεν εἰς μάχην καὶ κατέβαινε συντεταγμένος
ἐπὶ τοὺς πολεμίους καταπληκτικῶς.
27. Εἶχε δὲ τοὺς σύμπαντας σὺν τοῖς διὰ Πίθωνος
καὶ Σελεύκου προσγεγενημένοις πεζοὺς μὲν
πλείους τῶν δισμυρίων ὀκτακισχιλίων, ἱππεῖς δ᾿
ὀκτακισχιλίους πεντακοσίους, ἐλέφαντας δὲ ἑξήκοντα
πέντε. διηλλαγμέναις δ᾿ ἐχρήσαντο ταῖς
τάξεσιν οἱ στρατηγοί, διαμιλλώμενοι καὶ περὶ τῆς
2ἐν τούτοις ἐμπειρίας πρὸς ἀλλήλους. Εὐμενὴς μὲν
γὰρ ἐπὶ τοῦ λαιοῦ κέρατος ἔταξεν Εὔδαμον2 τὸν
καταγαγόντα τοὺς ἐλέφαντας ἐξ Ἰνδῶν, ἔχοντα
τὸ περὶ αὐτὸν ἄγημα τῶν ἱππέων, ὄντων ἑκατὸν
πεντήκοντα, πρόταγμα δὲ τούτων εἴλας δύο ξυστοφόρων
ἐπιλέκτων, πλῆθος3 ἐχούσας ἱππέων πεντήκοντα.
3καὶ συνῆψε μὲν τούτους τοῖς ὑπερδεξίοις
τῆς ὑπωρίας, ἑξῆς δὲ τούτοις Στάσανδρον τὸν
στρατηγὸν ἔταξεν ἔχοντα τοὺς ἰδίους ἱππεῖς ἐννακοσίους
4πεντήκοντα. μετὰ δὲ τούτους ἔστησεν
Ἀμφίμαχον τὸν Μεσοποταμίας σατράπην, ᾧ συνηκολούθουν
ἱππεῖς ἑξακόσιοι, συνάπτοντας δὲ τούτοις
τοὺς ἐξ Ἀραχωτῶν ἱππεῖς ἑξακοσίους, ὧν
ἡγεῖτο πρότερον μὲν Σιβύρτιος, διὰ δὲ τὴν ἐκείνου
5φυγὴν μετειλήφει τὴν ἡγεμονία Κεφάλων. ἑξῆς
δ᾿ ἦσαν πεντακόσιοι μὲν ἐκ Παροπανισαδῶν, οἱ



1ἔχουσι Wesseling: ἀντέχουσι.2Εὔδαμον, cp. chap. 14. 1, etc.: Εὔδημον.3πλῆθος Post, μῆκος Reiske: βάθος302Book XIX

each placed his hope of victory in himself. In any 317 b.c. case, Antigonus by this device prevented the enemy from going forward while securing for himself a respite in which to bring up his army, and then when the army arrived, he drew it all up for battle and marched down in awe-inspiring array against the enemy.
27. Including the reinforcements brought by Pithon and Seleucus, Antigonus had in all more than twenty-eight thousand foot soldiers, eight thousand five hundred horsemen,1 and sixty-five elephants. The generals employed different formations in drawing up the armies, vying with each other in regard to their competence in tactical skill as well. On his left wing Eumenes stationed Eudamus, who had brought the elephants from India, with his squadron of one hundred and fifty horsemen, and as an advance guard for them two troops of selected mounted lancers with a strength of fifty horsemen.2 He placed them in contact with the higher land of the base of the hill, and next to them he put Stasander, the general, who had his own cavalry to the number of nine hundred and fifty. After them he stationed Amphimachus, the satrap of Mesopotamia, whom six hundred horsemen followed, and in contact with these were the six hundred horsemen from Arachosia, whose leader formerly had been Sibyrtius, but, because of the latter’s flight, Cephalon had assumed command of them. Next were five hundred from Paropanisadae


1This is some 2000 less than the total of the individual cavalry detachments listed in chap. 29.2The text is uncertain, but βάθος, “with a depth of 50 men.” seems impossible. In chap. 28. 3 we find six eilae of 50 each and one of 300, but the latter is regarded as unusual.303