Diodorus of Sicily

διόπερ δόξαντες εὐχειρίᾳ καὶ ἀνδρείᾳ διαφέρειν καὶ
πολλὰς χρείας παρασχόμενοι, καὶ τιμηθέντες ὑπὸ
τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων τοῦ θέρους λήγοντος ἐξαπεστάλησαν
2εἰς τὴν Σικελίαν. μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα
Φιλίσκος μὲν ὑπ᾿ Ἀρταξέρξου τοῦ βασιλέως ἀποσταλεὶς
κατέπλευσεν ἐπὶ τὴν Ἑλλάδα, παρακαλῶν
τοὺς Ἕλληνας διαλύσασθαι μὲν τοὺς πολέμους,
εἰρήνην δὲ κοινὴν συνθέσθαι. οἱ μὲν οὖν ἄλλοι
πάντες ἀσμένως ὑπήκουσαν, Θηβαῖοι δὲ κατὰ τὴν
ἰδίαν ὑπόστασιν ὅλην τὴν Βοιωτίαν ὑπὸ μίαν ἀγαγόντες1
συντέλειαν οὐ προσεδέχθησαν. ἀπογνωσθείσης
δὲ τῆς κοινῆς εἰρήνης, ὁ μὲν Φιλίσκος
καταλιπὼν τοῖς Λακεδαιμονίοις δισχιλίους ἐπιλέκτους
μισθοφόρους ἔχοντας τοὺς μισθούς, ἀπῆλθεν
εἰς τὴν Ἀσίαν.
3Ἅμα δὲ τούτοις πραττομένοις Εὔφρων ὁ Σικυώνιος,
διαφέρων θράσει καὶ ἀπονοίᾳ, συνεργοὺς
λαβὼν Ἀργείους ἐπέθετο τυραννίδι. κρατήσας
δὲ τῆς ἐπιβολῆς τετταράκοντα τοὺς εὐπορωτάτους
τῶν Σικυωνίων ἐφυγάδευσε, δημεύσας αὐτῶν τὰς
οὐσίας, καὶ πολλῶν χρημάτων κυριεύσας μισθοφόρους
ἤθροισε καὶ τῆς πόλεως ἐδυνάστευσεν.
71. Ἐπ᾿ ἄρχοντος δ᾿ Ἀθήνησι Ναυσιγένους ἐν
Ῥώμῃ χιλίαρχοι κατεστάθησαν ἀντὶ τῶν ὑπάτων
τέτταρες, Λεύκιος Παπίριος,2 Λεύκιος Μενήνιος,
Σερούιος Κορνήλιος, Σερούιος Σολπίκιος,3 παρὰ
δὲ Ἠλείοις ὀλυμπιὰς ἤχθη τρίτη πρὸς ταῖς ἑκατόν,
καθ᾿ ἣν ἐνίκα στάδιον Πυθόστρατος Ἀθηναῖος.



1So Vogel: ἄγοντες FJK.2Παπύριος Vulgate.3Σουλιπίκιος MSS. except PA.146Book XV

Accordingly, having won repute for superior dexterity 369/8 b.c. and courage and rendered many kinds of service, they were given awards by the Lacedaemonians and sent back home at the close of the summer to Sicily.1 Following this, Philiscus, who was sent on this mission by King Artaxerxes, sailed to Greece to urge the Greeks to compose their strife and agree to a general peace. All but the Thebans responded willingly2; they, however, adhering to their own design, had brought all Boeotia into one confederation and were excluded from the agreement. Since the general peace was not agreed to, Philiscus left two thousand picked mercenaries, paid in advance, for the Lacedaemonians and then returned to Asia.
While these things were going on, Euphron of Sicyon, a particularly rash and crack-brained individual, with accomplices from Argos, attempted to set up a tyranny.3 Succeeding in his plan, he sent forty of the wealthiest Sicyonians into exile, first confiscating their property, and, when he had secured large sums thereby, he collected a mercenary force and became lord of the city.
71. When Nausigenes was archon at Athens, in 368/7 b.c. Rome four military tribunes with consular power were elected, Lucius Papirius, Lucius Menenius, Servius Cornelius, and Servius Sulpicius; and the Eleians celebrated the hundred third Olympiad, in which Pythostratus the Athenian won the stadium race.



1For the performance of these Celts and Iberians see Xenophon, Hell. 7. 1. 20–22.2See Xenophon, Hell. 7. 1. 27. This peace move is dated in the spring of 368 (Cary, Cambridge Ancient History, 6. 93).3This is told in Xenophon, Hell. 7. 1. 44–46 under the year 367. Diodorus is probably wrong as to the year (cp. Beloch, Griechische Geschichte2, 3. 2. 243).147