Diodorus of Sicily

Ἑλλήνων τινὲς αἰσθόμενοι προσιόντας αὐτοὺς καὶ
δόξαντες τὴν τῶν Καρχηδονίων δύναμιν ἥκειν ἀπήγγειλαν
τοῖς περὶ τὸν Ἀγαθοκλέα πλησίον ὑπάρχειν
2τὸ τῶν πολεμίων στρατόπεδον. τοῦ δυνάστου δὲ
παραγγείλαντος εἰς ὅπλα χωρεῖν, ἐξέπιπτον ἐκ τῆς
στρατοπεδείας οἱ στρατιῶται μετὰ πολλοῦ θορύβου.
ἅμα δὲ τῆς τε κατὰ τὴν παρεμβολὴν φλογὸς εἰς
ὕψος ἀρθείσης καὶ τῆς τῶν Καχηδονίων κραυγῆς
ἐξακούστου γινομένης ὑπέλαβον πρὸς ἀλήθειαν τοὺς
βαρβάρους ἁπάσῃ τῇ δυνάμει προσάγειν ἐπ᾿ αὐτούς.
3τῆς δ᾿ ἐκπλήξεως τὸ βουλεύεσθαι παραιρουμένης
ἐνέπεσε φόβος εἰς τὸ στρατόπεδον καὶ πάντες πρὸς
φυγὴν ὥρμησαν. εἶτα προσμιξάντων αὐτοῖς τῶν
Λιβύων καὶ τῆς νυκτὸς μείζονα τὴν ἄγνοιαν φυλαττούσης
οἱ περιτυγχάνοντες ἀλλήλους ὡς πολεμίους
4ἠμύνοντο. ὅλην δὲ τὴν νύκτα πανταχῇ διασπειρομένων
αὐτῶν καὶ πανικῷ θορύβῳ συνεχομένων
συνέβη πλείους τῶν τετρακισχιλίων ἀναιρεθῆναι.
ἐπιγνωσθείσης δὲ μόγις τῆς ἀληθείας οἱ διασωθέντες
ἐπανῆλθον εἰς τὴν παρεμβολήν. αἱ μὲν οὖν δυνάμεις
ἀμφότεραι τὸν εἰρημένον τρόπον ἠτύχησαν,
ἐξαπατηθεῖσαι κατὰ τὴν παροιμίαν τοῖς κενοῖς τοῦ
πολέμου.
68. Ἀγαθοκλῆς δέ, μετὰ τὴν γενομένην ἀτυχίαν
τῶν μὲν Λιβύων ἁπάντων ἀποστάντων ἀπ᾿ αὐτοῦ,
τῆς δὲ ὑπολειπομένης δυνάμεως ἀδυνατούσης διαπολεμεῖν
πρὸς τοὺς Καρχηδονίους διέγνω τὴν Λιβύην
ἐκλιπεῖν. διακομίσαι δὲ τοὺς στρατιώτας οὐχ
ὑπελάμβανεν δυνήσεσθαι διὰ τὸ μήτε πόρια παρεσκευάσθαι
μήτε τοὺς Καρχηδονίους ἐπιτρέψαι ποτ᾿
2ἂν θαλασσοκρατοῦντας. διαλύσεις δ᾿ οὐκ ἐνόμιζε
ποιήσεσθαι τοὺς βαρβάρους, πολὺ προέχοντας ταῖς
324Book XX

and some of the Greeks, seeing them advancing and 307 b.c. believing that the army of the Carthaginians had come, reported to Agathocles that the enemy’s forces were near at hand. The dynast gave the order to take up arms, and the soldiers rushed from the camp with great tumult. Since at the same time the fire in the Carthaginian camp blazed high and the shouting of the Carthaginians became audible, the Greeks believed that the barbarians were in very truth advancing against them with their whole army. Since their consternation prevented deliberation, panic fell upon the camp and all began to flee. Then as the Libyans mingled with them and the darkness fostered and increased their uncertainty, those who happened to meet fought each other as if they were enemies. They were scattered about everywhere throughout the whole night and were in the grip of panic fear, with the result that more than four thousand were killed. When the truth was at long last discovered, those who survived returned to their camp. Thus both armies met with disaster in the way described, being tricked, according to the proverb, by the empty alarms of war.1
68. Since after this misfortune the Libyans all deserted him and the army which remained was not strong enough to wage battle against the Carthaginians, Agathocles decided to leave Libya. But he did not believe that he would be able to transport his soldiers since he had not prepared any transports and the Carthaginians would never permit it while they controlled the sea. He did not expect that the barbarians would agree to a truce because they were

1Cp. chap. 30. 1, and note.325