Diodorus of Sicily

Φιλίππου τελευτὴν ἀσμένως ἤκουσαν καὶ τῆς ἡγεμονίας
τῶν Ἑλλήνων οὐκ ἐξεχώρουν τοῖς Μακεδόσι,
διαπρεσβευσάμενοι δὲ πρὸς Ἄτταλον ἐν
ἀπορρήτοις συνετίθεντο κοινοπραγίαν καὶ πολλὰς
τῶν πόλεων προετρέποντο τῆς ἐλευθερίας
ἀντέχεσθαι.
3Αἰτωλοὶ δὲ κατάγειν τοὺς ἐξ Ἀκαρνανίας φυγάδας
ἐψηφίσαντο διὰ Φιλίππου πεῖραν εἰληφότας τῆς
φυγῆς. Ἀμβρακιῶται δὲ πεισθέντες Ἀριστάρχῳ
τὴν μὲν ὑπὸ Φιλίππου κατασταθεῖσαν φρουρὰν
ἐξέβαλον, τὴν δὲ πόλιν ἐποίησαν δημοκρατεῖσθαι·
4ὁμοίως δὲ τούτοις Θηβαῖοι τὴν μὲν ἐν τῇ Καδμείᾳ
φρουρὰν ἐκβαλεῖν ἐψηφίσαντο, τῷ δ᾿ Ἀλεξάνδρῳ
μὴ συγχωρεῖν τὴν τῶν Ἑλλήνων ἡγεμονίαν. Ἀρκάδες
δὲ οὔτε Φιλίππῳ συνεχώρησαν τὴν ἡγεμονίαν
μόνοι τῶν Ἑλλήνων οὔτ᾿ Ἀλεξάνδρῳ προσέσχον·
5τῶν δ᾿ ἄλλων Πελοποννησίων Ἀργεῖοι καὶ
Ἠλεῖοι καὶ Λακεδαιμόνιοι καί τινες ἕτεροι πρὸς
τὴν αὐτονομίαν ὥρμησαν. τῶν δὲ ὑπεροικούντων
τὴν Μακεδονίαν ἐθνῶν οὐκ ὀλίγα πρὸς ἀπόστασιν
ὥρμα καὶ πολλὴ ταραχὴ κατεῖχε τοὺς τῇδε κατοικοῦντας
βαρβάρους.
6Ἀλλ᾿ ὅμως τηλικούτων πραγμάτων καὶ τοσούτων
φόβων κατεχόντων τὴν βασιλείαν Ἀλέξανδρος
νέος ὢν παντελῶς ἅπαντα τὰ κατὰ τὴν ἀρχὴν
δυσχερῆ παραδόξως καὶ συντόμως κατεστήσατο·
οὓς μὲν γὰρ πειθοῖ διὰ τῆς ὁμιλίας προσηγάγετο,
οὓς δὲ φόβῳ διωρθώσατο, τινὰς δὲ βίᾳ χειρωσάμενος
ὑπηκόους ἐποιήσατο.
4. Πρώτους δὲ Θετταλοὺς ὑπομνήσας τῆς ἀρχαίας


124Book XVII

Macedon, the news of Philip’s death was received 335/4 b.c. with rejoicing, and the Athenians were not ready to concede the leading position among the Greeks to Macedon. They communicated secretly with Attalus and arranged to co-operate with him, and they encouraged many of the cities to strike for their freedom.
The Aetolians voted to restore those of the Acarnanians who had experienced exile because of Philip. The Ambraciots were persuaded by one Aristarchus to expel the garrison placed in their city by Philip and to transform their government into a democracy. Similarly, the Thebans voted to drive out the garrison in the Cadmeia and not to concede to Alexander the leadership of the Greeks. The Arcadians alone of the Greeks had never acknowledged Philip’s leadership nor did they now recognize that of Alexander. Otherwise in the Peloponnesus the Argives and Eleians and Lacedaemonians, with others, moved to recover their independence.1 Beyond the frontiers of Macedonia, many tribes moved toward revolt and a general feeling of unrest swept through the natives in that quarter.2
But, for all the problems and fears that beset his kingdom on every side, Alexander, who had only just reached manhood, brought everything into order impressively and swiftly. Some he won by persuasion and diplomacy, others he frightened into keeping the peace,3 but some had to be mastered by force and so reduced to submission.
4. First he dealt with the Thessalians, reminding



1Justin, 11. 2. 4–5. Aristarchus, presumably an Ambraciot,
is otherwise unknown. Diodorus has inverted the rôles of the Arcadians and the Lacedaemonians; it was the latter who had never been subject to Philip. Cp. further below, chap. 4.2Cp. below, chap. 8. 1.3Arrian, 1.1.3 (with reference to Athens).125