Diodorus of Sicily
3Ὁ δ᾿ οὖν Ἀλέξανδρος τὰ πεπονηκότα τῶν
σκαφῶν ἐνέπρησε, τὸν δὲ λοιπὸν στόλον παραδοὺς
Νεάρχῳ καί τισιν ἄλλοις τῶν φίλων προσέταξε τὴν
παραλίαν πᾶσαν παραπλεῦσαι δι᾿ Ὠκεανοῦ καὶ
πάντα κατασκεψαμένους ἀπαντᾶν ἐπὶ τὰς ἐκβολὰς
4τοῦ Εὐφράτου ποταμοῦ. αὐτὸς δὲ ἀναλαβὼν τὴν
δύναμιν ἐπῆλθε πολλὴν χώραν καὶ τοὺς μὲν ἐναντιουμένους
κατεπολέμησε, τοὺς δὲ πειθαρχοῦντας
φιλανθρώπως προσεδέχετο. τοὺς μὲν γὰρ Ἀβρίτας1
ὀνομαζομένους καὶ τοὺς τὴν Κεδρωσίαν οἰκοῦντας
5χωρὶς κινδύνων προσηγάγετο, μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα
πολλὴν μὲν ἄνυδρον, οὐκ ὀλίγην δὲ ἔρημον διελθὼν
ἐπὶ τὰ Ὠρείτιδος2 ὅρια κατήντησεν. εἰς τρία δὲ
μέρη τὴν δύναμιν διελόμενος τοῦ μὲν πρώτου
μέρους ἀπέδειξεν ἡγεμόνα Πτολεμαῖον, τοῦ δὲ
6δευτέρου Λεοννάτον, καὶ τὴν μὲν παραθαλαττίαν
λεηλατεῖν προσέταξε Πτολεμαῖον, τὴν μεσόγειον
δὲ κατασῦραι Λεοννάτον, τὴν δ᾿ ὑπώρειαν καὶ τὴν
ὀρεινὴν αὐτὸς ἐπόρθησεν. ἅμα δ᾿ ὑφ᾿ ἕνα καὶ τὸν
αὐτὸν καιρὸν πολλῆς χώρας δῃουμένης ἔγεμε πᾶς
τόπος πυρὸς καὶ διαρπαγῆς καὶ πολλῶν φόνων.
7διόπερ ταχέως οἱ μὲν στρατιῶται πολλῆς λείας
ἐκυρίευσαν, τῶν δ᾿ ἀναιρεθέντων σωμάτων ἀριθμὸς





1Ἀβρίτας R; Ἁβρίτας X; Ἀμβρίτας F.2Νεωτερίδας RX; Νεωτερίδος F; corrected by Wesseling
from other authors and the mention of the Ὠρεῖται, below, in
chap. 105.420Book XVII
Alexander burned such of his boats as were 326/5 b.c damaged.1 The rest of the fleet he turned over to Nearchus and others of his Friends with orders to coast along through the Ocean and, having observed everything, to meet him at the mouth of the Euphrates River.2 He set his army in motion and traversed much territory and defeated his opponents, while those who submitted were received kindly.3 He brought over without fighting the so-called Abritae4 and the tribesmen of Cedrosia. Then he marched through a long stretch of waterless and largely desert country as far as the frontiers of Oreitis. There he divided his force into three divisions and named as commander of the first, Ptolemy, and of the second, Leonnatus. He ordered Ptolemy to plunder the district by the sea and Leonnatus to lay waste the interior.5 He himself devastated the upper country and the hills. At one and the same time much country was wasted, so that every spot was filled with fire and devastation and great slaughter. The soldiers soon became possessed of much booty, and the number of




1Curtius, 9. 10. 4.2Plutarch, Alexander, 66. 2; Arrian, 6. 21. 1–3. According
to Curtius, Nearchus was ordered to explore the Ocean
and then rejoin Alexander, either via the Indus or by way
of the Euphrates (9. 10. 3). Curtius states that the fleet was commanded by Nearchus and Onesicritus, Plutarch that Onesicritus was only the chief pilot, and Arrian (from Nearchus; cp. 8. 20. 5) that Nearchus had sole command. The fleet waited until the end of the monsoons and sailed in the autumn (on the 20th of Boedromion, according to Arrian, Indica, 21. 1; but Arrian gives the wrong year) or about 20 September 325 b.c.3An anticipation of Vergil’s parcere subiectis et debellare superbos (Aen. 6. 853); like the Romans, Alexander did not accept neutrality.4They are called Arabitae in Curtius (9. 10. 5) and Arrian (6. 21. 4).5Curtius, 9. 10. 5–7, who also uses the term “Cedrosii” for the usual Gadrosia (Arrian, 6. 22. 1). He does, however, use the variant term “Horitae” (9. 10. 6). This expedition is sketched by Strabo, 15. 2. 1–8. 720–723.421