Diodorus of Sicily

πολλῶν χρημάτων ἀπελύτρωσε1 τοῖς ἱερεῦσι τῶν
3Αἰγυπτίων. τοὺς δὲ συστρατευσαμένους τῶν Ἑλλήνων
κατὰ τὴν ἀξίαν ἕκαστον δωρεαῖς ἀξιολόγοις
τιμήσας ἀπέλυσεν εἰς τὰς πατρίδας· τῆς δ᾿ Αἰγύπτου
σατράπην καταστήσας Φερενδάτην ἐπανῆλθεν
μετὰ τῆς δυνάμεως εἰς Βαβυλῶνα πολλὰ μὲν
χρήματα καὶ λάφυρα κομίζων δόξαν δὲ μεγάλην
ἐκ τῶν κατορθωμάτων περιπεποιημένος.
52. Ἐπ᾿ ἄρχοντος δ᾿ Ἀθήνησι Καλλιμάχου Ῥωμαῖοι
κατέστησαν ὑπάτους Μάρκιον2 Γάιον καὶ
Πόπλιον Οὐαλέριον. ἐπὶ δὲ τούτων Ἀρταξέρξης
ὁρῶν μεγάλας ἑαυτῷ παρεσχημένον χρείας ἐν τῷ
πρὸς Αἰγυπτίους πολέμῳ Μέντορα τὸν στρατηγὸν
2προῆγεν αὐτὸν μάλιστα τῶν φίλων. τιμήσας δ᾿
ἀριστείοις τὸν ἄνδρα ἐδωρήσατο αὐτῷ ἀργυρίου
μὲν ἑκατὸν τάλαντα τῆς δ᾿ ἄλλης πολυτελοῦς κατασκευῆς
τὴν κρατίστην· ἀπέδειξε δὲ σατράπην τῆς
κατὰ τὴν Ἀσίαν παραλίας καὶ τὸν πρὸς τοὺς ἀφεστηκότας
πόλεμον ἐπέτρεψεν αὐτοκράτορα στρατηγὸν
3ἀποδείξας. ὁ δὲ Μέντωρ ἔχων οἰκειότητα
πρὸς Ἀρτάβαζον καὶ Μέμνονα τοὺς διαπεπολεμηκότας
μὲν πρὸς Πέρσας ἐν τοῖς ἐπάνω χρόνοις τότε
δὲ πεφευγότας ἐκ τῆς Ἀσίας καὶ διατρίβοντας
παρὰ Φιλίππῳ, δεηθεὶς τοῦ βασιλέως ἔπεισεν αὐτὸν
ἀπολῦσαι τοὺς ἄνδρας τῶν ἐγκλημάτων. εὐθὺς δὲ
καὶ μετεπέμψατο πρὸς ἑαυτὸν ἀμφοτέρους μεθ᾿

1So Stephanus: 

 F, ἀνελύτρωσε (-σαι P) cet.2C. Martins Rutilius Livy, 7. 21; Fasti Consulares; chap. 28. 1: Μάρκον.382Book XVI

Bagoas returned to the Egyptian priests on the payment 350/19 b.c. of huge sums by way of ransom. Then when he had rewarded the Greeks who had accompanied him on the campaign with lavish gifts, each according to his deserts, he dismissed them to their native lands; and, having installed Pherendates as satrap of Egypt, he returned with his army to Babylon, bearing many possessions and spoils and having won great renown by his successes.
52. When Callimachus was archon at Athens, the 349/8 b.c. Romans elected as consuls Gaius Marcius and Publius Valerius. During their term of office Artaxerxes, seeing that Mentor the general had performed great services for him in the war against the Egyptians, advanced him over and above his other friends. Esteeming him worthy of honour for his gallant actions, he gave him a hundred talents of silver and also the best of expensive decorations, and he appointed him satrap of the Asiatic coast and placed him in charge of the war against the rebels, having designated him general in supreme command. And since Mentor was related1 to Artabazus and Memnon, both of whom had warred against the Persians in the preceding period2 and at the time now under consideration were fugitives from Asia residing at the court of Philip, he requested the King and prevailed upon him to dismiss the charges against them. Immediately afterwards he also summoned them both to come to his presence




1Artabazus was his brother-in-law, Memnon his brother (see below). (Cp. Demosthenes, 23. 157: ὁ Μέμνων καὶ ὁ Μέντωρ, οἱ κηδεσταὶ τοῦ Ἀρταβάζου).2See chaps. 22. 1 and 34. 2.383