Diodorus of Sicily

εἰς Μακεδονίαν, ηὐξηκὼς ἑαυτοῦ τὴν βασιλείαν
ταῖς τε πράξεσι καὶ τῇ πρὸς τὸ θεῖον εὐσεβείᾳ.
3Φάυλλος δὲ στρατεύσας εἰς Λοκροὺς τοὺς ὀνομαζομένους1
Ἐπικνημιδίους τὰς μὲν ἄλλας πόλεις ἐχειρώσατο
πάσας, μίαν δὲ τὴν ὀνομαζομένην Νάρυκα2
διὰ προδοσίας νυκτὸς παραλαβὼν πάλιν ἐξέπεσε
καὶ τῶν στρατιωτῶν ἀπέβαλεν οὐκ ἐλάττους τῶν
4διακοσίων. μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα στρατοπεδεύοντος αὐτοῦ
περὶ τὰς ὀνομαζομένας Ἄβας οἱ Βοιωτοὶ νυκτὸς
ἐπιθέμενοι τοῖς Φωκεῦσιν ἀνεῖλον αὐτῶν οὐκ ὀλίγους·
ἐπαρθέντες δὲ τῷ προτερήματι παρῆλθον εἰς
τὴν τῶν Φωκέων χώραν καὶ πολλὴν αὐτῆς πορθήσαντες
5ἤθροισαν λαφύρων πλῆθος. ἐπανιόντων δ᾿
αὐτῶν καὶ τῇ Ναρυκαίων3 πόλει πολιορκουμένῃ
βοηθούντων ἐπιφανεὶς ὁ Φάυλλος τούτους μὲν
ἐτρέψατο, τὴν δὲ πόλιν ἑλὼν κατὰ κράτος διήρπασε
6καὶ κατέσκαψεν. αὐτὸς δὲ περιπεσὼν νόσῳ φθινάδι
καὶ πολὺν χρόνον ἀρρωστήσας ἐπιπόνως καὶ τῆς
ἀσεβείας οἰκείως κατέστρεψε τὸν βίον, καταλιπὼν
τῶν Φωκέων στρατηγὸν Φάλαικον τὸν Ὀνομάρχου
υἱὸν τοῦ τὸν ἱερὸν πόλεμον ἐκκαύσαντος, ἀντίπαιδα
τὴν ἡλικίαν ὄντα· παρακατέστησε δ᾿ αὐτῷ ἐπίτροπον
ἅμα καὶ στρατηγὸν Μνασέαν, ἕνα τῶν
7ἑαυτοῦ φίλων. μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα οἱ Βοιωτοὶ νυκτὸς
ἐπιθέμενοι τοῖς Φωκεῦσι τόν τε στρατηγὸν αὐτῶν
Μνασέαν ἀπέκτειναν καὶ τῶν στρατιωτῶν εἰς
διακοσίους. μετ᾿ ὀλίγον δ᾿ ἱππομαχίας γενομένης

1So most MSS. (cp. Book 11. 83. 2), ἐπονομαζομένους FM.2Νάρυκα Gronovhis (cp. Book 14. 82. 8, Strabo, 9. 4. 2): Ἄρυκαν PX, Ἀρύκαν RVFM.3Ἀρυκαίων PXRV.342Book XVI

enlarged his kingdom not only by his achievements 352/1 b.c. but also by his reverence toward the god. Phaÿllus, having made a campaign into the Locris known as Epicnemidian, succeeded in capturing all the cities but one named Naryx, which he had taken by treachery at night but from which he was expelled again with the loss of two hundred of his men. Later as he was encamped near a place called Abae,1 the Boeotians attacked the Phocians at night and slew a great number of them; then, elated by their success, they passed into Phocian territory, and, by pillaging a great portion of it, gathered a quantity of booty. As they were on their way back and were assisting the city of the Narycaeans, which was under siege, Phaÿllus suddenly appeared, put the Boeotians to flight, and having taken the city by storm, plundered and razed it. But Phaÿllus himself, falling sick2 of a wasting disease, after a long illness, suffering great pain as befitted his impious life, died, leaving Phalaecus, son of the Onomarchus3 who had kindled4 the Sacred War, as general of the Phocians, a stripling in years, at whose side he had placed as guardian and supporting general Mnaseas, one of his own friends. After this in a night attack upon the Phocians the Boeotians slew their general Mnaseas and about two hundred of his men. A short while later in a cavalry battle which







1On the border of Phocis.2See Pausanias. 10. 2. 6 and for an alternative story Philo Judaeus in Eusebius, Praeparatio Evangelica, 8, 14. 33.3According to Pausanias, 10. 2. 7, Phalaecus was the son of Phaÿllus.4Said of Philomelus, chap. 23. 1.343