Diodorus of Sicily

πολιορκήσαντες τήν τε χώραν αὐτῶν κατέδραμον
καί τινα τῶν πλησίον πολισμάτων εἷλον. ἐνίκησαν
δὲ μάχῃ τὸν Ἀντιπάτρου στρατηγὸν Πολυκλῆν
καὶ τοῦτόν τε καὶ τῶν στρατιωτῶν οὐκ ὀλίγους
ἀνεῖλον· τῶν δὲ ζωγρηθέντων οὓς μὲν ἀπέδοντο,
3οὓς δὲ ἀπελύτρωσαν. μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα εἰς Θετταλίαν
ἐμβαλόντες τοὺς πλείστους τῶν Θετταλῶν
ἔπεισαν κοινωνεῖν τοῦ πρὸς Ἀντίπατρον πολέμου·
καὶ ταχέως ἠθροίσθησαν οἱ πάντες πεζοὶ μὲν δισμύριοι
πεντακισχίλιοι, ἱππεῖς δὲ χίλιοι πεντακόσιοι.
4τούτων δὲ προσαγομένων τὰς πόλεις Ἀκαρνᾶνες
ἀλλοτρίως ἔχοντες πρὸς Αἰτωλοὺς ἐνέβαλον εἰς τὴν
Αἰτωλίαν καὶ τήν τε χώραν ἐδῄουν καὶ τὰς πόλεις
5ἐπολιόρκουν. οἱ δὲ Αἰτωλοὶ πυθόμενοι τὰς ἰδίας
πατρίδας κινδυνεύειν τοὺς μὲν ἄλλους στρατιώτας
ἀπέλιπον ἐν Θετταλίᾳ, Μένωνα τὸν Φαρσάλιον
ἐπιστήσαντες στρατηγόν, αὐτοὶ δὲ τοὺς πολιτικοὺς
ἀναλαβόντες ἧκον συντόμως εἰς τὴν Αἰτωλίαν καὶ
τοὺς Ἀκαρνᾶνας καταπληξάμενοι τὰς πατρίδας
6ἠλευθέρωσαν τῶν κινδύνων. τούτων δὲ περὶ ταῦτα
ἀσχολουμένων Πολυπέρχων ὁ καταλελειμμένος ἐν
Μακεδονίᾳ στρατηγὸς ἧκεν εἰς τὴν Θετταλίαν μετὰ
δυνάμεως ἀξιολόγου, νικήσας δὲ παρατάξει τοὺς
πολεμίους τόν τε στρατηγὸν Μένωνα ἀνεῖλε καὶ
τῶν ἄλλων κατέκοψε τοὺς πλείστους καὶ τὴν
Θετταλίαν ἀνεκτήσατο.
39.Κατὰ δὲ τὴν Ἀσίαν Ἀρριδαῖος καὶ Πίθων
οἱ τῶν βασιλέων ἐπιμεληταὶ ἀναζεύξαντες ἀπὸ τοῦ
Νείλου μετὰ τῶν βασιλέων καὶ τῆς δυνάμεως ἧκον
2εἰς Τριπαράδεισον τῆς ἄνω Συρίας. ἐνταῦθα δὲ


118Book XVIII

Locrians, overran their country, and captured
some 321 b.c. of the neighbouring towns. They defeated
Antipater’s general Polycles in battle, killing him
and no small number of his soldiers. Some of those who were taken captive they sold, others they released
on receiving ransoms. Invading Thessaly next, they persuaded most of the Thessalians to join them in
the war against Antipater, and a force was quickly gathered, numbering in all twenty-five thousand
infantry and fifteen hundred cavalry. While they
were gaining the cities, however, the Acarnanians, who were hostile to the Aetolians, invaded Aetolia,
where they began to plunder the land and to besiege the cities. When the Aetolians learned that their own country was in danger, they left the other troops in Thessaly, putting Menon of Pharsalus in
command, while they themselves with the citizen soldiers
went swiftly into Aetolia and, by striking fear into the Acarnanians, freed their native cities from danger. While, however, they were engaged in these
matters, Polyperchon, who had been left in Macedonia as general, came into Thessaly with a considerable
army and, by defeating the enemy in a battle in which he killed the general Menon and cut most of his
army to pieces, recovered Thessaly.
39. In Asia Arrhidaeus and Pithon, the guardians of the kings, setting out from the Nile with the
kings and the army, came to Triparadeisus in upper
Syria.1
1Τhe exact location of Triparadeisus (Three Parks) is unknown. For the disorder there and the subsequent settlement, including the redistribution of the satrapies, cp.
Arrian, FGrH, 156. 9. 31–38, Polyaenus, 4. 6. 4.119