Diodorus of Sicily
11. Τῶν δ᾿ ἄλλων Ἑλλήνων οἱ μὲν πρὸς Μακεδόνας
ἀπέκλινον, οἱ δὲ τὴν ἡσυχίαν εἵλοντο. Αἰτωλοὶ
μὲν οὖν ἅπαντες πρῶτοι συνέθεντο τὴν
συμμαχίαν, καθάπερ προείρηται, μετὰ δὲ τούτους
Θετταλοὶ μὲν πάντες πλὴν Πελινναίων,1 Οἰταῖοι
δὲ πλὴν Ἡρακλεωτῶν, Ἀχαιοὶ2 δὲ Φθιῶται πλὴν
Θηβαίων, Μηλιεῖς3 δὲ πλὴν Λαμιέων,4 ἑξῆς δὲ
Δωριεῖς ἅπαντες καὶ Λοκροὶ καὶ Φωκεῖς, ἔτι δ᾿
Αἰνιᾶνες καὶ Ἀλυζαῖοι5 καὶ Δόλοπες, πρὸς δὲ
τούτοις Ἀθαμᾶνες6 καὶ Λευκάδιοι καὶ Μολοττῶν
οἱ περὶ Ἀρυπταῖον· οὗτος δ᾿ ὕπουλον συμμαχίαν
συνθέμενος ὕστερον διὰ προδοσίας συνήργησε τοῖς
Μακεδόσι. τῶν τ᾿ Ἰλλυριῶν καὶ Θρᾳκῶν ὀλίγοι7
συνέθεντο συμμαχίαν διὰ τὸ πρὸς τοὺς Μακεδόνας
2μῖσος. ἑξῆς δὲ συνελάβοντο τοῦ πολέμου
Καρύστιοι μὲν ἐξ Εὐβοίας, τελευταῖοι δὲ τῶν
Πελοποννησίων Ἀργεῖοι, Σικυώνιοι, Ἠλεῖοι, Μεσσήνιοι
καὶ οἱ τὴν Ἀκτὴν κατοικοῦντες. οἱ μὲν
οὖν συμμαχίαν συνθέμενοι τῶν Ἑλλήνων ὑπῆρχον
οἱ προειρημένοι.
3Ὁ δὲ δῆμος ἀπέστελλε στρατιώτας τῷ Λεωσθένει
βοηθήσοντας πολιτικοὺς μὲν πεζοὺς πεντακισχιλίους,
ἱππεῖς δὲ πεντακοσίους, μισθοφόρους
δὲ δισχιλίους. τούτων δὲ πορευομένων διὰ τῆς
Βοιωτίας ἀλλοτρίους συνέβαινεν εἶναι τοὺς Βοιωτοὺς
τοῖς Ἀθηναίοις διὰ τοιαύτας τινὰς αἰτίας.
Ἀλέξανδρος Θήβας κατασκάψας τὴν χώραν τοῖς
4περιοικοῦσι Βοιωτοῖς ἔδωκεν. οὗτοι δὲ κατακληρουχήσαντες




1Πελινναίων Palmer: Πελληναίων RXV, Πελληνέων F.2Ἀχαιοὶ Hertlein: Ἀχαιῶν.3Μηλιεῖς Palmer: ἡλιεῖς RWV, Μιληεῖς F.4Λαμιέων Palmer: Μαλέων.5Ἀλυζαῖοι Palmer: Κλυζαῖοι RXV, Λυζαῖοι F.6Ἀθαμᾶνες Wesseling: Ἀθάμαντες.7Rhodoman adds οὐκ before ὀλίγοι.42Book XVIII
11. Of the rest of the Greeks, some were well disposed 323 b.c. toward the Macedonians, others remained neutral. The Aetolians in full force were the first to join the alliance, as has been said, and after them all the Thessalians except those from Pelinnaeum, the Oetaeans except the inhabitants of Heraclea, the Achaeans of Phthiotis except the people of Thebae, the Melians except those of Lamia, then in succession all the Dorians,1 the Locrians, and the Phocians, also the Aenianians, the Alyzaeans, and the Dolopians, and in addition the Athamanians, the Leucadians, and those of the Molossians who were subject to Aryptaeus. The last named, after making a hollow alliance, later treacherously co-operated with the Macedonians. A few of the Illyrians and of the Thracians joined the alliance because of their hatred of the Macedonians. Next, the Carystians from Euboea undertook a share in the war, and finally, of the peoples of the Peloponnesus, the Argives, the Sicyonians, the Eleans, the Messenians, and those who dwell on Actê. Now those of the Greeks who joined the alliance were as I have listed them.
Athens sent citizen soldiers to Leosthenes as reinforcements, five thousand foot and five hundred horse, and also two thousand mercenaries. These were to go through Boeotia, but it happened that the Boeotians were hostile to the Athenians for some such reason as the following. After Alexander had razed Thebes, he had given the land to the neighbouring Boeotians. They, having portioned out the property





1i.e. the inhabitants of Doris in central Greece.43