Diodorus of Sicily

ἀπογνοὺς τὴν κάθοδον καὶ περὶ τῶν ἐγκλημάτων
ἀπολογησάμενος ἄλλης ἡγεμονίας ἠξιώθη κατὰ τὴν
3Ἀσίαν μείζονος. κακῶς δὲ τὰ κατὰ τὴν ἀρχὴν
διοικήσας ἔφυγε πάλιν εἰς Κύπρον καὶ συλληφθεὶς
τιμωρίας ἠξιώθη. ὁ δὲ Πνυταγόρας1 ἑκουσίως
ὑποταγεὶς τοῖς Πέρσαις τὸ λοιπὸν ἀδεῶς ἐβασίλευε
τῆς Σαλαμῖνος.
4Ὁ δὲ τῶν Περσῶν βασιλεὺς μετὰ τὴν ἅλωσιν
τῆς Σιδῶνος, παραγενομένων αὐτῷ τῶν συμμάχων
ἔκ τε Ἄργους καὶ Θηβῶν καὶ τῶν κατὰ τὴν Ἀσίαν
Ἑλληνίδων πόλεων, ἀθροίσας πᾶσαν τὴν δύναμιν
5προῆγεν ἐπὶ τὴν Αἴγυπτον. καταντήσας δ᾿ ἐπὶ
τὴν μεγάλην λίμνην καθ᾿ ἣν ἔστι τὰ καλούμενα
Βάραθρα, μέρος τῆς δυνάμεως ἀπέβαλε διὰ τὴν
ἀπειρίαν τῶν τόπων. περὶ δὲ τῆς κατὰ τὴν λίμνην
φύσεως καὶ τοῦ περὶ αὐτὴν παραδόξου συμπτώματος
προειρηκότες ἐν τῇ πρώτῃ βύβλῳ τὸ διλογεῖν
6περὶ τῶν αὐτῶν παρήσομεν. διελθὼν δὲ τὰ Βάραθρα
μετὰ τῆς δυνάμεως ὁ βασιλεὺς ἧκεν πρὸς
τὸ Πηλούσιον. αὕτη δ᾿ ἐστὶ πόλις ἐπὶ τοῦ πρώτου
στόματος καθ᾿ ὃν τόπον ὁ Νεῖλος ποιεῖται τὰς
ἐκβολάς. οἱ μὲν οὖν Πέρσαι κατεστρατοπέδευσαν
ἀπὸ τεσσαράκοντα σταδίων τοῦ Πηλουσίου, οἱ δ᾿
7Ἕλληνες πρὸς αὐτῷ τῷ πολίσματι. οἱ δ᾿ Αἰγύπτιοι,
δεδωκότων αὐτοῖς τῶν Περσῶν πολὺν χρόνον
εἰς τὴν παρασκευήν, πάντα μὲν τὰ στόματα2 τοῦ
Νείλου καλῶς κατεσκευακότες ὑπῆρχον, μάλιστα
δὲ τὸ πρὸς τῷ Πηλουσίῳ διὰ τὸ πρῶτον εἶναι τοῦτο
8καὶ μάλιστα κείμενον εὐκαίρως. ἐφρούρουν δὲ τὸ
χωρίον στρατιῶται πεντακισχίλιοι, στρατηγοῦντος
Φιλόφρονος τοῦ Σπαρτιάτου.3 οἱ δὲ Θηβαῖοι

1See note 2 on p. 364.2πάντα μὲν τὰ ματα P, π. μ. τὰ X.3So Hertlein, 2. 1, p. 24: στρατηγοῦ.366Book XVI

Evagoras, after having given up hope of his restoration 350/49 b.c. and made his defence on the accusations brought against him, was accorded another and higher command in Asia. But then when he had misgoverned his province he fled again to Cyprus and, arrested there, paid the penalty. Pnytagoras, who had made willing submission to the Persians, continued thenceforth to rule unmolested as king in Salamis.
After the capture of Sidon and the arrival of his allies from Argos and Thebes and the Greek cities in Asia, the King of the Persians assembled all his army and advanced against Egypt. As he came to the great marsh where are the Barathra or Pits, as they are called, he lost a portion of his army through his lack of knowledge of the region. Since we have discoursed earlier on the nature of the marsh1 and the peculiar mishaps which occur there in the first Book of our History, we shall refrain from making a second statement about it. Having passed through the Barathra with his army the King came to Pelusium. This is a city at the first mouth at which the Nile debouches into the sea. Now the Persians encamped at a distance of forty stades from Pelusium, but the Greeks close to the town itself. The Egyptians, since the Persians had given them plenty of time for preparation, had already fortified well all the mouths of the Nile, particularly the one near Pelusium because it was the first and the most advantageously situated. Five thousand soldiers garrisoned the position, Philophron
the Spartiate being the general in command.




1See Book 1. 30. 4–9 and Book 20. 73. 3.367