Diodorus of Sicily

πρὸς τὰς μάχας κατεσκεύασεν καὶ τοῦ Πευ
κέστου τὸν ὄγκον καὶ τὸ πρόσχημα ταπεινώσας
ἑαυτὸν εἰς ὕψος ἤγαγε καὶ προσδοκίαν ἦρεν1
2ἐλπίδων ἀγαθῶν παρὰ τοῖς πλήθεσιν. ἦν δ᾿ ὁ
νοῦς τῶν γεγραμμένων ὅτι τὸ μὲν Ἀλεξάνδρου
παιδίον Ὀλυμπιὰς παραλαβοῦσα κεκόμισται καὶ
τὴν Μακεδονίας βασιλείαν κυρίως, ἀναιρεθέντος
Κασάνδρου, Πολυπέρχων δὲ διαβέβηκεν εἰς Ἀσίαν
πρὸς Ἀντίγονον ἔχων τῆς βασιλικῆς δυνάμεως τὴν
κρατίστην καὶ τοὺς ἐλέφαντας, ἔστι δὲ προσάγων
3ἤδη περὶ Καππαδοκίαν. ἡ δ᾿ ἐπιστολὴ Συρίοις
γεγραμμένη γράμμασιν ἀπέσταλτο παρὰ Ὀρόντου
τοῦ σατραπείαν μὲν ἔχοντος Ἀρμενίας, φίλου δὲ
ὄντος Πευκέστῃ. πιστευθείσης δὲ τῆς ἐπιστολῆς
διὰ τὴν συνήθειαν τὴν προϋπάρχουσαν τοῖς σατράπαις
ὁ μὲν Εὐμενὴς ἐκέλευσε περιενεγκεῖν καὶ
δεῖξαι τοῖς τε ἡγεμόσι καὶ τῶν ἄλλων στρατιωτῶν
τοῖς πλείστοις, τὸ δὲ στρατόπεδον ἅπαν μετετέθη
ταῖς διανοίαις καὶ πάντες ἀπέβλεπον πρὸς τὰς
Εὐμενοῦς ἐλπίδας, ὡς τούτου δυνησομένου καὶ
προάγειν διὰ τῶν βασιλέων οὓς ἂν βούληται καὶ
4δίκας λαβεῖν παρὰ τῶν ἀδικούντων. μετὰ δὲ τὴν
εὐωχίαν Εὐμενὴς βουλόμενος καταπλήξασθαι τοὺς
ἀπειθοῦντας ἢ στρατηγίας ὀρεγομένους παρήγαγεν
εἰς κρίσιν Σιβύρτιον, ὃς ἦν τῆς μὲν Ἀραχωσίας
σατράπης Πευκέστου δὲ μάλιστα φίλος, ἔλαθε δὲ
αὐτὸν τῶν ἱππέων τινὰς ἀποστείλας εἰς Ἀραχώτας·
καὶ τὰς ἀποσκευὰς κελεύσας παρελέσθαι
εἰς τηλικούτους περιέστησε κινδύνους ὥστε,
εἰ μὴ λαθὼν διέδρα, θανάτῳ περιέπεσεν ἂν ὑπὸ
τοῦ πλήθους.
1ἦρεν added by Capps.292Book XIX

confident of the outcome of the battles and, by lowering 317 b.c. the pomp and circumstance of Peucestes, improved his own standing and increased his prospects of success in the eyes of the crowd. The purport of what he had written was that Olympias, associating Alexander’s son with herself, had recovered firm control of the kingdom of Macedonia after slaying Cassander, and that Polyperchon had crossed into Asia against Antigonus with the strongest part of the royal army and the elephants and was already advancing in the neighbourhood of Cappadocia. The letter, written in the Syrian writing, was sent from Orontes, who held the satrapy of Armenia and who was a friend of Peucestes. Since the letter was believed because of the previous friendship between the satraps, Eumenes ordered it to be carried around and shown to the commanders and also to most of the other soldiers. The sentiment of the entire encampment was changed and all began to turn their attention to Eumenes’ prospects in the belief that he would be able by help of the kings both to promote whomever he wished and to exact punishment from those who wronged him. After the feast Eumenes, in his desire to overawe those who did not obey him or who craved a command, brought to trial Sibyrtius, who was satrap of Arachosia and a very close friend of Peucestes. Without Sibyrtius’ knowledge, Eumenes sent some horsemen into Arachosia, and by ordering the seizure of his baggage, he brought him into such danger that, if he had not escaped secretly, he would have been condemned to death by the assembly.1
1Sibyrtius, however, continued as satrap of Arachosia (chap. 48. 3).293