Diodorus of Sicily

ἐποίησε, καὶ τὴν χώραν Οἰταίοις καὶ
Μηλιεῦσιν ἐδωρήσατο· μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα ἐπὶ τὴν Περραιβίαν
ἀναζεύξας1 τῶν πόλεων τὰς μὲν λόγοις
φιλανθρώποις προσηγάγετο, τὰς δὲ διὰ τῆς βίας
ἐχειρώσατο. ταχὺ δὲ τῆς δυναστείας αὐτοῦ στερεουμένης,
οἱ τὴν Θετταλίαν οἰκοῦντες ὑφεωρῶντο
τὴν αὔξησιν αὐτοῦ καὶ τὴν πλεονεξίαν.
3Ἅμα δὲ τούτοις πραττομένοις ἐν τῇ πόλει τῶν
Ἀργείων ἐγένετο στάσις καὶ φόνος τοσοῦτος ὅσος
παρ᾿ ἑτέροις τῶν Ἑλλήνων οὐδέποτε γεγονέναι
μνημονεύεται. ἐκλήθη δὲ ὁ νεωτερισμὸς οὗτος
παρὰ τοῖς Ἕλλησι σκυταλισμός, διὰ τὸν τρόπον
τοῦ θανάτου ταύτης τυχὼν τῆς προσηγορίας.
58. Ἡ δ᾿ οὖν2 στάσις ἐγένετο διὰ τοιαύτας αἰτίας.
τῆς πόλεως τῶν Ἀργείων δημοκρατουμένης
καί τινων δημαγωγῶν παροξυνόντων τὸ πλῆθος
κατὰ τῶν ταῖς ἐξουσίαις καὶ δόξαις ὑπερεχόντων,
οἱ διαβαλλόμενοι συστάντες ἔγνωσαν καταλῦσαι
2τὸν δῆμον. βασανισθέντων δέ τινων ἐκ τῶν συνεργεῖν
δοκούντων, οἱ μὲν ἄλλοι φοβηθέντες τὴν ἐκ
τῶν βασάνων τιμωρίαν ἑαυτοὺς ἐκ τοῦ ζῆν μετέστησαν,
ἑνὸς δ᾿ ἐν ταῖς βασάνοις ὁμολογήσαντος
καὶ πίστιν λαβόντος, ὁ μὲν μηνυτὴς τριάκοντα
τῶν ἐπιφανεστάτων κατηγόρησεν, ὁ δὲ δῆμος οὐκ
ἐλέγξας ἀκριβῶς ἅπαντας τοὺς διαβληθέντας ἀπέκτεινε
3καὶ τὰς οὐσίας αὐτῶν ἐδήμευσεν. πολλῶν
δὲ καὶ ἄλλων ἐν ὑποψίαις ὄντων, καὶ τῶν δημαγωγῶν
ψευδέσι διαβολαῖς συνηγορούντων, ἐπὶ τοσοῦτον
ἐξηγριώθη τὸ πλῆθος ὥστε πάντων τῶν

1ἀναζεύξας Dindorf, Vogel: ἐπιζεύξας.2δ᾿ οὖν Dindorf: γοῦν MSS., Bekker, Vogel.112Book XV

treachery, laid it waste, and gave the country to the 370/69 b.c. Oetaeans and Malians; then later, moving into Perrhaebia, he won over some of the cities by generous promises, and subdued others by force. As his position of influence speedily became established, the inhabitants of Thessaly looked with suspicion on his aggrandizement and encroachments.
While these things were going on, in the city of Argos civil strife broke out accompanied by slaughter of a greater number than is recorded ever to have occurred anywhere else in Greece. Among the Greeks this revolutionary movement was called “Club-law,” receiving this appellation on account of the manner of the execution.
58. Now the strife arose from the following causes: the city of Argos1 had a democratic form of government, and certain demagogues instigated the populace against the outstanding citizens of property and reputation. The victims of the hostile charges then got together and decided to overthrow the democracy. When some of those who were thought to be implicated were subjected to torture, all but one, fearing the agony of torture, committed suicide, but this one came to terms under torture, received a pledge of immunity, and as informer denounced thirty of the most distinguished citizens, and the democracy without a thorough investigation put to death all those who were accused and confiscated their property. But many others were under suspicion, and as the demagogues supported false accusations, the mob was wrought up to such a pitch of savagery that they condemned to



1See also Plutarch, Praecepta gerendae reip. 814; Isocrates,
Philip, 52; Dionysius of Hal. 7. 66. 5.113