Diodorus of Sicily

ἀναγκαζομένων τῶν στρατιωτῶν ἀλλήλους σαρκοφαγεῖν,
τῶν δ᾿ Ἀριμασπῶν τρισμυρίας ἁμάξας σίτου
γεμούσας παρακομισάντων σωθεὶς παραδόξως
ἀτελείαις τε καὶ ἄλλαις δωρεαῖς ἐτίμησε τὸ ἔθνος
καὶ τὴν προϋπάρχουσαν προσηγορίαν ἀφελόμενος
2προσηγόρευσεν Εὐεργέτας. τότε δὲ Ἀλέξανδρος
εἰς τὴν τούτων χώραν στρατεύσας1 καὶ τῶν ἐγχωρίων
φιλοφρόνως αὐτὸν προσδεξαμένων ἐτίμησε τὸ
ἔθνος ταῖς ἁρμοζούσαις δωρεαῖς.
Τὸ δ᾿ αὐτὸ καὶ τῶν ὁμόρων τῶν ὀνομαζομένων
Κεδρωσίων ποιησάντων καὶ τούτους ταῖς πρεπούσαις
χάρισιν ἠμείψατο. ἀμφοτέρων δὲ τῶν εἰρημένων
ἐθνῶν τὴν στρατηγίαν Τιριδάτῃ παρέδωκεν.
3περὶ ταῦτα δὲ αὐτοῦ διατρίβοντος ἧκόν τινες ἀπαγγέλλοντες
ὅτι Σατιβαρζάνης ἐκ τῆς Βακτριανῆς
μετὰ δυνάμεως πολλῆς ἱππικῆς παραγενόμενος
εἰς τὸ τῶν Ἀρίων2 ἔθνος ἀπέστησε τοὺς ἐγχωρίους
ἀπ᾿ Ἀλεξάνδρου. ὁ δὲ βασιλεὺς ἀκούσας τὸ γεγονὸς
ἀπέστειλεν ἐπ᾿ αὐτὸν μέρος τῆς δυνάμεως, στρατηγοὺς
ἐπιστήσας Ἐριγυιὸν καὶ Στασάνορα, αὐτὸς
δὲ τὴν Ἀραχωσίαν καταστρεψάμενος ὀλίγαις ἡμέραις
ὑπήκοον ἐποίησεν.
82. Τοῦ δ᾿ ἐνιαυσίου χρόνου διεληλυθότος Ἀθήνησι
μὲν ἦρχεν Εὐθύκριτος, ἐν Ῥώμῃ δὲ τὴν ὑπατικὴν
ἀρχὴν διεδέξαντο Λεύκιος Πλάτιος καὶ Λεύκιος
Παπίριος, ὀλυμπιὰς δ᾿ ἤχθη τρίτη πρὸς ταῖς

1στρατοπεδεύσας X.2The district is spelled Ἀρεία in chap. 78. 1.352Book XVII

for lack of food the soldiers were constrained to eat 329/8 b.c. each other, when the Arimaspians appeared bringing thirty thousand wagons laden with provisions. Saved from utter despair, then, Cyrus gave them exemption from taxation and other marks of honour, and abolishing their former appellation, named them Benefactors. So now, when Alexander led his army into their country, they received him kindly and he honoured the tribe with suitable gifts.1
Their neighbours, the so-called Cedrosians,2 did the same, and them too he rewarded with appropriate favours. He gave the administration of these two peoples to Tiridates.3 While he was thus occupied reports were brought to him that Satibarzanes had returned from Bactria with a large force of cavalry to Areia, and had caused the population to revolt from Alexander. At this news, the king dispatched against him a portion of his army under the command of Erigyius and Stasanor, while he himself conquered Arachosia and in a few days made it subject to him.4
82. When this year was over, Euthycritus became 328/7 b.c. archon at Athens and at Rome Lucius Platius and Lucius Papirius became consuls. The one hundred






1Curtius, 7. 3.3; Arrian, 3. 27. 4–5.2These are usually called Gedrosians.3Arrian (3. 27. 5) reports that these tribes were left independent; it may be that this Tiridates was a native of the country (Berve, Alexanderreich, 2, no. 755). Menon became satrap of Gedrosia and Arachosia (Arrian, 3. 28. 1) or of Arachosia alone (Curtius, 7. 3. 5).4Curtius, 7. 3. 2; Arrian, 3. 28. 2–3. They both report that the Macedonian troops were commanded by Erigyius and Caranus, but that Stasanor took over the satrapy in place of the revolted satrap Arsames.353