Diodorus of Sicily
4λαβὼν ἐξαπέστειλεν εἰς τὴν Ῥόδον. εἷλε δὲ καὶ
τετρήρη πλέουσαν μὲν ἐκ Κιλικίας, ἔχουσαν δ᾿
ἐσθῆτα βασιλικὴν καὶ τὴν ἄλλην ἀποσκευὴν ἣν ἡ
γυνὴ Δημητρίου Φίλα παρασκευασαμένη φιλοτιμότερον
ἀπεστάλκει τἀνδρί. τὸν μὲν οὖν ἱματισμὸν
ἀπέστειλεν εἰς Αἴγυπτον, οὐσῶν τῶν στολῶν ἁλουργῶν
καὶ βασιλεῖ φορεῖν πρεπουσῶν, τὴν δὲ ναῦν
ἐνεώλκησεν καὶ τοὺς ναύτας ἀπέδοτο τούς τ᾿ ἐκ τῆς
τετρήρους καὶ τοὺς ἐκ τῶν ἄλλων πλοίων τῶν
5ἁλόντων. τῶν δ᾿ ὑπολοίπων νεῶν τριῶν Ἀμύντας
ἡγούμενος ἔπλευσεν ἐπὶ νήσων καὶ πολλοῖς πλοίοις
περιτυχὼν κομίζουσι τὰ πρὸς τὰς μηχανὰς ἁρμόζοντα
τοῖς πολεμίοις ἃ μὲν αὐτῶν κατέδυσεν, ἃ δὲ
κατήγαγεν εἰς τὴν πόλιν, ἐν̇ οἷς ἑάλωσαν καὶ
τεχνῖται τῶν ἀξιολόγων καὶ πρὸς βέλη καὶ καταπέλτας
ἐμπειρίᾳ διαφέροντες ἕνδεκα.
6Μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα ἐκκλησίας συναχθείσης συνεβούλευόν
τινες τὰς εἰκόνας τὰς Ἀντιγόνου καὶ Δημητρίου
κατασπάσαι, δεινὸν εἶναι λέγοντες ἐν ἴσῳ
τιμᾶσθαι τοὺς πολιορκοῦντας τοῖς εὐεργέταις· ἐφ᾿
οἷς ὁ δῆμος ἀγανακτήσας τούτοις μὲν ὡς ἁμαρτάνουσιν
ἐπετίμησεν, τῶν δὲ περὶ Ἀντίγονον τιμῶν
οὐδεμίαν μετεκίνησεν, καλῶς πρός τε δόξαν1 καὶ τὸ
7συμφέρον βουλευσάμενος. ἥ τε γὰρ μεγαλοψυχία
καὶ τὸ βέβαιον τῆς ἐν δημοκρατίᾳ κρίσεως παρὰ
μὲν τοῖς ἄλλοις ἐπαίνων ἐτύγχανε, παρὰ δὲ τοῖς
πολιορκοῦσι μεταμελείας· τὰς γὰρ κατὰ τὴν Ἑλλάδα
πόλεις οὐδεμίαν ἐνδεδειγμένας εὔνοιαν εἰς
τοὺς εὐεργέτας ἐλευθεροῦντες τὴν διὰ τῆς πείρας
φανεῖσαν βεβαιοτάτην εἰς ἀμοιβὴν χάριτος ἐφαίνοντο

1πρός τε δόξαν Reiske, πρὸς τὴν δόξαν Wesseling: πρὸς τὸ
δόξαν.390Book XX

to Rhodes. He also captured a quadrireme that was 304 b.c. sailing from Cilicia and had on board royal robes and the rest of the outfit that Demetrius’ wife Phila had with great pains made ready and sent off for her husband.1 The clothing Damophilus sent to Egypt since the garments were purple and proper for a king to wear; but the ship he hauled up on land, and he sold the sailors, both those from the quadrireme and those from the other captured ships. Amyntas, who was in command of the three remaining ships, made for islands where he fell in with many freighters carrying to the enemy materials useful for the engines of war; he sank some of these and some he brought to the city. On these ships were also captured eleven famous engineers, man of outstanding skill in making missiles and catapults.
Thereafter, when an assembly had been convened, some advised that the statues of Antigonus and Demetrius should be pulled down, saying that it was absurd to honour equally their besiegers and their benefactors. At this the people were angry and censured these men as erring, and they altered none of the honours awarded to Antigonus, having made a wise decision with a view both to fame and to self interest. For the magnanimity and the soundness of this action in a democracy won plaudits from all others and repentance from the besiegers; for while the latter were setting free the cities throughout Greece, which had displayed no goodwill at all toward their benefactors, they were manifestly trying to enslave the city that in practice showed itself most

1Cp. chap. 53.391