Diodorus of Sicily
24. Τούτῳ δὲ τῷ τρόπῳ τοὺς μὲν ἄλλους καταπληξάμενος,
ἑαυτῷ δ᾿ ὄγκον καὶ πρόσχημα μέγα
περιποιήσας μετεβάλετο πάλιν καὶ τὸν Πευκέστην
λόγοις φιλανθρώποις καὶ μεγάλαις ἐπαγγελίαις
προσαγαγόμενος εὔνουν ἑαυτῷ καὶ πρόθυμον κατεσκεύασεν
εἰς τὸ τοῖς βασιλεῦσι συναγωνίζεσθαι.
2σπεύδων δὲ καὶ παρὰ τῶν ἄλλων σατραπῶν καὶ
στρατηγῶν ὥσπερ ὅμηρα λαβεῖν τοῦ μὴ καταλείψειν
αὐτόν, προσεποιήθη χρημάτων σπανίζειν
καὶ παρεκάλεσεν ἕκαστον κατὰ δύναμιν δανεῖσαι
3τοῖς βασιλεῦσι. λαβὼν δὲ παρ᾿ ὧν ἐδόκει συμφέρειν
ἡγεμόνων τετρακόσια τάλαντα τοὺς πρότερον
ὑπόπτους ὄντας ἐπιβουλεύειν ἢ καταλείψειν πιστοτάτους
φύλακας ἔσχε τοῦ σώματος καὶ
συναγωνιστάς.
4Οὕτως δὲ αὐτοῦ περὶ τούτων πρὸς τὸ μέλλον
στρατηγοῦντος ἧκόν τινες ἐκ Μηδίας ἀπαγγέλλοντες
ὅτι μετὰ τῆς δυνάμεως Ἀντίγονος τὴν
ἀνάζευξιν ἐπὶ τῆς Περσίδος εἴη πεποιημένος. ἃ δὴ
πυθόμενος καὶ αὐτὸς ἀνέζευξε, διεγνωκὼς ἀπαντᾶν
5τοῖς πολεμίοις καὶ διακινδυνεύειν. κατὰ δὲ τὴν
ὁδοιπορίαν δευτεραῖος θυσίαν ἐπετέλεσε τοῖς θεοῖς
καὶ τὴν δύναμιν εὐωχήσας πολυτελῶς τὰ μὲν πλήθη
πρὸς εὔνοιαν προεκαλέσατο, αὐτὸς δὲ κατὰ τὴν
μέθην συμπεριενεχθεὶς τῶν παραληφθέντων τοῖς
εἰς τὸ πίνειν ὁρμήσασιν ἐνέπεσεν εἰς ἀρρωστίαν.
διόπερ ἡμέρας τινὰς ἐπέσχε τῆς πορείας, καταβαρούμενος
ὑπὸ τοῦ πάθους· ἡ δὲ δύναμις ἐν
ἀθυμίᾳ καθειστήκει, τῶν μὲν πολεμίων προσδοκωμένων
294Book XIX
24. After Eumenes had frightened the others in 317 b.c. this manner and had surrounded himself with pomp and circumstance, he changed once more and, having won Peucestes over with kind words and great promises, rendered him loyal toward himself and eager to join in the struggle in behalf of the kings. Desiring to exact from the other satraps and generals hostages, as it were, to prevent their deserting him, he pretended to be in need of money and called on each of them to lend all the money he could to the kings. By taking four hundred talents from those leaders from whom he considered it expedient, he converted men whom he had formerly suspected of plotting against him or of intending to abandon him into most faithful guards of his person and partners in the contest.1
While Eumenes was making these strategic moves with an eye to the future, there came men from Media with information that Antigonus and his army had broken camp and set out for Persia. When he heard this, he also set out, having made up his mind to meet the enemy and risk the issue. On the second day of the journey he performed a sacrifice to the gods and entertained the army sumptuously; the large majority he had indeed encouraged to loyalty, but he himself during the drinking bout was led on by those of the invited guests who were eagerly engaged in drinking, and he became ill.2 For this reason he delayed the march for some days, since he was overcome by his ailment; and the army was disheartened, for the enemy were expected to


1Plutarch (Eumenes, 13. 6) puts this stratagem a little earlier. In general Plutaich’s account of the last campaigns of Eumenes is of little value.2Cp. Plutarch, Eumenes, 14. 3–5.295