Diodorus of Sicily

καθ᾿ ἡμέραν βουλεύεσθαι κοινῇ περὶ τῶν συμφερόντων·
4ἕστατο1 γὰρ Ἀλεξάνδρῳ τετελευτηκότι σκηνὴ
καὶ κατὰ ταύτην θρόνος, πρὸς ᾧ θύοντες εἰώθεισαν
συνεδρεύειν περὶ τῶν κατεπειγόντων. πάντων δὲ
διασημαινομένων τὸ ῥηθὲν ὡς συμφερόντως2 εἰρημένον
συνῆγε καθ᾿ ἡμέραν συνέδριον οἷόν τινος
5δημοκρατουμένης πόλεως. μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα παρελθόντων
αὐτῶν εἰς Σοῦσα παρὰ τῶν θησαυροφυλακούντων
Εὐμενὴς ἔλαβε χρημάτων πλῆθος ὅσον ἦν
ἱκανὸν εἰς τὰς χρείας· μόνῳ γὰρ τούτῳ διὰ τῶν
ἐπιστολῶν οἱ βασιλεῖς συνετετάχεισαν διδόναι καθ᾿
ὅ τι ἂν αὐτὸς προαιρῆται. μισθοδοτήσας δὲ τοὺς
Μακεδόνας εἰς ἓξ μῆνας Εὐδάμῳ τῷ τοὺς ἐλέφαντας
καταγαγόντι τοὺς ἐκ τῆς Ἰνδικῆς ἔδωκε διακόσια
τάλαντα, τῷ μὲν λόγῳ πρὸς τὰς τῶν θηρίων
δαπάνας, τῷ δ᾿ ἔργῳ διὰ τῆς δωρεᾶς ταύτης θεραπεύων
τὸν ἄνδρα· ᾧ γὰρ ἂν τῶν στασιαζόντων
οὗτος προσθοῖτο, μεγίστην ἐποιεῖτο ῥοπήν, καταπληκτικῆς
οὔσης τῆς τῶν θηρίων χρείας. τῶν δ᾿
ἄλλων σατραπῶν ἕκαστος ἔτρεφε τοὺς ἐκ τῆς ὑφ᾿
ἑαυτὸν χώρας συνηκολουθηκότας.
6Εὐμενὴς μὲν οὖν ἐν τῇ Σουσιανῇ διατρίβων
ἀνελάμβανε τὴν δύναμιν, Ἀντίγονος δὲ παραχειμάσας
ἐν τῇ Μεσοποταμίᾳ τὸ μὲν πρῶτον διενοήθη
τοὺς περὶ τὸν Εὐμενῆ διώκειν ἐκ ποδὸς πρὶν αὐξηθῆναι,
ὡς δ᾿ ἤκουσε τοὺς σατράπας καὶ τὰς μετ᾿
αὐτῶν δυνάμεις συνεληλυθυίας τοῖς Μακεδόσιν,
ἐπέσχε τὴν σπουδὴν καὶ τήν τε δύναμιν ἀνελάμβανε
καὶ προσκατέγραφε στρατιώτας· ἑώρα γὰρ τὸν


1ἕστατο Dindorf: ἵστατο MSS., Fischer.2συμφερόντως Fischer, cp. Book 11. 71. 1: συμφέρον.270Book XIX

together about what was to the common advantage. For a tent had been set up for Alexander although he 317 b.c. was dead, and in the tent a throne, before which they were accustomed to make offerings and then to sit as a council in regard to matters that demanded attention.1 Since all approved his proposal as made in the general interest, he called a council each day like that of some city ruling itself on democratic principles. Later, when they arrived at Susa, Eumenes received from those in charge of the treasury a sum of money sufficient for his needs; for it was to him alone that the kings in their letter had ordered the treasurers to give whatever sum he should ask.2 After paying the Macedonians for six months, he gave two hundred talents to Eudamus, who had brought down the elephants from India, saying that this was for the cost of maintaining the animals, but really trying to win the favour of the man by this gift; for he would tip the scales decisively in favour of any one of the rivals to whom he might attach himself, since the employment of the beasts strikes terror. Each of the other satraps provided for the support of the troops who had followed him from the territory under his command.
While Eumenes remained in Susianê refreshing his forces, Antigonus, who had wintered in Mesopotamia,3 at first had planned to follow Eumenes close on his heels before his strength should be increased; but on hearing that the satraps and their armies had joined the Macedonians, he checked his speed and began to refresh his forces and to enrol additional soldiers,



1Cp. Book 18. 60. 5–61. 3.2Cp. Book 18. 57. 3, 58. 1.3This is the winter of 318/17, i.e. the same as that mentioned in chap. 12. 1.271