Diodorus of Sicily
2τὸν τῶν πολεμίων στόλον διέφθειρε. κατὰ δὲ
τὴν ναυμαχίαν τῶν μὲν Ἀθηναίων διεφθάρησαν
τριήρεις ὀκτωκαίδεκα, τῶν δὲ Λακεδαιμονίων
διεφθάρησαν μὲν εἴκοσι καὶ τέτταρες, αὔτανδροι
δ᾿ ἐλήφθησαν ὀκτώ. Χαβρίας μὲν οὖν ἐπιφανῆ
ναυμαχίαν1 νικήσας κατέπλευσε μετὰ πολλῶν λαφύρων
εἰς τὸν Πειραιέα, καὶ μεγάλης ἀποδοχῆς
ἔτυχε παρὰ τοῖς πολίταις. μετὰ γὰρ τὸν Πελοποννησιακὸν
πόλεμον Ἀθηναῖοι ταύτην πρώτην ναυμαχίαν
ἐνίκησαν· τὴν γὰρ περὶ Κνίδον οὐκ ἰδίᾳ
διηγωνίσαντο, τῷ δὲ βασιλικῷ στόλῳ χρησάμενοι
προετέρησαν.
3Ἅμα δὲ τούτοις πραττομένοις κατὰ τὴν Ἰταλίαν
ἐν τῇ Ῥώμῃ Μάρκος Μάνλιος2 ἐπιβαλόμενος τυραννίδι
καὶ κρατηθεὶς ἀνῃρέθη.
36. Ἐπ᾿ ἄρχοντος δ᾿ Ἀθήνησι Χαρισάνδρου3
Ῥωμαῖοι μὲν ἀντὶ τῶν ὑπάτων χιλιάρχους κατέστησαν
τέτταρας, Σερούιον Σουλπίκιον, Λεύκιον
Παπίριον, Τίτον Κοΐνκτιον,4 Ἠλεῖοι δ᾿ ἤγαγον
ὀλυμπιάδα πρώτην πρὸς ταῖς ἑκατόν, καθ᾿ ἣν ἐνίκα
στάδιον Δάμων Θούριος. ἐπὶ δὲ τούτων ἐν τῇ
Θρᾴκῃ Τριβαλλοὶ σιτοδείᾳ πιεζόμενοι πανδημεὶ
στρατείαν ἐποιήσαντο πρὸς τὴν ὑπερόριον χώραν,
καὶ τὰς τροφὰς ἐκ τῆς ἀλλοτρίας γῆς ἐπορίζοντο.
2ὄντες δὲ πλείους τῶν τρισμυρίων ἐπῆλθον τήν τε
ὅμορον Θρᾴκην καὶ τὴν τῶν Ἀβδηριτῶν χώραν
ἐπόρθησαν ἀδεῶς· πολλῆς δὲ ὠφελείας κυριεύσαντες



1ἐπιφανῆ ναυμαχίαν] Vogel reads ἐπιφανεῖ ναυμαχίᾳ.2Μάνλιος Wesseling: Μανίλιος.3Χαρισάνδρου Dindorf: Χαριάνδρου.4Τίτον Κοΐνκτιον P (cp. Livy, 6. 18. 1): Κορνήλιον Τίτον καὶ Μάρκον Κοίντιον.46Book XV

enemy fleet. In the battle eighteen triremes1 on 377/6 b.c. the Athenian side were destroyed; on the Lacedaemonian twenty-four were destroyed and eight captured with their crews. Chabrias then, having won a notable victory, sailed back laden with spoils to the Peiraeus and met with an enthusiastic reception from his fellow citizens. Since the Peloponnesian War this was the first naval battle the Athenians had won. For they had not fought the battle of Cnidus2 with a fleet of their own, but had got the use of the King’s fleet and won a victory.
While these things were going on, in Italy Marcus Manlius,3 who aspired to a tyranny in Rome, was overpowered and slain.
36. When Charisander was archon at Athens, the 376/5 b.c. Romans elected four military tribunes with consular power, Servius Sulpicius, Lucius Papirius, Titus Quinctius; and the Eleians celebrated the one hundred first Olympiad, in which Damon of Thurii won the stadium race. During their term of office, in Thrace the Triballians, suffering from a famine, moved in full force into territory beyond their borders and obtained food from the land not their own. More than thirty thousand invaded the adjacent part of Thrace and ravaged with impunity the territory of Abdera; and after seizing a large quantity of booty they were





1At variance with Demosthenes, 20. 78: μόνος τῶν πάντων στρατηγῶν οὐ πόλιν, οὐ φρούριον, οὐ ναῦν, οὐ στρατιώτην ἀπώλεσεν (sc. Χαβρίας) οὐδέν᾿ ἡγούμενος ὑμῶν.2394.b.c. Conon, the Athenian admiral, had a Persian fleet in this naval victory which threatened Sparta’s supremacy (see Book 14. 83).3See Livy, 6. 20.47