Diodorus of Sicily

δὲ τούτοις ἴσοι Θρᾷκες ἐκ τῶν ἄνω κατοικιῶν.
πρὸ δὲ τούτων ἁπάντων ἔταξεν ἐλέφαντας μὲν ἐν
ἐπικαμπίῳ τεσσαράκοντα πέντε, τοξότας δὲ καὶ
σφενδονήτας ἐν τοῖς τῶν θηρίων διαστήμασι τοὺς
6ἱκανούς. τοῦτον δὲ τὸν τρόπον ὀχυρωσάμενος τὸ
λαιὸν κέρας συνῆψεν αὐτῷ τὴν φάλαγγα. ταύτης
δὲ τὸ ἄκρον ἐπεῖχον οἱ ξένοι, πλείους ὄντες τῶν
ἑξακισχιλίων, τὸ δ᾿ ἑξῆς οἱ καθωπλισμένοι μὲν εἰς
τὰ Μακεδονικά, παντοδαποὶ δ᾿ ὄντες τοῖς ἔθνεσιν,
εἰς πεντακισχιλίους.
28. Μετὰ δὲ τούτους ἐτάχθησαν οἱ Μακεδόνες
ἀργυράσπιδες, ὄντες μὲν πλείους τρισχιλίων, ἀνίκητοι
δὲ καὶ διὰ τὰς ἀρετὰς πολὺν φόβον παρεχόμενοι
τοῖς πολεμίοις· ἐπὶ πᾶσι δὲ οἱ ἐκ τῶν
ὑπασπιστῶν, ὄντες1 πλείους τρισχιλίων, ἀφηγουμένου
τούτων τε ἅμα καὶ τῶν ἀργυρασπίδων Ἀντιγένους
2καὶ Τευτάμου. πρὸ δὲ πάσης τῆς φάλαγγος
ἔστησεν ἐλέφαντας τεσσαράκοντα καὶ τὰ τούτων
διαστήματα τοῖς ψιλικοῖς τάγμασιν2 ἀνεπλήρωσεν.
3ἐπὶ δὲ τοῦ δεξιοῦ κέρατος ἐξέταξε τοὺς ἱππεῖς,
ἐχομένους μὲν τῆς φάλαγγος τοὺς ἐκ Καρμανίας
ὀκτακοσίους, ὧν Τληπόλεμος σατράπης ἡγεῖτο,
ἑξῆς δὲ τοὺς καλουμένους ἑταίρους ἐννακοσίους καὶ
τὸ Πευκέστου καὶ Ἀντιγένους ἄγημα, τριακοσίους
ἔχον ἱππεῖς μιᾷ περιειλημμένους εἴλῃ, ἐπ᾿ ἄκρου
δὲ τοῦ κέρατος τὸ Εὐμενοῦς ἄγημα, τοὺς ἴσους
ἔχον ἱππεῖς, καὶ τούτων πρόταγμα τῶν Εὐμενοῦς
παίδων εἴλας δύο, συνεστηκυίας ἑκατέρας ἐξ ἱππεων


1ἐπὶ πᾶσι δὲ οἱ . . . ὄντες Geer: ἐπὶ πᾶσι δὲ τοὺς . . . ὄντας.2τάγμασιν Dindorf: τὴν τάξιν.304Book XIX

and an equal number of Thracians from the colonies 317 b.c. of the upper country. In front of all these he drew up forty-five elephants in a curved line with a suitable number of bowmen and slingers in the spaces between the animals. When Eumenes had made the left wing strong in this way, he placed the phalanx beside it. The outer end of this consisted of the mercenaries, who numbered more than six thousand; next were about five thousand men who had been equipped in the Macedonian fashion although they were of all races.
28. After them he drew up the Macedonian Silver Shields, more than three thousand in number, undefeated troops, the fame of whose exploits caused much fear among the enemy, and finally the men from the hypaspists,1 more than three thousand, with Antigenes and Teutamus leading both them and the Silver Shields. In front of the whole phalanx he placed forty elephants, filling the spaces between them with light armed soldiers. On the right wing he stationed cavalry: next to the phalanx, eight hundred from Carmania led by the satrap Tlepolemus, then the nine hundred called the Companions and the squadron of Peucestes and Antigenes, which contained three hundred horsemen arranged in a single unit. At the outer end of the wing was Eumenes’ squadron with the same number of horsemen, and as an advance-guard for them two troops of Eumenes’ slaves, each composed of fifty mounted men, while at

1The difference, if any, between the hypaspists and the other heavy armed foot soldiers is not clear. Tarn (Hellenistic Military and Naval Developments, 17) suggests that the “real distinction between the hypaspists and the phalanx was probably one of standing and recruitment; it was the difference between the Guards and the infantry of the line.”305