Diodorus of Sicily

μὲν πόλιν ἐκλιπεῖν, εἰς δὲ τὴν ἀκρόπολιν τοὺς ἀρίστους
τῶν στρατιωτῶν καταστήσαντες μετὰ τῆς
ἁρμοζούσης χορηγίας τὸν λοιπὸν ὄχλον καὶ τὰ
6χρήματα ἀπεκόμισαν εἰς τὴν Κῶν. ὁ δ᾿ Ἀλέξανδρος
ἅμ᾿ ἡμέρᾳ γνοὺς τὸ γεγενημένον τὴν μὲν
πόλιν κατέσκαψε τῇ δ᾿ ἀκροπόλει περιέθηκε τεῖχος
καὶ τάφρον ἀξιόλογον· αὐτὸς δὲ μέρος τῆς δυνάμεως
μετὰ στρατηγῶν ἐξέπεμψεν εἰς τὴν μεσόγειον,
προστάξας τὰ συνεχῆ τῶν ἐθνῶν χειροῦσθαι.
Οὗτοι μὲν οὖν ἐνεργῶς πολεμήσαντες πᾶσαν τὴν
χώραν μέχρι τῆς μεγάλης Φρυγίας καταστρεψάμενοι,
διέθρεψαν τοὺς στρατιώτας ἐκ τῆς πολεμίας·
7ὁ δ᾿ Ἀλέξανδρος τὴν παραθαλαττίαν πᾶσαν μέχρι
Κιλικίας χειρωσάμενος πολλὰς πόλεις κατεκτήσατο
καὶ φρούρια καρτερὰ φιλοτιμότερον πολιορκήσας
τῇ βίᾳ κατεπόνησεν, ἐν οἷς ἑνὸς παραδόξως ἐκράτησε,
περὶ οὗ διὰ τὴν ἰδιότητα τῆς περιπετείας οὐκ
ἄξιον παραλιπεῖν.
28. Τῆς γὰρ Λυκίας περὶ τὰς ἐσχατιὰς πέτραν
μεγάλην ὀχυρότητι διαφέρουσαν ᾤκουν οἱ Μαρμαρεῖς
ὀνομαζόμενοι, οἵτινες παριόντος Ἀλεξάνδρου
τὸ χωρίον ἐπέθεντο τοῖς κατὰ τὴν οὐραγίαν Μακεδόσι
καὶ συχνοὺς ἀνελόντες πολλὰ τῶν σωμάτων





194Book XVII

decided to abandon the city.1 They installed their 334 /3 b.c. best men in the acropolis with sufficient provision and conveyed the rest of the army and the stores to Cos. When Alexander at daybreak learned what had taken place he razed the city and surrounded the citadel with a formidable wall and trench.2 A portion of his force under certain generals he dispatched into the interior with orders to subdue the neighbouring tribes.3
These commanders, campaigning vigorously, subdued the whole region as far as greater Phrygia, supporting their men on the land. Alexander, for his part, overran the littoral as far as Cilicia, acquiring many cities and actively storming and reducing the strong points. One of these he captured surprisingly with such a curious reversal of fortune that the account of it cannot be omitted.4
28. Near the frontiers of Lycia there is a great rock fortress5 of unusual strength inhabited by people named Marmares. As Alexander marched by, these people attacked the Macedonian rear guard and killed many, carrying off as booty numerous men


1Arrian, 1. 23. 1.2Arrian, 1. 23. 6.3Arrian, 1. 24. 3, states only that Parmenion was sent back
to Sardes with mostly non-Macedonian troops, to proceed
thence into Phrygia.4Presumably Diodorus means to say that this story was
in his source, and too interesting to be omitted. He does
actually at this point omit all the other events of Alexander’s
Pisidian campaign including the miraculous passage of the
Climax, as well as the famous story of the Gordian knot.
These are told by Curtius (3. 1), Justin, 11. 7, Plutarch (Alex- ander, 17–18. 2), and Arrian (t. 24. 3–2. 4. 6). Tarn’s argument (Alexander the Great, 2. 72) that these popular stories were not in Diodorus’s source of the moment is untenable if his source was Trogus (p. 13).5Here and elsewhere, Diodorus uses the term petra for the abrupt and isolated rocky hills which are not uncommon in Asia, and which made excellent fortresses. This story is not otherwise reported. Freya Stark (Journal of Hellenistic Studies, 78 (1958), 116; cp. Alexander’s Path (1958), 250 f.) identifies this place with Chandir in Pamphylia. Appian (Bell, Civ. 4. 10. 80) tells the same story of Xanthus, traditionally destroyed in this way three times (Herodotus, 1. 176; Plutarch, Brutus, 31), and it was something of a literary topos (also Diodorus, Book 18. 22. 4–7; Strabo, 14. 5. 7. 671). Strabo (14. 3. 9. 666) remarks that this destruction was necessary to open the passes.195