Diodorus of Sicily
20. Ἅμα δ᾿ ἡμέρᾳ τὸ μὲν τῆς συμφορᾶς μέγεθος
συνεωράθη, οἱ δὲ Συρακόσιοι, μίαν ἔχοντες σωτηρίαν
τὴν ἀπὸ τοῦ Δίωνος βοήθειαν, ἐξαπέστειλαν
ἱππεῖς εἰς Λεοντίνους, δεόμενοι τοῦ Δίωνος μὴ
περιιδεῖν τὴν πατρίδα δοριάλωτον γινομένην καὶ
τῶν μὲν ἡμαρτημένων δοῦναι συγγνώμην αὐτοῖς,
τὰς δὲ παρούσας δυστυχίας ἐλεήσαντα διορθώσασθαι
2τὴν τῆς πατρίδος συμφοράν. ὁ δὲ Δίων
λαμπρὸς ὢν τὴν ψυχὴν καὶ διὰ τὴν ἐκ φιλοσοφίας
παιδείαν ἐξημερωμένος τοὺς λογισμοὺς οὐκ ἐμνησικάκησε
τοῖς πολίταις, ἀλλὰ τοὺς μισθοφόρους
πείσας παραχρῆμα ἀνέζευξε καὶ διανύσας ὀξέως
τὴν εἰς Συρακούσσας ὁδὸν ἧκε πρὸς τὰ Ἑξάπυλα.
3ἐνταῦθα δὲ διατάξας τοὺς στρατιώτας προσῆγε
κατὰ τάχος καὶ κατέλαβεν ἐκ τῆς πόλεως τέκνα
μὲν καὶ γυναῖκας καὶ τοὺς γεγηρακότας ὑπὲρ τοὺς
μυρίους· οὗτοι δὲ πάντες ἀπαντῶντες μετὰ δακρύων
ἱκέτευον ἀμῦναι τοῖς ἰδίοις ἀκληρήμασιν. οἱ δ᾿
ἐκ1 τῆς ἀκροπόλεως μισθοφόροι κεκρατηκότες ἤδη
τῆς προθέσεως τὰς μὲν περὶ τὴν ἀγορὰν οἰκίας
διαρπάσαντες ἐνέπρησαν, ἐπὶ δὲ τὰς λοιπὰς ὁρμήσαντες
4διήρπαζον τὰς ἐν ταύταις κτήσεις. καθ᾿
ὃν δὴ καιρὸν Δίων κατὰ πλείους τόπους εἰσπεσὼν
εἰς τὴν πόλιν καὶ τοῖς πολεμίοις περὶ τὰς ἁρπαγὰς
ἀσχολουμένοις ἐπιθέμενος πάντας τοὺς περιτυγχάνοντας
ἔκτεινε κομίζοντας ἐπὶ τῶν ὤμων παντοδαπὰς
κατασκευάς· διὰ δὲ τὸ παράδοξον τῆς
παρουσίας καὶ τὴν ἀταξίαν καὶ τὴν ταραχὴν τῶν
διαφορούντων τὰς κτήσεις εὐχερῶς ἅπαντες ἐχειροῦντο.
τέλος δὲ πλειόνων ἢ τετρακισχιλίων φονευθέντων,
τῶν μὲν ἐν ταῖς οἰκίαις, τῶν δ᾿ ἐν ταῖς

1ἐκ added by Dindorf.292Book XVI
20. At daybreak the magnitude of the disaster was 356/5 b.c. seen in its entirety, and the Syracusans, whose one hope of survival lay in help from Dion, sent horsemen to Leontini begging Dion not to suffer his native city to be captured by the spear point of the enemy, to forgive them the mistakes they had made, and in pity for their present misfortunes to come and retrieve his country’s disaster. Dion, a man noble in spirit and civilized in his judgements because of his philosophical training, did not bear a grudge against his fellow citizens, but, after winning the mercenaries over, straightway set out and, having quickly traversed the road to Syracuse, arrived at the Hexapyla.1 After drawing up his soldiers at that point he advanced with all speed and encountered, fleeing from the city, children, women, and old men in excess of ten thousand. All of these as they met him besought him with tears to avenge their own misfortunes. The mercenaries from the citadel, having already obtained their objective, after plundering the houses by the market-place set them on fire and now, attacking the remaining residences, were in the act of plundering the possessions in these. At this very moment Dion, rushing into the city in several places and attacking the enemy as they were busily engaged in their looting, slew all whom he met as they were lugging furnishings of various sorts off on their shoulders. And because of the unexpectedness of his appearance and the disorder and confusion, all of those who were making off with their plunder were easily overpowered. And finally, after more than four thousand had been slain, some in the houses, and others in the streets, the rest fled in a

1Entrance on the north to Tycha, a populous quarter of the city.293