Diodorus of Sicily
2Ἀλέξανδρος γὰρ βραχεῖ χρόνῳ πρότερον τῆς τελευτῆς
ἔκρινε κατάγειν ἅπαντας τοὺς ἐν ταῖς
Ἑλληνίσι πόλεσι φυγάδας, ἅμα μὲν δόξης ἕνεκεν,
ἅμα δὲ βουλόμενος ἔχειν ἐν ἑκάστῃ πόλει πολλοὺς
ἰδίους ταῖς εὐνοίαις πρὸς τοὺς νεωτερισμοὺς καὶ
3τὰς ἀποστάσεις τῶν Ἑλλήνων. διόπερ ὑπογύων
ὄντων τῶν Ὀλυμπίων ἐξέπεμψεν εἰς τὴν Ἑλλάδα
Νικάνορα τὸν Σταγειρίτην, δοὺς ἐπιστολὴν περὶ τῆς
καθόδου· ταύτην δὲ προσέταξεν ἐν τῇ πανηγύρει
διὰ τοῦ νικήσαντος κήρυκος ἀναγνωσθῆναι τοῖς
4πλήθεσιν. τούτου δὲ ποιήσαντος τὸ προσταχθὲν
λαβὼν ὁ κῆρυξ ἀνέγνω τὴν ἐπιστολὴν τήνδε.
“βασιλεὺς Ἀλέξανδρος τοῖς ἐκ τῶν Ἑλληνίδων
πόλεων φυγάσι. τοῦ μὲν φεύγειν ὑμᾶς οὐχ ἡμεῖς
αἴτιοι γεγόναμεν, τοῦ δὲ κατελθεῖν εἰς τὰς ἰδίας
πατρίδας ἡμεῖς ἐσόμεθα πλὴν τῶν ἐναγῶν. γεγράφαμεν
δὲ Ἀντιπάτρῳ περὶ τούτων, ὅπως τὰς
μὴ βουλομένας τῶν πόλεων κατάγειν ἀναγκάσῃ.”
5κηρυχθέντων δὲ τούτων μεγάλῳ κρότῳ ἐπεσήμηνε
τὸ πλῆθος. ἀποδεξάμενοι γὰρ οἱ κατὰ τὴν πανήγυριν
τὴν χάριν τοῦ βασιλέως διὰ τῆς χαρᾶς1
ἠμείβοντο τὴν εὐεργεσίαν τοῖς ἐπαίνοις. ἦσαν δ᾿
οἱ φυγάδες ἀπηντηκότες ἅπαντες ἐπὶ τὴν πανήγυριν,
ὄντες πλείους τῶν δισμυρίων.
6Οἱ μὲν οὖν πολλοὶ τὴν κάθοδον τῶν φυγάδων
ὡς ἐπ᾿ ἀγαθῷ γινομένην ἀπεδέχοντο, Αἰτωλοὶ δὲ
καὶ Ἀθηναῖοι δυσχεραίνοντες τῇ πράξει χαλεπῶς
ἔφερον. Αἰτωλοὶ μὲν γὰρ τοὺς Οἰνιάδας ἐκβεβληκότες
ἐκ τῆς πατρίδος προσεδόκων τὴν ἐπὶ τοῖς

1Dindorf, followed by Fischer, reads διὰ τὴν χαρὰν.34Book XVIII

death, Alexander decided to restore all the exiles in 323 b.c. the Greek cities,1 partly for the sake of gaining fame, and partly wishing to secure many devoted personal followers in each city to counter the revolutionary movements and seditions of the Greeks. Therefore, the Olympic games being at hand,2 he sent Nicanor of Stageira to Greece, giving him a decree about the restoration, which he ordered him to have proclaimed by the victorious herald to the crowds at the festival.3 Nicanor carried out his instructions, and the herald received and read the following message: “King Alexander to the exiles from the Greek cities. We have not been the cause of your exile, but, save for those of you who are under a curse, we shall be the cause of your return to your own native cities. We have written to Antipater about this to the end that if any cities are not willing to restore you, he may constrain them.” When the herald had announced this, the crowd showed its approval with loud applause; for those at the festival welcomed the favour of the king with cries of joy, and repaid his good deed with praises. All the exiles had come together at the festival, being more than twenty thousand in number.
Now people in general welcomed the rescoration of the exiles as a good thing, but the Aetolians and the Athenians took offence at the action and were angry. The reason for this was that the Aetolians had exiled the Oeniadae from their native city and



1Cp. Book 17. 109. 1.2In 324, the year before Alexander’s death.3The games began with a contest of heralds, the winner in which officiated throughout the festival. Cp. Suetonius, Nero, 24. 1; Pausanias, 5, 22. 1 and J. G. Frazer on this passage.35