Diodorus of Sicily
5ἐπέπλεον ἀλλήλοις. εἶχε δὲ τριήρεις ὁ μὲν
Πόλλις ἑξήκοντα καὶ πέντε ὁ δὲ Χαβρίας ὀγδοήκοντα
καὶ τρεῖς. ἐπιπλεουσῶν δὲ τῶν νεῶν ἀλλήλαις,
Πόλλις μὲν ἡγούμενος τοῦ δεξιοῦ κέρως
πρῶτος ἐνέβαλε ταῖς ἀντιτεταγμέναις τριήρεσιν ἐπὶ
τοῦ λαιοῦ κέρατος, ὧν ἡγεῖτο Κήδων ὁ Ἀθηναῖος·
ἀγωνισάμενος δὲ λαμπρῶς αὐτόν τε τὸν Κήδωνα
διέφθειρε καὶ τὴν ναῦν κατεβύθισεν· ὁμοίως δὲ καὶ
ταῖς ἄλλαις1 συμβαλὼν καὶ τοῖς ἐμβόλοις ἀναρρήττων,
ἃς μὲν διέφθειρεν, ἃς δὲ φυγεῖν ἠνάγκασεν.
6ἃ δὴ κατιδὼν ὁ Χαβρίας, καὶ μέρος τῶν περὶ αὐτὸν
νεῶν ἐκπέμψας, ἐβοήθησε τοῖς πιεζομένοις καὶ
τὴν ἧτταν τῶν ἰδίων διωρθώσατο, αὐτὸς δ᾿ ἔχων
τὸ κράτιστον τοῦ στόλου καὶ γενναίως ἀγωνισάμενος
πολλὰς μὲν τριήρεις διέφθειρεν, οὐκ ὀλίγας
δ᾿ αἰχμαλώτους ἔλαβεν.
35. Γενόμενος δ᾿ ἐπὶ τοῦ προτερήματος, καὶ
πάσας τὰς τῶν πολεμίων ναῦς φυγεῖν ἀναγκάσας,
ἀπέσχετο παντελῶς τοῦ διωγμοῦ· ἀναμνησθεὶς γὰρ2
τῆς ἐν Ἀργινούσαις ναυμαχίας, ἐν ᾗ τοὺς νικήσαντας
στρατηγοὺς ὁ δῆμος ἀντὶ μεγάλης εὐεργεσίας
θανάτῳ περιέβαλεν, αἰτιασάμενος ὅτι τοὺς
τετελευτηκότας κατὰ τὴν ναυμαχίαν οὐκ ἔθαψαν,
εὐλαβήθη μήποτε τῆς περιστάσεως ὁμοίας γενομένης
κινδυνεύσῃ παθεῖν παραπλήσια. διόπερ ἀποστὰς
τοῦ διώκειν ἀνελέγετο τῶν πολιτῶν τοὺς
διανηχομένους, καὶ τοὺς μὲν ἔτι ζῶντας διέσωσε,
τοὺς δὲ τετελευτηκότας ἔθαψεν. εἰ δὲ μὴ περὶ
ταύτην ἐγένετο τὴν ἐπιμέλειαν ῥᾳδίως ἂν ἅπαντα


1ταῖς ἄλλαις Reiske: τοῖς ἄλλοις.2γὰρ added by Reiske.44Book XV

each other.1 Pollis had sixty-five triremes; Chabrias 377/6 b.c. eighty-three. As the ships bore down on one another, Pollis, leading the right wing, was first to attack the opposing triremes on the left wing, which Cedon the Athenian commanded. In a brilliant contest he slew Cedon himself and sank his ship; and, in similar fashion engaging the other ships of Cedon and tearing them open with the beaks of his ships, he destroyed some and others he forced to flee. When Chabrias beheld what was happening, he dispatched a squadron of the ships under his command and brought support to the men who were hard pressed and so retrieved the defeat of his own side. He himself with the strongest part of the fleet in a valiant struggle destroyed many triremes and took a large number captive.
35. Although he had thus won the upper hand and forced all the enemies’ ships to flee, he abstained altogether from pursuit. For he recalled the battle of Arginusae2 and that the assembly of the people, in return for the great service performed by the victorious generals, condemned them to death on the charge that they had failed to bury the men who had perished in the fight; consequently he was afraid, since the circumstances were much the same, that he might run the risk of a similar fate. Accordingly, refraining from pursuit, he gathered up the bodies of his fellow citizens which were afloat, saved those who still lived, and buried the dead. Had he not engaged in this task he would easily have destroyed the whole


1The battle of Naxos took place in Sept. 376. For other accounts see Xenophon, Hell. 5. 4. 60–61; Plutarch, Phocion, 6 (for date); Polyaenus, 3. 11.2 (also gives date).2406.b.c. One of the Athenian causes célèbres (see Book 13. 99. 101).45