Diodorus of Sicily

ἐπ᾿ ἀνδρείᾳ κατεκτήσαντο.1 μεγίστων δ᾿ ἐπαίνων
ὁ στρατηγὸς Ἐπαμεινώνδας ἠξιώθη, διὰ τῆς ἰδίας
ἀνδρείας μάλιστα καὶ στρατηγικῆς συνέσεως τοὺς
ἀνικήτους ἡγεμόνας τῆς Ἑλλάδος κατηγωνισμένος.
4ἔπεσον δ᾿ ἐν τῇ μάχῃ τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων οὐκ ἐλάττους
τῶν τετρακισχιλίων, τῶν δὲ Βοιωτῶν περὶ
τριακοσίους. μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα περί τε τῆς τῶν
νεκρῶν ἀναιρέσεως καὶ τῆς εἰς Πελοπόννησον ἀπαλλαγῆς
τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων σπονδὰς ἐποιήσαντο.
Καὶ τὰ μὲν περὶ τὴν ἐν Λεύκτροις μάχην συμβάντα
τοιοῦτον ἔσχε τέλος.
57. Τοῦ δ᾿ ἐνιαυσίου χρόνου διεληλυθότος Ἀθήνησι
μὲν ἦρχε Δυσνίκητος,2 ἐν Ῥώμῃ δὲ ἀντὶ τῶν
ὑπάτων χιλίαρχοι κατεστάθησαν τέτταρες, Κόιντος
Σερουίλιος καὶ Λεύκιος Φούριος, ἔτι δὲ Γάιος
Λικίνιος καὶ Πόπλιος Κοίλιος.3 ἐπὶ δὲ τούτων
Θηβαῖοι μεγάλῃ δυνάμει στρατεύσαντες ἐπ᾿ Ὀρχομενὸν
ἐπεβάλοντο μὲν ἐξανδραποδίσασθαι τὴν πόλιν,
Ἐπαμεινώνδου δὲ συμβουλεύσαντος ὅτι τὰ διὰ τῆς
ἀνδρείας κατεργασθέντα τῇ φιλανθρωπίᾳ δεῖ4 διαφυλάττειν
τοὺς τῆς τῶν Ἑλλήνων ἡγεμονίας ὀρεγομένους,
μετέγνωσαν. διόπερ τοὺς μὲν Ὀρχομενίους
εἰς τὴν τῶν συμμάχων χώραν κατέταξαν, μετὰ δὲ
ταῦτα Φωκεῖς καὶ Αἰτωλοὺς καὶ Λοκροὺς φίλους
ποιησάμενοι τὴν εἰς Βοιωτίαν ἐπάνοδον ἐποιήσαντο.
2Ἰάσων δὲ ὁ Φερῶν τύραννος ἀεὶ μᾶλλον αὐξόμενος
ἐστράτευσεν εἰς τὴν Λοκρίδα, καὶ τὴν μὲν Ἡράκλειαν
τὴν ἐν Τραχινίᾳ διὰ προδοσίας ἑλὼν ἀνάστατον



1κατεκτήσαντο Reiske: κατεστήσαντο.2Δυσνίκητος (cp. Kirchner, Pros. Att. no. 4580)] Δυσκίνητος
H.3Κύλιος Ρ, Κίλιος FJK, Cloelius Livy, 6. 31. 1.4δεῖ added by Scaliger.110Book XV

number, they won a great reputation for valour. The 371/0 b.c. highest praises were accorded the general Epameinondas, who chiefly by his own courage and by his shrewdness as a commander had defeated in battle the invincible leaders of Greece. More than four thousand1 Lacedaemonians fell in the battle but only about three hundred Boeotians. Following the battle they made a truce to allow for taking up the bodies of the dead and the departure of the Lacedaemonians to the Peloponnese.
Such was the outcome of events relating to the battle of Leuctra,
57. When the year had ended, at Athens Dysnicetus 370/69 b.c. was archon, and in Rome military tribunes with consular power were elected, four in number: Quintus Servilius, Lucius Furius, Gaius Licinius, and Publius Coelius. During their term of office the Thebans, taking the field with a large army against Orchomenus, aimed to reduce the city to slavery, but when Epameinondas advised them that any who aimed at supremacy over the Greeks ought to safeguard by their generous treatment what they had achieved by their valour, they changed their mind. Accordingly they reckoned the people of Orchomenus as belonging to the territory of their allies, and later, having made friends of the Phocians, Aetolians, and Locrians, returned to Boeotia again.2 Jason,3 tyrant of Pherae, whose power was constantly increasing, invaded Locris, first took Heracleia in Trachinia by





1Diodorus probably is exaggerating. Xenophon (Hell. 6. 4. 15) says “almost a thousand.”2For the allies of the Thebans in 370 see Xenophon, Hell. 6. 5. 23; Agesilaüs, 2. 24.3See Hell. 6. 4. 27–28.111