Diodorus of Sicily

εἰ δυσὶ πρότερον ἡμέραις ἐγένετο τῆς Περδίκκου
τελευτῆς, οὐδεὶς ἂν ἐτόλμησε τὰς χεῖρας Περδίκκᾳ
2προσενεγκεῖν διὰ τὸ μέγεθος τῆς εὐημερίας. οἱ δ᾿
οὖν Μακεδόνες πυθόμενοι τὰ περὶ τὸν Εὐμενῆ
κατέγνωσαν αὐτοῦ θάνατον καὶ τῶν περὶ αὐτὸν
ἐπιφανῶν ἀνδρῶν πεντήκοντα, ἐν οἷς ἦν καὶ Ἀλκέτας
ὁ ἀδελφὸς τοῦ Περδίκκου. ἀπέκτειναν δὲ
καὶ τῶν φίλων τοῦ Περδίκκου τοὺς μάλιστα πιστοτάτους
καὶ τὴν ἀδελφὴν αὐτοῦ Ἀταλάντην, ἣν ἦν
γεγαμηκὼς Ἄτταλος ὁ τοῦ στόλου τὴν ἡγεμονίαν
παρειληφώς.
3Μετὰ δὲ τὴν ἀναίρεσιν τοῦ Περδίκκου Ἄτταλος
ὁ τοῦ στόλου τὴν ἡγεμονίαν ἔχων διέτριβε μὲν
περὶ τὸ Πηλούσιον, ὡς δ᾿ ἐπύθετο τὴν τῆς γυναικὸς
ἀναίρεσιν καὶ τοῦ Περδίκκου, τὸν στόλον
ἀναλαβὼν ἐξέπλευσε καὶ κατήντησεν εἰς Τύρον.
4ὁ δὲ τῆς πόλεως ταύτης φρούραρχος Ἀρχέλαος,
Μακεδὼν τὸ γένος, τὸν Ἄτταλον φιλοφρόνως
ὑπεδέξατο καὶ τήν τε πόλιν παρέδωκεν αὐτῷ καὶ
τὰ χρήματα, δεδομένα μὲν ὑπὸ Περδίκκου φυλάττειν,
τότε δὲ δικαίως ἀποδεδομένα, τὸ δὲ πλῆθος
ὄντα ταλάντων ὀκτακοσίων. ὁ δ᾿ Ἄτταλος ἐν
τῇ Τύρῳ διατρίβων ἀνελάμβανε τῶν Περδίκκου
φίλων τοὺς διασωζομένους ἐκ τῆς πρὸς τῇ Μέμφει
στρατοπεδείας.
38. Ἀντιπάτρου δ᾿ εἰς τὴν Ἀσίαν διαβεβηκότος
Αἰτωλοὶ κατὰ τὰς πρὸς Περδίκκαν συνθήκας
ἐστράτευσαν εἰς τὴν Θετταλίαν, ἀντιπερισπάσαι
βουλόμενοι τὸν Ἀντίπατρον. εἶχον δὲ στρατιώτας
πεζοὺς μὲν μυρίους καὶ δισχιλίους, ἱππεῖς δὲ
τετρακοσίους, ὧν ἦν στρατηγὸς Ἀλέξανδρος Αἰτωλός.
2ἐν παρόδῳ δὲ τοὺς Ἀμφισσεῖς Λοκροὺς
116Book XVIII

If this had become known two days before the
death 321 b.c. of Perdiccas, no one would have dared raise a hand against him because of his great good fortune.
Now, however, the Macedonians, on learning the news about Eumenes, passed sentence of death upon him and upon fifty of the chief men of his following, among whom was Alcetas, the brother of Perdiccas. They also slew the most faithful of Perdiccas’ friends and his sister Atalantê, the wife of Attalus, the man who had received command of the fleet.
After the murder of Perdiccas, Attalus, who had the command of the fleet, was waiting at
Pelusium; but when he learned of the murder of his wife and of Perdiccas, he set sail and came to Tyre with the fleet. The commandant of the garrison of that city, Archelaüs, who was a Macedonian by race,
welcomed Attalus and surrendered the city to him and also the funds that had been given him by Perdiccas for safe-keeping and had now been honourably repaid, being in amount eight hundred talents. Attalus remained in Tyre, receiving those of the friends of Perdiccas who escaped in safety from the camp
before Memphis.1
38. After the departure of Antipater for Asia,2 the Aetolians, in accordance with their compact with Perdiccas, made a campaign into Thessaly for the purpose of diverting Antipater. They had twelve thousand foot soldiers and four hundred horsemen, and their general was Alexander, an Aetolian. On the march they besieged the city of the
Amphissian


1According to Arrian (FGrH 156. 11. 39), he gathered a force of ten thousand foot and eight hundred horse with which he made an unsuccessful attack on Rhodes.2Cp. chaps. 25. 5, 29. 4.117