Diodorus of Sicily

μὲν πλείους τῶν τετταράκοντα μυριάδων, ἱππεῖς δὲ
οὐκ ἐλάττους τῶν δέκα μυριάδων.
Δαρεῖος μὲν οὖν μετὰ τοσαύτης δυνάμεως ἀναζεύξας
ἐκ Βαβυλῶνος προῆγεν ἐπὶ Κιλικίας, ἔχων
μεθ᾿ ἑαυτοῦ τήν τε γυναῖκα καὶ τὰ τέκνα, υἱὸν καὶ
3δύο θυγατέρας, καὶ τὴν μητέρα· Ἀλέξανδρος δὲ
πρὸ μὲν τῆς Μέμνονος τελευτῆς πυνθανόμενος
Χῖον καὶ τὰς ἐν Λέσβῳ πόλεις κεχειρῶσθαι, τὴν
δὲ Μιτυλήνην κατὰ κράτος ἡλωκυῖαν, πρὸς δὲ τούτοις
τὸν Μέμνονα τριακοσίαις τριήρεσι καὶ πεζῇ
δυνάμει μέλλοντα στρατεύειν ἐπὶ Μακεδονίαν, τῶν
δ᾿ Ἑλλήνων τοὺς πλείους ἑτοίμους εἶναι πρὸς ἀπόστασιν
4οὐ μετρίως ἠγωνία, ὡς δ᾿ ἧκόν τινες ἀπαγγέλλοντες
τὴν Μέμνονος τελευτήν, ἀπελύθη τῆς
πολλῆς ἀγωνίας. μετ᾿ ὀλίγον δὲ εἰς ἀρρωστίαν
βαρυτέραν ἐμπεσὼν καὶ χαλεπῷ πάθει συνεχόμενος
5συνεκάλεσε τοὺς ἰατρούς. τῶν μὲν οὖν ἄλλων
ἕκαστος δυσχερῶς εἶχε πρὸς τὴν θεραπείαν, Φίλιππος
δ᾿ Ἀκαρνὰν τὸ γένος παραβόλοις καὶ συντόμοις
θεραπείαις1 χρώμενος ἐπηγγείλατο διὰ
6φαρμακείας λύσειν τὴν νόσον. ἀσμένως δὲ τοῦ
βασιλέως ὑπακούσαντος διὰ τὸ λέγεσθαι Δαρεῖον
μετὰ τῆς δυνάμεως ἐκ Βαβυλῶνος ὡρμηκέναι ὁ
μὲν ἰατρὸς δοὺς φάρμακον πιεῖν καὶ συνεργὸν λαβὼν
τὴν φύσιν τοῦ κάμνοντος καὶ τὴν τύχην εὐθὺς ἀπήλλαξε
τῆς νόσου τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον. οὗτος μὲν οὖν
παραδόξως ἐκφυγὼν τὸν κίνδυνον καὶ τὸν ἰατρὸν
τιμήσας μεγαλοπρεπῶς κατέταξεν αὐτὸν εἰς τοὺς
εὐνουστάτους τῶν φίλων.
1So RX: ἰατρείαις F.204Book XVII

four hundred thousand1 infantry and not less than one 333/2 b.c. hundred thousand cavalry.
This was the force with which Dareius marched out of Babylon in the direction of Cilicia; he had with him his wife and children—a son and two daughters—and his mother. As to Alexander, he had been watching how, prior to his death, Memnon had won over Chios and the cities in Lesbos and had taken Mitylene by storm. He learned that Memnon planned to carry the war into Macedonia with three hundred ships of war and a land army also, while the greater part of the Greeks were ready to revolt. This caused him no little anxiety, but when persons came with the news of Memnon’s death, he was relieved of this fear; but shortly thereafter he became seriously ill,2 and, afflicted by severe pain, sent for his physicians. All the rest were hesitant to treat him, but Philip the Arcarnanian offered to employ risky but quick-acting remedies and by the use of drugs to break the hold of the disease. This proposal the king accepted gladly, for he had heard that Dareius had already left Babylon with his army. The physician gave him a drug to drink and, aided by the natural strength of the sufferer as well as by Fortune, promptly relieved Alexander of the trouble. Making an astonishing recovery, the king honoured the physician with magnificent gifts and assigned him to the most loyal category of Friends.3
3letter to Philip only as he drank the medicine (Curtius, 3.
5–6; Justin, 11. 8. 3–9; Plutarch, Alexander, 19; Arrian,
2. 4. 7–11; P. Oxyrhynchus 1798, Frag. 44, col. 1). Other writers add that Alexander was warned against the physician by Parmenion, but that Alexander showed the1Justin (11.9. 1) also gives 400,000. The unknown writer of the Alexander History P. Oxyrhynchus 1798 (Frag. 44, col. 2.2/3) and Arrian(2. 8. 8) give the Persian strength as 600,000.2Either from fatigue, as Aristobulus, or from swimming in the cold river Cydnus (Arrian, 2. 4. 7).205