Diodorus of Sicily
2τὴν ἁρμόζουσαν δύναμιν. συνεξέπεμψε δὲ καὶ τῶν
ἀξιολόγων ἡγεμόνων τοὺς ἱκανούς, ὧν ἦσαν ἐπιφανέστατοι
Ἀλκέτας ὁ ἀδελφὸς καὶ Νεοπτόλεμος,
καὶ τούτοις παρεκελεύσατο πάντα πειθαρχεῖν Εὐμενεῖ
διά τε τὴν στρατηγίαν αὐτοῦ καὶ διὰ τὴν
3τῆς πίστεως βεβαιότητα. ὁ δ᾿ Εὐμενὴς μετὰ τῆς
δοθείσης δυνάμεως παρελθὼν ἐπὶ τὸν Ἑλλήσποντον
καὶ προκατασκευασάμενος1 ἐκ τῆς ἰδίας σατραπείας
ἵππων πλῆθος ἐκόσμησε τὴν στρατιάν, ἐλλειπῆ
καθεστῶσαν κατὰ τοῦτο τὸ μέρος.
4Τῶν δὲ περὶ Κρατερὸν καὶ Ἀντίπατρον περαιωσάντων
τὰς δυνάμεις ἐκ τῆς Εὐρώπης ὁ μὲν Νεοπτόλεμος
φθονήσας τῷ Εὐμενεῖ καὶ περὶ αὑτὸν
ἔχων Μακεδονικὴν δύναμιν ἀξιόλογον λάθρᾳ διεπρεσβεύσατο
πρὸς τοὺς περὶ τὸν Ἀντίπατρον καὶ
συνθέμενος κοινοπραγίαν ἐπεβούλευσε τῷ Εὐμενεῖ.
καταφανὴς δὲ γενόμενος καὶ συναναγκασθεὶς μάχην
συνάψαι αὐτός τε ἐκινδύνευσεν ἀναιρεθῆναι καὶ τὴν
5δύναμιν σχεδὸν ἅπασαν ἀπέβαλεν· ὁ γὰρ Εὐμενὴς
νικήσας καὶ πολλοὺς ἀνελὼν τὸ λοιπόν τε πλῆθος
τῶν στρατιωτῶν προσηγάγετο καὶ τὴν δύναμιν τὴν
ἰδίαν οὐ μόνον διὰ τῆς νίκης ἐπηύξησεν, ἀλλὰ καὶ
προσλαβόμενος Μακεδόνων ἀγαθῶν ἀνδρῶν πλῆθος.
6Νεοπτόλεμος μὲν οὖν μετὰ τριακοσίων ἱππέων
διασωθεὶς ἐκ τῆς παρατάξεως ἀφίππευσε μετὰ τούτων
πρὸς τοὺς περὶ τὸν Ἀντίπατρον· οὗτοι δὲ
συνεδρεύσαντες περὶ τοῦ πολέμου διέγνωσαν τὰς
δυνάμεις εἰς δύο μέρη διελεῖν καὶ τὸ μὲν ἕτερον
Ἀντίπατρον ἀναλαβόντα προάγειν ἐπὶ Κιλικίας,
διαπολεμήσοντα πρὸς Περδίκκαν, τὸ δὲ ἄλλο μέρος
ἔχοντα Κρατερὸν ἐπιβαλεῖν τοῖς περὶ τὸν Εὐμενῆ

1προσκατασκευασάμενος Dindorf.96Book XVIII

into Asia,1 giving him a suitable force. He also sent 321 b.c. with him enough of the commanders of note, of whom the most prominent were his brother Alcetas and Neoptolemus; and he ordered them to obey Eumenes in all things because of his skill as general and his firm loyalty. Eumenes, with the forces that had been given him, went to the Hellespont; and there, having already prepared a large body of cavalry from his own satrapy, he marshalled his army, which had previously been deficient in that branch.
When Craterus and Antipater had brought their forces across from Europe, Neoptolemus, who was jealous of Eumenes and had a considerable number of Macedonians in his following, secretly entered into negotiations with Antipater, came to an agreement with him, and plotted against Eumenes. On being discovered and forced to fight, he himself was in danger of being killed, and he lost almost all his forces; for Eumenes, after he had won the victory and had killed many, won over the remaining soldiers and increased his own power, not only by the victory but also by having acquired a large number of stout Macedonians. But Neoptolemus, who had saved himself from the battle with three hundred horsemen, rode off with them to Antipater. A council of war was held, and it was decided to divide the forces into two parts. Antipater was to take one part and set out for Cilicia to fight against Perdiccas, and Craterus with the other part was to attack Eumenes and, after

1Cp. chap. 25. 6. For this campaign cp. Arrian, FGrH, 156. 9. 26–27; Justin, 13. 8. 1–9; Plutarch, Eumenes, 4–7; Nepos, Eumenes, 3-4. It is dated 321/0 by the Parian Marble, and probably took place early in the summer of 321.97