Diodorus of Sicily

ἐπειδὴ παρεγένοντο παραλαβόντες τῶν
φίλων εἰς τεσσαράκοντα, προσποιηθεὶς ἑαυτὸν ἐπιβουλεύεσθαι
συνελάμβανεν ἅπαντας καὶ κατηγόρησε
μὲν αὐτῶν ἐν τοῖς στρατιώταις, φήσας ὑπὸ τῶν
ἑξακοσίων ἁρπάζεσθαι διὰ τὴν πρὸς τὸν δῆμον
εὔνοιαν, καὶ κατωδύρετο τὴν περὶ αὑτὸν τύχην.
5παροξυνομένου δὲ τοῦ πλήθους καὶ βοῶντος μηκέτι
μέλλειν, ἀλλ᾿ ἐκ χειρὸς ἐπιθεῖναι τοῖς ἀδικήσασι τὴν
δίκην, τοῖς μὲν σαλπιγκταῖς παρήγγειλε σημαίνειν
τὸ πολεμικόν, τοῖς δὲ στρατιώταις ἀναιρεῖν τοὺς
αἰτίους καὶ διαρπάζειν τὰς κτήσεις τῶν ἑξακοσίων
6καὶ τῶν τούτοις κοινοπραγούντων. ὁρμησάντων
δὲ πάντων ἐπὶ τὴν ἁρπαγὴν ἡ πόλις ἐπληρώθη ταραχῆς
καὶ μεγάλων ἀτυχημάτων· οἱ μὲν γὰρ χαριέστατοι
τῶν πολιτῶν, ἀγνοοῦντες τὸν καθ᾿ αὑτῶν
κεκυρωμένον ὄλεθρον, ἐξεπήδων ἐκ τῶν οἰκιῶν
εἰς τὰς ὁδούς, μαθεῖν σπεύδοντες τὸν θόρυβον, οἱ
δὲ στρατιῶται τὰ μὲν διὰ τὴν πλεονεξίαν, τὰ δὲ
διὰ τὸν θυμὸν ἠγριωμένοι τὰς ψυχὰς ἀνῄρουν τοὺς
διὰ τὴν ἄγνοιαν γυμνὰ τὰ σώματα τῶν ἀμυνουμένων1
ὅπλων παρεχομένους.
7. Διαληφθέντων δὲ τῶν στενωπῶν κατὰ2 μέρος
ὑπὸ τῶν στρατιωτῶν οἱ μὲν κατὰ τὰς ὁδούς, οἱ δ᾿
ἐν ταῖς οἰκίαις ἐφονεύοντο. πολλοὶ δὲ καὶ τῶν μηδ᾿
ὁτιοῦν διαβεβλημένων ἀνῃροῦντο, δεόμενοι μαθεῖν
τὴν αἰτίαν τῆς ἀπωλείας. καθωπλισμένον γὰρ
πλῆθος ἐξουσίαν προσλαβὸν οὐ διέκρινε φίλον ἢ
πολέμιον, ἀλλὰ παρ᾿ οὗ πλέον ὠφεληθήσεσθαι3
2διειλήφει, τοῦτον ἐχθρὸν ἡγεῖτο. διὸ καὶ παρῆν
ὁρᾶν πᾶσαν τὴν πόλιν πεπληρωμένην ὕβρεως καὶ


1ἀμυνουμένων Capps: ἀμυνομένων.2Hertlein adds τῶν before κατὰ.3ὠφεληθήσεσθαι MSS., Fischer, ὠφελήσεσθαι Dindorf.244Book XIX

of common interest. When they had come bringing 317 b.c. with them some forty of their friends, Agathocles, pretending that he himself was being plotted against, arrested all of them, accused them before the soldiers, saying that he was being seized by the Six Hundred because of his sympathy for the common people, and bewailed his fate. When, however, the mob was aroused and with a shout urged him not to delay but to inflict the just penalty on the wrongdoers out of hand, he gave orders to the trumpeters to give the signal for battle and to the soldiers to kill the guilty persons and to plunder the property of the Six Hundred and their supporters. All rushed out to take part in the plunder, and the city was filled with confusion and great calamity; for the members of the aristocratic class, not knowing the destruction that had been ordained for them, were dashing out of their homes into the streets in their eagerness to learn the cause of the tumult, and the soldiers, made savage both by greed and by anger, kept killing these men who, in their ignorance of the situation, were presenting their bodies bare of any arms that would protect them.
7. The narrow passages were severally occupied by soldiers, and the victims were murdered, some in the streets, some in their houses. Many, too, against whom there had been no charge whatever, were slain when they sought to learn the cause of the massacre. For the armed mob having seized power did not distinguish between friend and foe, but the man from whom it had concluded most profit was to be gained, him it regarded as an enemy. Therefore one could see the whole city filled with outrage, slaughter, and


245