Diodorus of Sicily

τὰς τοῦ πολέμου πράξεις. ἐγένετο δ᾿ αὐτῷ καὶ
σημεῖον ἐν τῷ ἱερῷ τοῦ Ἀπόλλωνος· ἀετὸς γὰρ
ὑπερπετώμενος τὸν ναὸν1 τοῦ θεοῦ καὶ συγκυλισθεὶς
ἐπὶ τὴν γῆν τὰς τρεφομένας ἐν τῷ ἱερῷ περιστερὰς
ἐθήρευεν, ὧν ἐνίας ἀπ᾿ αὐτῶν ἥρπαζε τῶν βωμῶν.
τὸ δὲ σημεῖον ἔφασαν οἱ περὶ ταῦτ᾿ ἀσχολούμενοι
σημαίνειν τῷ Φιλομήλῳ καὶ τοῖς Φωκεῦσι κρατήσειν
3τῶν περὶ Δελφοὺς πραγμάτων. ἐπαρθεὶς οὖν
ἐπὶ τούτοις ἐπέλεξε τῶν φίλων τοὺς εὐθετωτάτους
εἰς τὰς πρεσβείας καὶ τούτων τοὺς μὲν εἰς τὰς
Ἀθήνας, τοὺς δ᾿ εἰς Λακεδαίμονα, τοὺς δ᾿ εἰς τὰς
Θήβας ἐξέπεμψεν· ὁμοίως δὲ καὶ πρὸς τὰς ἄλλας
τὰς ἐπισημοτάτας τῶν κατὰ τὴν Ἑλλάδα πόλεων
ἀπέστειλεν, ἀπολογούμενος ὅτι κατείληπται τοὺς
Δελφοὺς οὐ τοῖς ἱεροῖς χρήμασιν ἐπιβουλεύων, ἀλλὰ
τῆς τοῦ ἱεροῦ προστασίας ἀμφισβητῶν· εἶναι γὰρ
Φωκέων αὐτὴν ἰδίαν ἐν τοῖς παλαιοῖς χρόνοις ἀποδεδειγμένην.
4τῶν δὲ χρημάτων τὸν λόγον ἔφη
πᾶσι τοῖς Ἕλλησιν ἀποδώσειν καὶ τόν τε σταθμὸν
καὶ τὸν ἀριθμὸν τῶν ἀναθημάτων ἕτοιμος εἶναι
παραδοῦναι τοῖς βουλομένοις ἐξετάζειν. ἠξίου δέ,
ἄν τις δι᾿ ἔχθραν ἢ φθόνον πολεμῇ Φωκεῦσι,
μάλιστα μὲν συμμαχεῖν, εἰ δὲ μή γε, τὴν ἡσυχίαν
5ἄγειν. τῶν δὲ πρέσβεων τὸ προσταχθὲν πραξάντων
Ἀθηναῖοι μὲν καὶ Λακεδαιμόνιοι καί τινες ἄλλοι
συμμαχίαν πρὸς αὐτὸν συνέθεντο καὶ βοηθήσειν
ἐπηγγείλαντο, Βοιωτοὶ δὲ καὶ Λοκροὶ καί τινες
ἕτεροι τἀναντία τούτοις ἐψηφίσαντο καὶ τὸν πόλεμον
ὑπὲρ τοῦ θεοῦ πρὸς τοὺς Φωκεῖς ἐπανείλαντο.
Ταῦτα μὲν οὖν ἐπράχθη κατὰ τοῦτον τὸν ἐνιαυτόν.
1So X: νεὸν P, νεὼν cet.314Book XVI

the business of the war. There came to him an omen as 355/4 b.c. well, in the temple of Apollo, namely an eagle which, after flying over the temple of the god and swooping down to earth, preyed upon the pigeons which were maintained in the temple precincts, some of which it snatched away from the very altars. Those versed in such matters declared that the omen indicated to Philomelus and the Phocians that they would control the affairs of Delphi. Elated accordingly by these events, he selected the best qualified of his friends for the embassies, and sent some to Athens, some to Lacedaemon, and some to Thebes; and he likewise sent envoys to the other most distinguished cities of the Greek world, explaining that he had seized Delphi, not with any designs upon its sacred properties but to assert a claim to the guardianship of the sanctuary; for this guardianship had been ordained in early times as belonging to the Phocians. He said he would render due account of the property to all the Greeks and expressed himself as ready to report the weight and the number of the dedications to all who wished an examination. But he requested that, if any through enmity or envy were to engage in war against the Phocians, these cities should preferably join forces with him, or, if not, at least maintain peaceful relations.1 When the envoys had accomplished their appointed mission, the Athenians, Lacedaemonians, and some others arranged an alliance with him and promised assistance, but the Boeotians, Locrians, and some others passed decrees to the contrary intent and renewed the war in behalf of the god upon the Phocians.
Such were the events of this year.
1See chap. 33. 2.315