Diodorus of Sicily

περὶ Χαιρώνειαν ὁ Φάλαικος ἡττηθεὶς ἀπέβαλε
τῶν ἱππέων οὐκ ὀλίγους.
39. Ἅμα δὲ τούτοις πραττομένοις καὶ κατὰ τὴν
Πελοπόννησον ἐγένοντο ταραχαὶ καὶ κινήσεις διὰ
τοιαύτας τινὰς αἰτίας. Λακεδαιμόνιοι πρὸς Μεγαλοπολίτας
διαφερόμενοι τὴν χώραν αὐτῶν κατέδραμον
Ἀρχιδάμου τὴν ἡγεμονίαν ἔχοντος· οἱ δὲ
Μεγαλοπολῖται παροξυνθέντες ἐπὶ τοῖς πραχθεῖσι
καὶ καθ᾿ ἑαυτοὺς οὐκ ὄντες ἀξιόμαχοι παρὰ τῶν
2συμμάχων μετεπέμψαντο βοήθειαν. Ἀργεῖοι μὲν
οὖν καὶ Σικυώνιοι καὶ Μεσσήνιοι πανδημεὶ κατὰ
τάχος ἐβοήθησαν, Θηβαῖοι δ᾿ ἀπέστειλαν πεζοὺς
μὲν τετρακισχιλίους, ἱππεῖς δὲ πεντακοσίους, στρατηγὸν
3ἐπιστήσαντες Κηφισίωνα. Μεγαλοπολῖται
μὲν οὖν μετὰ τῶν συμμάχων ἐκστρατεύσαντες
κατεστρατοπέδευσαν περὶ τὰς πηγὰς τοῦ Ἀλφειοῦ
ποταμοῦ· οἱ δὲ Λακεδαιμόνιοι τρισχιλίους μὲν πεζοὺς
παρὰ Φωκέων προσελάβοντο ἱππεῖς δὲ ἑκατὸν
καὶ πεντήκοντα παρὰ Λυκόφρονος καὶ Πειθολάου
τῶν ἐκπεπτωκότων ἐκ τῆς ἐν Φεραῖς τυραννίδος·
συστησάμενοι δὲ δύναμιν ἀξιόμαχον κατεστρατοπέδευσαν
4περὶ Μαντίνειαν. μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα ἐπὶ
πόλιν Ὀρνεὰς τῆς Ἀργείας καταντήσαντες ἔφθασαν
αὐτὴν ἐκπολιορκήσαντες πρὸ τῆς τῶν πολεμίων
παρουσίας, οὖσαν σύμμαχον τῶν Μεγαλοπολιτῶν.
ἐπεξελθόντων δὲ τῶν Ἀργείων συνάψαντες μάχην
ἐνίκησαν καὶ πλείους τῶν διακοσίων ἀπέκτειναν.
5τῶν δὲ Θηβαίων ἐπιφανέντων καὶ τῷ μὲν πλήθει
διπλασίων ὄντων ταῖς δ᾿ εὐταξίαις λειπομένων
συνέστη μάχη καρτερά· καὶ τῆς νίκης ἀμφιδόξου
γενομένης οἱ μὲν Ἀργεῖοι καὶ οἱ σύμμαχοι τὴν εἰς
344Book XVI

took place near Chaeroneia, Phalaecus was defeated 352/1 b.c. and lost a large number of his cavalry.
39. While these things were going on, throughout the Peloponnese also disturbances and disorders had occurred for the following reasons. The Lacedaemonians, being at variance with the Megalopolitans, overran their country with Archidamus in command, and the Megalopolitans,1 incensed over their actions but not strong enough to fight by themselves, summoned aid from their allies. Now the Argives, Sicyonians,
and Messenians in full force and with all speed came to their assistance; and the Thebans dispatched four thousand foot and five hundred horse with Cephision
placed in charge as general. The Megalopolitans accordingly, having taken the field with their allies, encamped near the headwaters of the Alpheius River, while the Lacedaemonians were reinforced by three thousand foot-soldiers from the Phocians and one hundred fifty cavalry from Lycophron and Peitholaüs, the exiled tyrants of Pherae, and, having mustered an army capable of doing battle, encamped by Mantineia. Then having advanced to the Argive city of Orneae,2 they captured it before the arrival of the enemy, for it was an ally of the Megalopolitans. When the Argives took the field against them, they joined battle and defeated them and slew more than two hundred. Then the Thebans appeared, and since they were in number twice as many though inferior in discipline, a stubborn battle was engaged; and as the victory hung in doubt, the Argives and their allies withdrew


1They even sent ambassadors to Athens begging help. It was on this occasion that Demosthenes delivered his speech, “On the Megalopolitans” (q.v. 16). See also Pausanias, 8. 27. 9–10.2Cp. chap. 34. 3.345