Diodorus of Sicily
Ὡς Ἀγαθοκλῆς Ἰτύκην ἐκπολιορκήσας διεβίβασε μέρος
τῆς δυνάμεως εἰς τὴν Σικελίαν.
Ὡς Ἀκραγαντῖνοι παραταξάμενοι πρὸς τοὺς Ἀγαθοκλέους
στρατηγοὺς ἡττήθησαν.
Ὡς Ἀγαθοκῆς Ἡράκλειαν μὲν καὶ Θέρμα καὶ
Κεφαλοίδιον προσηγάγετο, τὴν δὲ τῶν Ἀπολλωνιατῶν
χώραν καὶ πόλιν ἐξηνδραποδίσατο.
Ὡς Ἀγαθοκλῆς ἐν Σικελίᾳ ναυμαχίᾳ μὲν ἐνίκησε
Καρχηδονίους, μάχῃ δ᾿ Ἀκραγαντίνους.
Διάβασις εἰς Λιβύην Ἀγαθοκλέους τὸ δεύτερον καὶ
ἧττα.
Αἱ γενόμεναι ταραχαὶ κατὰ τὰ ἑκατέρων στρατόπεδα.
Ἀγαθοκλέους δρασμὸς εἰς Σικελίαν.
Αἱ γενόμεναι σφαγαὶ τῶν Σικελιωτῶν ὑπὸ Ἀγαθοκλέους.
Στρατεία Ἀντιγόνου βασιλέως μεγάλαις δυνάμεσιν
ἐπ᾿ Αἴγυπτον.
Ἀπόστασις Πασιφίλου στρατηγοῦ ἀπὸ Ἀγαθοκλέους.
Ὡς Καρχηδόνιοι συνέθεντο τὴν εἰρήνην πρὸς Ἀγαθοκλέα.
Ὡς Ῥόδον πολιορκήσας Δημήτριος διελύσατο τὴν
πολιορκίαν.
Ὡς Ῥωμαῖοι Σαμνίτας δυσὶ μάχαις ἐνίκησαν.
Ὡς Δημήτριος ἀπὸ τῆς Ῥόδου πλεύσας εἰς τὴν Ἑλλάδα
τὰς πλείστας πόλεις ἠλευθέρωσεν.
Ὡς Ἀγαθοκλῆς Λιπαραίους χρήματα ἀδίκως εἰσπραξάμενος
ἀπέβαλε τὰς ναῦς ἐν αἷς ἦν τὰ χρήματα.
140Book XX
How Agathocles, having besieged and taken Utica, transported part of his troops across into Sicily (chaps. 54–55).
How the people of Acragas took the field against Agathocles’ generals and were defeated (chap. 56).
How Agathocles won over to himself Heraclea, Therma, and Cephaloedium, but reduced the country and city of the Apolloniates to utter slavery (chap. 56).
How in Sicily Agathocles defeated the Carthaginians in a naval battle and the people of Acragas in a battle on land (chaps. 57–63).
Agathocles’ crossing to Libya for the second time and his defeat (chap. 64).
The confusion that arose in the camps of both armies (chaps. 65–70).
Agathocles’ flight to Sicily (chap. 71).
The slaughter of the Sicilians by Agathocles (chaps. 71–72).
Expedition of King Antigonus against Egypt with great forces (chaps. 73–76).
Desertion of Pasiphilus, a general, from Agathocles (chap. 77).1
How the Carthaginians made peace with Agathocles (chap. 79).
How Demetrius, after laying siege to Rhodes, abandoned the siege (chaps. 81–88, 91–99).2
How the Romans defeated the Samnites in two battles (chap. 90).
How Demetrius sailed from Rhodes to Greece and freed most of the cities (chaps. 100, 102–103).
How Agathocles unjustly exacted money from the Liparaeans and lost the ships in which the money was (chap. 101).
1Chap. 78 omitted: comparison of Agathocles with Dionysius.2The Greek Table of Contents makes no mention of the
events related in chap. 80, the Roman raids on Samnium,
and in chap. 89, Agathocles’ defeat of Deinocrates in Sicily.141