Diodorus of Sicily

καὶ τῆς αἰχμαλωσίας ἀπολύσαντα πρὸς ἑαυτὸν
3ἀναλαβεῖν ἐντίμως. τέλος δ᾿ ὑπὸ τοῦ Δημάδου
καθομιληθέντα ταῖς Ἀττικαῖς χάρισι πάντας ἀπολῦσαι
τοὺς αἰχμαλώτους ἄνευ λύτρων, καθόλου δ᾿
ἀποθέμενον τὴν ἐκ τῆς νίκης ὑπερηφανίαν πρέσβεις
ἀποστεῖλαι πρὸς τὸν δῆμον τῶν Ἀθηναίων καὶ
συνθέσθαι πρὸς αὐτοὺς φιλίαν τε καὶ συμμαχίαν,
εἰς δὲ τὰς Θήβας φρουρὰν ἐγκαταστήσαντα συγχωρῆσαι
τὴν εἰρήνην τοῖς Βοιωτοῖς.
88. Οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι μετὰ τὴν ἧτταν Λυσικλέους
μὲν τοῦ στρατηγοῦ θάνατον κατέγνωσαν Λυκούργου
τοῦ ῥήτορος κατηγορήσαντος. οὗτος γὰρ τῶν τότε
ῥητόρων μέγιστον ἔχων ἀξίωμα καὶ δώδεκα μὲν
ἔτη τὰς προσόδους τῆς πόλεως διοικήσας ἐπαινουμένως
βίον δ᾿ ἐζηκὼς ἐπ᾿ ἀρετῇ περιβόητον πικρότατος
2ἦν ἐν τοῖς λόγοις1 κατήγορος. γνοίη δ᾿ ἄν
τις αὐτοῦ τὴν ἐν τοῖς λόγοις ἀξίαν καὶ πικρίαν ἐν
οἷς τοῦ Λυσικλέους κατηγορῶν λέγει, Ἐστρατήγεις,
ὦ Λύσικλες, καὶ χιλίων μὲν πολιτῶν τετελευτηκότων,
δισχιλίων δ᾿ αἰχμαλώτων γεγονότων,
τροπαίου δὲ κατὰ τῆς πόλεως ἑστηκότος, τῆς δ᾿
Ἑλλάδος ἁπάσης δουλευούσης, καὶ τούτων ἁπάντων
γεγενημένων σοῦ ἡγουμένου καὶ στρατηγοῦντος
τολμᾷς ζῆν καὶ τὸ τοῦ ἡλίου φῶς ὁρᾶν καὶ εἰς
τὴν ἀγορὰν ἐμβάλλειν, ὑπόμνημα γεγονὼς αἰσχύνης
καὶ ὀνείδους τῇ πατρίδι.
3Ἴδιον δέ τι συνέβη γενέσθαι κατὰ τοὺς ὑποκειμένους
χρόνους. καθ᾿ ὃν γὰρ καιρὸν ἡ περὶ τὴν
Χαιρώνειαν ἐγένετο μάχη, ἑτέρα παράταξις συνέστη
1ἐν τοῖς λόγοις deleted by Dindorf (cp. infra, § 2).82Book XVI

captivity and gave him a place in his own company 338/7 b.c. with every mark of honour. Addressed by Demades with Attic charm, he ended by releasing all of the Athenian prisoners without ransom and, altogether abandoning the arrogance of victory, sent envoys to the people of Athens and concluded with them a treaty of friendship and alliance. With the Boeotian she concluded peace but maintained a garrison in Thebes.
88. After this defeat, the Athenians condemned to death the general Lysicles on the accusation of Lycurgus, the orator. Lycurgus had the highest repute of the politicians of his time, and since he had won praise for his conduct of the city’s finances over a period of twelve1 years and lived in general a life renowned for rectitude, he proved to be a very stern prosecutor. One can judge of his character and austerity in the passage in his accusation where he says: “You were general, Lysicles. A thousand citizens have perished and two thousand were taken captive. A trophy stands over your city’s defeat, and all of Greece is enslaved. All of this happened under your leadership and command, and yet you dare to live and to look on the sun and even to intrude into the market, a living monument of our country’s shame and disgrace.”
There was an odd coincidence in the period under review. At the same time as the battle took place at Chaeroneia, another battle occurred in Italy on the



1Diodorus has got ahead of himself. Lycurgus’s service as finance minister belongs to the years 338/7–327/6 b.c. (Kunst, Real-Encyclopädie, 13 (1927), 2448 f.). He was, however, almost fifty years old at this time, and so a mature statesman.83