Diodorus of Sicily

καὶ τῇ δυσχωρίᾳ τῶν τόπων πλεονεκτοῦντες,
ἐτρέψαντο τοὺς προσμαχομένους.1 οἱ δὲ περὶ
τὸν Ἀλκέταν τῆς μὲν ἐπὶ τοὺς πεζοὺς καταφυγῆς
ἀποκεκλεισμένοι, τῷ δὲ πλήθει τῶν πολεμίων εἰς
μέσον ἀπειλημμένοι πρόδηλον εἶχον τὴν ἀπώλειαν.
διὸ καὶ τῆς σωτηρίας δυσβοηθήτου γενομένης ὁ
μὲν Ἀλκέτας πολλοὺς ἀποβαλὼν μόλις διεξέπεσε
πρὸς τὴν τῶν πεζῶν φάλαγγα.
45. Ὁ δ᾿ Ἀντίγονος ἐξ ὑπερδεξίων τόπων ἐπαγαγὼν
τούς τε ἐλέφαντας καὶ πᾶσαν τὴν δύναμιν
κατεπλήξατο τοὺς πολεμίους πολὺ τοῖς πλήθεσι
λειπομένους· ἦσαν γὰρ οἱ σύμπαντες2 πεζοὶ μὲν
μύριοι καὶ ἑξακισχίλιοι, ἱππεῖς δὲ ἐννακόσιοι, οἱ δ᾿
Ἀντιγόνου χωρὶς τῶν ἐλεφάντων πεζοὶ μὲν πλείους
τῶν τετρακισμυρίων, ἱππεῖς δὲ ὑπὲρ τοὺς ἑπτακισχιλίους.
2ἅμα δὲ τῶν ἐλεφάντων ἐπιόντων κατὰ
μέτωπον καὶ τῶν ἱππέων διὰ τὸ πλῆθος πανταχῇ
περιχεομένων,3 ἔτι δὲ τῶν πεζῶν πολλαπλασίων καὶ
κρειττόνων ὄντων ταῖς ἀρεταῖς καὶ τὴν στάσιν
ὑπερδέξιον ἐχόντων, πολὺς θόρυβος καὶ φόβος
κατεῖχε τοὺς περὶ τὸν Ἀλκέταν· διὰ δὲ τὴν ὑπερβολὴν
τῆς ὀξύτητος καὶ τῆς ἐνεργείας οὐδ᾿ ἐκτάξαι
3καλῶς τὴν φάλαγγα κατίσχυσε. τροπῆς δὲ παντελοῦς
γενομένης Ἄτταλος μὲν καὶ Δόκιμος καὶ
Πολέμων καὶ πολλοὶ τῶν ἀξιολόγων ἡγεμόνων
ἐζωγρήθησαν, Ἀλκέτας δὲ μετὰ τῶν ἰδίων ὑπασπιστῶν
καὶ παίδων ἔφυγε μετὰ τῶν Πισιδῶν
τῶν συστρατευομένων εἰς πόλιν Πισιδικὴν ὄνομα
4Τερμησσόν. ὁ δ᾿ Ἀντίγονος πάντας4 μὲν καθ᾿


1προσμαχομένους Dindorf: τοὺς μαχομένους RX, τοὺς προμαχομένους
F.2σύμπαντες Fischer: σύμμαχοι πάντες.3περιχεομένων Wesseling: περιεχομένων.4πάντας Post: τούτους. Fischer indicates a lacuna after παραλαβὼν.136Book XVIII

and also had an advantage from the difficulty of the 319 b.c. terrain, routed the attackers. Alcetas, whose retreat to the infantry had been cut off and who was caught in a trap by the superior numbers of the enemy, faced imminent destruction. Therefore now that survival itself was difficult, he abandoned many of his men and hardly escaped to the phalanx of the footmen.
45. Antigonus, however, led his elephants and his whole army down from a higher position and struck panic into his opponents, who were far inferior to him in number; for they were in all sixteen thousand foot and nine hundred horse, while Antigonus, in addition to the elephants, had more than forty thousand foot soldiers and above seven thousand horsemen. The elephants were now attacking the army of Alcetas from the front, and at the same time the horsemen because of superior numbers were pouring about them on all sides, while a force of infantry, which far outnumbered them and also surpassed them in valour, was holding a position above them. At this, tumult and panic began to grip Alcetas’ soldiers; and because of the great rapidity and force of the attack, he was unable to draw up the phalanx properly. The rout was complete. Attalus, Docimus, Polemon, and many of the more important officers were taken captive1; but Alcetas, accompanied by his own guards and attendants, escaped with his Pisidian allies to a city of Pisidia called Termessus. Antigonus




1For their fate cp. Book 19. 16.137