Diodorus of Sicily
6ὧν ὀξέως ποιησάντων τὸ προσταχθὲν καὶ
παρεισπεσόντων εἰς τὴν στρατοπεδείαν τῶν Μακεδόνων
τῶν αἰχμαλώτων τινὲς ἁρπάσαντες ὅπλα
συνήργουν τοῖς Σκύθοις καὶ διήρπαζον τὰς ἀποσκευάς·
βοὴ δ᾿ ἦν καὶ ταραχὴ διὰ τὸ παράδοξον
7καθ᾿ ὅλην τὴν παρεμβολήν. αἱ μὲν οὖν ἄλλαι τῶν
αἰχμαλωτίδων πρὸς τοὺς βαρβάρους ἀπεχώρουν, ἡ
δὲ μήτηρ τοῦ Δαρείου Σισύγγαμβρις παρακαλουσῶν
αὐτὴν τῶν αἰχμαλωτίδων οὐ προσέσχεν, ἀλλ᾿
ἐφ᾿ ἡσυχίας ἔμεινε φιλοφρόνως, οὔτε τῷ παραδόξῳ
τῆς τύχης πιστεύσασα οὔτε τὴν πρὸς Ἀλέξανδρον
8εὐχαριστίαν λυμαινομένη. τέλος δὲ οἱ Σκύθαι
πολλὴν τῆς ἀποσκευῆς διαρπάσαντες ἀφίππευσαν
πρὸς τοὺς περὶ Μαζαῖον καὶ τὴν εὐημερίαν ἀπήγγειλαν.
ὁμοίως δὲ καὶ τῶν περὶ Δαρεῖον τεταγμένων
ἱππέων τινὲς καταπονήσαντες τῷ πλήθει
τοὺς ἀνθεστῶτας Μακεδόνας φεύγειν ἠνάγκασαν.
60. Δευτέρου δὲ προτερήματος τοῖς Πέρσαις γενομένου
ὁ μὲν Ἀλέξανδρος σπεύδων δι᾿ ἑαυτοῦ
τὴν ἧτταν διορθώσασθαι τῶν ἰδίων μετὰ τῆς βασιλικῆς
εἴλης καὶ τῶν ἄλλων τῶν ἐπιφανεστάτων
2ἱππέων ἐπ᾿ αὐτὸν ἤλαυνε τὸν Δαρεῖον. ὁ δὲ τῶν
Περσῶν βασιλεὺς δεξάμενος τὴν ἐπιφορὰν τῶν
πολεμίων αὐτὸς μὲν ἐφ᾿ ἅρματος ἀγωνιζόμενος
ἠκόντιζεν εἰς τοὺς ἐπιφερομένους, πολλῶν δ᾿ αὐτῷ
συναγωνιζομένων καὶ τῶν βασιλέων ἐπ᾿ ἀλλήλους
ἱεμένων ὁ μὲν Ἀλέξανδρος ἀκοντίσας ἐπὶ τὸν
Δαρεῖον τούτου μὲν ἥμαρτεν, τοῦ δὲ παρεστῶτος


288Book XVII

capture the baggage. This they did promptly, and 331/0 b.c. as they burst into the camp of the Macedonians, some of the captives seized weapons and aided the Scythians in seizing the baggage. There was shouting and confusion throughout the whole camp area at this unexpected event. Most of the female captives rushed off to welcome the Persians, but the mother of Dareius, Sisyngambris, did not heed when the women called upon her, but remained placidly where she was, since she neither trusted the uncertain turns of Fortune nor would sully her gratitude toward Alexander. Finally, after the Scythians had rounded up much of the baggage, they rode off to Mazaeus to report their success.1 During this time, also, part of the cavalry of Dareius in superior numbers continued their pressure on the opposing Macedonians and forced them to give ground.
60. This was a second success for the Persians, and Alexander saw that it was time for him to offset the discomfiture of his forces by his own intervention2 with the royal squadron and the rest of the elite horse guards, and rode hard against Dareius.3 The Persian king received their attack and fighting from a chariot hurled javelins against his opponents, and many supported him. As the kings approached each other, Alexander flung a javelin at Dareius and missed him,



1Curtius, 4. 15. 5–11. The “baggage” included persons
as well as objects, and it may be that this attack was a cal- culated attempt to recover the Persian women captured at Issus. Arrian (3. 14. 5–6) views it as a purely military manœuvre. Arrian reports that it was a break through the Macedonian line carried out by Indians and Persian cavalry, while Curtius and Plutarch (Alexander, 32. 3), who do not identify the troops, agree with Diodorus that the operation was a sweep around the Macedonian left wing.2This same motivation is ascribed to Alexander, Curtius, 4. 15. 19.3Curtius, 4. 15. 24–33; Arrian, 3. 14. 1–3.289