Diodorus of Sicily

τῶν στρατοπέδων, οἱ μὲν μάντεις1 σφαγιασάμενοι
παρ᾿ ἀμφοτέροις ἀπεφαίνοντο τὴν νίκην ὑπὸ τῶν
2θεῶν προφαινομένην· κατὰ δὲ τὴν τάξιν2 Μαντινεῖς
μὲν μετὰ τῶν ἄλλων Ἀρκάδων τὸ δεξιὸν ἐπεῖχον
κέρας, ἔχοντες παραστάτας καὶ συναγωνιστὰς Λακεδαιμονίους,
τούτοις δὲ συνεχεῖς ἦσαν Ἠλεῖοι καὶ
Ἀχαιοί, καὶ τῶν ἄλλων οἱ καταδεέστεροι τὴν
μέσην3 ἐπεῖχον τάξιν· τὸ δ᾿ εὐώνυμον κέρας ἀνεπλήρουν
Ἀθηναῖοι. Θηβαῖοι δ᾿ αὐτοὶ μὲν ἐπὶ τὸ
εὐώνυμον κέρας ἐτάχθησαν, παραστάτας ἔχοντες
Ἀρκάδας, τὸ δὲ δεξιὸν παρέδωκαν Ἀργείοις· τὸ
δὲ ἄλλο πλῆθος ἀνεπλήρου τὴν μέσην τάξιν,
Εὐβοεῖς καὶ Λοκροὶ καὶ Σικυώνιοι, πρὸς δὲ τούτοις
Μεσσήνιοι καὶ Μαλιεῖς καὶ Αἰνιᾶνες, ἔτι δὲ
καὶ Θετταλοὶ καὶ οἱ λοιποὶ σύμμαχοι. τοὺς δ᾿
ἱππεῖς ἐφ᾿ ἑκατέρων τῶν κεράτων ἀμφότεροι διείλοντο.
3τῶν δὲ στρατευμάτων τοῦτον τὸν τρόπον
τεταγμένων, ὡς ἤδη πλησίον ὑπῆρχον ἀλλήλων,
αἱ μὲν σάλπιγγες τὸ πολεμικὸν ἐσήμαινον, αἱ δὲ
δυνάμεις ἠλάλαξαν καὶ τῷ μεγέθει τῆς βοῆς τὴν
νίκην ἐσήμαινον. καὶ τὸ μὲν πρῶτον ἱππομαχίαν
ἐν τοῖς κέρασι συνεστήσαντο, καθ᾿ ἣν ταῖς φιλοτιμίαις
4ἑαυτοὺς ὑπερεβάλοντο. οἱ μὲν γὰρ τῶν
Ἀθηναίων ἱππεῖς τοῖς τῶν Θηβαίων ἐπελάσαντες
ἠλαττοῦντο οὐχ οὕτω ταῖς τῶν ἵππων4 ἀρεταῖς
οὐδὲ ταῖς ἰδίαις εὐψυχίαις οὐδὲ ταῖς κατὰ τὴν
ἱππικὴν ἐμπειρίαις· ἐν γὰρ τούτοις ἅπασιν οὐκ
ἦν καταδεέστερον τὸ τῶν Ἀθηναίων ἱππικόν· τῷ
δὲ πλήθει καὶ τῇ παρασκευῇ τῶν ψιλῶν5 καὶ τῇ
στρατηγικῇ συντάξει πολὺ τῶν ἐναντίων ἐλείποντο.
αὐτοὶ μὲν οὖν6 ὀλίγους εἶχον ἀκοντιστάς, οἱ δὲ

1So Scaliger: μαντινεῖς.2So Wurm (cp. chap. 86. 2): ἀξίαν.3So Capps (cp. chap. 85. 2 below): λοιπὴν.4So Schäfer: ἱππέων.5So Wesseling: φίλων.6οὖν A, omitted by cet.188Book XV

the soothsayers, having sacrificed on both sides, declared 363/2 b.c. that victory was foreshadowed by the gods. In the disposition of forces the Mantineians with the rest of the Arcadians occupied the right wing with the Lacedaemonians as their neighbours and supporters, and next to these were Eleians and Achaeans; and the weaker of the remaining forces occupied the centre, while the Athenians filled the left wing. The Thebans themselves had their post on the left wing, supported by the Arcadians, while they entrusted the right to the Argives. The remaining multitude filled the middle of the line: Euboeans, Locrians, Sicyonians, Messenians, Malians, Aenianians, together with Thessalians and the remaining allies. Both sides divided the cavalry and placed contingents on each wing. Such was the array of the armaments, and now as they approached one another, the trumpets sounded the battle charge, the armies raised the battle shout, and by the very volume of their cries betokened their victory. At first they engaged in a cavalry battle on the flanks in which they outbid each other in keen rivalry. Now as the Athenian horse attacked the Theban they suffered defeat not so much because of the quality of their mounts nor yet on the score of the riders’ courage or experience in horsemanship, for in none of these departments was the Athenian cavalry deficient; but it was in the numbers and equipment of the light-armed troops and in their tactical skill that they were far inferior to their opponents. Indeed they had only a few javelin-throwers,






189