Diodorus of Sicily

ἐπὶ δὲ τούτων Πτολεμαῖος ὁ Ἀλωρίτης1 ὁ Ἀμύντου
υἱὸς ἐδολοφόνησεν Ἀλέξανδρον1 τὸν ἀδελφόν, καὶ
2ἐβασίλευσε τῆς Μακεδονίας ἔτη τρία.2 κατὰ δὲ
τὴν Βοιωτίαν Πελοπίδας ἐφάμιλλος ὢν τῷ Ἐπαμεινώνδᾳ
τῇ κατὰ πόλεμον δόξῃ, καὶ θεωρῶν
ἐκεῖνον τὰ περὶ τὴν Πελοπόννησον συμφερόντως
κατεσκευακότα τοῖς Βοιωτοῖς, ἔσπευδε τὰ ἐκτὸς
Πελοποννήσου δι᾿ αὑτοῦ προσάγεσθαι τοῖς Θηβαίοις.
παραλαβὼν δὲ Ἰσμηνίαν, ἄνδρα φίλον μὲν
ἑαυτοῦ θαυμαζόμενον δ᾿ ἐπ᾿ ἀρετῇ, παρῆλθεν εἰς
Θετταλίαν. καταντήσας δὲ πρὸς Ἀλέξανδρον τὸν
Φερῶν τύραννον, ἀλόγως συνελήφθη μετὰ Ἰσμηνίου
3καὶ εἰς φυλακὴν παρεδόθη. Θηβαίων δ᾿ ἐπὶ τοῖς
πραχθεῖσι παροξυνθέντων, καὶ ταχέως εἰς τὴν Θετταλίαν
ἐκπεμψάντων ὁπλίτας μὲν ὀκτακισχιλίους
ἱππεῖς δ᾿ ἑξακοσίους, φοβηθεὶς Ἀλέξανδρος ἐξέπεμψε
πρεσβευτὰς εἰς τὰς Ἀθήνας περὶ συμμαχίας.
ᾧ παραχρῆμα ὁ δῆμος ἐξέπεμψε ναῦς μὲν τριάκοντα
στρατιώτας δὲ χιλίους, ὧν ἦν στρατηγὸς
4Αὐτοκλῆς. ἐν ὅσῳ δ᾿ οὗτος περιέπλει τὴν Εὔβοιαν
Θηβαῖοι κατήντησαν εἰς Θετταλίαν. τοῦ δ᾿ Ἀλεξάνδρου
πεζὴν δύναμιν ἠθροικότος καὶ ἱππεῖς πολλαπλασίους
ἔχοντος τῶν Βοιωτῶν, τὸ μὲν πρῶτον
οἱ Βοιωτοὶ διὰ μάχης ἔκρινον λῦσαι τὸν πόλεμον,
συνεργοὺς ἔχοντες τοὺς Θετταλούς· ὡς δ᾿ οὗτοι




1After Ἀλωρίτης Vogel deletes ὁ Ἀμύντου υἱὸς and after
Ἀλέξανδρον the words τὸν ἀδελφόν as inconsistent with cnaps.
60. 3, 77. 5 and Book 16. 2. 4. See explanatory note below.2So Rhodoman: τριάκοντα (cp. chap. 77. 5).148Book XV

During their term of office Ptolemy1 of Alorus, son of 368/7 b.c. Amyntas, assassinated Alexander, his brother-in-law, and was king of Macedon for three years. In Boeotia Pelopidas, whose military reputation rivalled that of Epameinondas, saw that the latter had arranged the Peloponnesian affairs to the advantage of the Boeotians, and was eager to be the instrument whereby districts outside of the Peloponnese were won for the Thebans. Taking along with him as his associate Ismenias, a friend of his, and a man who was admired for his valour, he entered Thessaly.2 There he met Alexander, the tyrant of Pherae, but was suddenly arrested with Ismenias, and placed under guard. The Thebans, incensed at what had been done, dispatched with all speed eight thousand hoplites and six hundred cavalry into Thessaly, so frightening Alexander that he dispatched ambassadors to Athens for an alliance.3 The Athenian people immediately sent him thirty ships and a thousand men under the command of Autocles. While Autocles was making the circuit of Euboea, the Thebans entered Thessaly. Though Alexander had gathered his infantry and had many times more horsemen than the Boeotians, at first the Boeotians decided to settle the war by battle, for they had the Thessalians as supporters; but when the latter



1Ptolemy of Alorus was the husband of Eurynoë, daughter
of Amyntas III and Eurydicê (Justin, 7. 4. 5, 7), hence the
use of τὸν ἀδελφόν. He may well have been the son of an
Amyntas since the name was common in Macedonia. After Alexander’ s death he took the regency for Perdiccas (Aeschines, On the Embassy, 29) and married the Queen dowager Eurydice (sch. ibid.; Justin, 7. 4. 7). If he was king, no coins were issued in his name. (See Beloch2, 3. 2. 67.) See also Plutarch, Pelopidas, 27; Marsyas in Athenaeus, Deip. 14, 629 d.2For this venture see Plutarch, Pelopidas, 27 ff.; Pausanias, 9. 15. 1–2: Nepos, Pelopidas, 5.3For the alliance see Plutarch, Pelopidas, 31. 4, Apophthegmata Epaminondou, 17 (193); Demosthenes, 23. 120; IG, 22. 1. 116. 39 f.149