Diodorus of Sicily
10. Οἱ δ᾿ Ἕλληνες πυνθανόμενοι τὸ μέγεθος τῶν
περὶ τοὺς Θηβαίους κινδύνων ἐδυσφόρουν ἐπὶ ταῖς
προσδοκωμέναις περὶ αὐτῶν συμφοραῖς, οὐ μὴν βοηθεῖν
γ᾿ ἐτόλμων τῇ πόλει διὰ τὸ προπετῶς καὶ
ἀβούλως εἰς ὁμολογουμένην ἀπώλειαν ἑαυτὴν δεδωκέναι.
2οἱ δὲ Θηβαῖοι ταῖς μὲν εὐτολμίαις προθύμως
ἀνεδέχοντο τοὺς κινδύνους, φήμαις δέ τισι
μάντεων καὶ θεῶν σημείοις ἠποροῦντο.
Πρῶτον μὲν γὰρ ἐν τῷ τῆς Δήμητρος ἱερῷ λεπτὸν
ἀράχνης ὕφασμά τι διαπεπετασμένον ὤφθη, τὸ
μὲν μέγεθος ἔχον ἱματίου, κύκλῳ δὲ περιφαῖνον
3ἶριν τῇ κατ᾿ οὐρανὸν ἐοικυῖαν. περὶ οὗ τὸ μὲν ἐν
Δελφοῖς χρηστήριον ἔδωκεν αὐτοῖς τόνδε τὸν
χρησμόν·

σημεῖον τόδε πᾶσι θεοὶ φαίνουσι βροτοῖσι,
Βοιωτοῖς δὲ μάλιστα καὶ οἳ περιναιετάουσι.
τὸ δὲ πάτριον τῶν Θηβαίων μαντεῖον τοῦτον ἐξήνεγκε
τὸν χρησμόν·
ἱστὸς ὑφαινόμενος ἄλλῳ κακόν, ἄλλῳ ἄμεινον.
4τοῦτο μὲν οὖν τὸ σημεῖον ἐγένετο τρισὶ μησὶν ἀνωτέρω
τῆς Ἀλεξάνδρου παρουσίας ἐπὶ τὰς Θήβας,
ὑπ᾿ αὐτὴν δὲ τὴν ἔφοδον τοῦ βασιλέως οἱ κατὰ
τὴν ἀγορὰν ἀνδριάντες ἐφάνησαν ἱδρῶτας ἀφιέντες
καὶ μεστοὶ σταλαγμῶν μεγάλων. χωρὶς δὲ
τούτων ἧκόν τινες τοῖς ἄρχουσιν ἀπαγγέλλοντες
τὴν ἐν Ὀγχηστῷ λίμνην μυκήματι παραπλήσιο٨
φωνὴν ἀφιέναι, τῇ δὲ Δίρκῃ κατὰ τὴν ἐπιφάνειαν
5τοῦ ὕδατος αἱματοειδῆ φρίκην ἐπιτρέχειν. ἕτεροι
δὲ ἧκον ἐκ Δελφῶν μηνύοντες ὅτι ὁ ἀπὸ Φωκέων
144Book XVII
10. Elsewhere in Greece, as people learned the 335/4 b.c. seriousness of the danger hanging over the Thebans, they were distressed at their expected disaster but had no heart to help them, feeling that the city by precipitate and ill-considered action had consigned itself to evident annihilation. In Thebes itself, however, men accepted their risk willingly and with good courage, but they were puzzled by certain sayings of prophets and portents of the gods.
First there was the light spider’s web in the temple of Demeter which was observed to have spread itself out to the size of an himation, and which all about shone iridescent like a rainbow in the sky. About this, the oracle at Delphi gave them the response:

“The gods to mortals all have sent this sign;
To the Boeotians first, and to their neighbours.”
The ancestral oracle of Thebes itself had given this response:
“The woven web is bane to one, to one a boon.”
This sign had occurred three months before Alexander’s descent on the city, but at the very moment of the king’s arrival the statues in the market place were seen to burst into perspiration and be covered with great drops of moisture. More than this, people reported to the city officials that the marsh at Onchestus was emitting a sound very like a bellow, while at Dircê a bloody ripple ran along the surface of the water. Finally, travellers coming from Delphi told how the temple which the Thebans had dedicated
145