Diodorus of Sicily
4τῶν πολεμίων. διόπερ θόρυβος καὶ πολλὴ ταραχὴ
κατεῖχε τὴν πόλιν καὶ συνδρομὴ τῶν ὄχλων εἰς τὴν
ἀγορὰν ἐγίνετο καὶ βουλὴ τῆς γερουσίας ὅ τι δέοι
πράττειν. στρατόπεδον μὲν γὰρ οὐκ ἦν ἕτοιμον
τὸ δυνάμενον ἀντιτάξασθαι, τὸ δὲ πολιτικὸν πλῆθος
ἄπειρον ὂν πολέμου προκαταπεπτώκει ταῖς ψυχαῖς,
οἱ πολέμιοι δὲ πλησίον εἶναι τῶν τειχῶν προσεδοκῶντο.
5ἔνιοι μὲν οὖν ἔφασαν πρεσβευτὰς ὑπὲρ
εἰρήνης ἀποστέλλειν πρὸς Ἀγαθοκλέα, τοὺς αὐτούς
ἅμα καὶ κατασκόπους ἐσομένους τῶν παρὰ τοῖς
πολεμίοις, τινὲς δὲ ἀναμεῖναι μέχρι ἂν γνῶσιν
ἀκριβῶς ἕκαστον τῶν πεπραγμένων. τοιαύτης δὲ
συγχύσεως τὴν πόλιν ἐχούσης κατέπλευσαν οἱ
πεμφθέντες ὑπὸ τοῦ ναυάρχου καὶ τὰς αἰτίας τῶν
πεπραγμένων ἐδήλωσαν.
10. Ἀναθαρσησάντων οὖν πάντων πάλιν ταῖς
ψυχαῖς ἡ γερουσία τοὺς μὲν ναυάρχους ἄπαντας
κατεμέμψατο ὅτι θαλαττοκρατοῦντες εἴασαν πολεμίαν
δύναμιν ἐπιβῆναι τῆς Λιβύης, στρατηγοὺς
δὲ ἀπέδειξαν τῶν δυνάμεων Ἄννωνα καὶ Βορμίλκαν,
2πατρῴαν ἔχθραν ἔχοντας· ἡγοῦντο γὰρ διὰ
τὴν ἰδίαν τούτοις ἀπιστίαν καὶ διαφορὰν κοινὴν ἔσεσθαι
τῆς πόλεως ἀσφάλειαν. πολὺ δὲ διεσφάλησαν
τῆς ἀληθείας. ὁ γὰρ Βορμίλκας πάλαι μὲν ἦν ἐπιθυμητὴς
τυραννίδος, οὐκ ἔχων δ᾿ ἐξουσίαν οὐδὲ
καιρὸν οἰκεῖον ταῖς ἐπιβολαῖς τότε ἔλαβεν ἀφορμὰς
3ἀξιολόγους, τυχῶν τῆς στρατηγίας. αἰτία δὲ
μάλιστα τούτων ἡ πρὸς τὰς τιμωρίας πικρία τῶν


166Book XX

while the enemy controlled the sea. Therefore panic 310 b.c. and great confusion seized upon the city; the crowds rushed to the market place, and the council of elders consulted what should be done. In fact there was no army at hand that could take the field against the enemy; the mass of the citizens, who had had no experience in warfare, were already in despair; and the enemy was thought to be near the walls. Accordingly, some proposed to send envoys to Agathocles to sue for peace, these same men serving also as spies to observe the situation of the enemy; but some urged that they should delay until they had learned precisely what had taken place. However, while such confusion prevailed in the city, the messengers sent by the commander of the fleet sailed in and made clear the true explanation of what had happened.
10. Now that all had regained their courage, the council reprimanded all the commanders of the fleet because, although controlling the sea, they had allowed a hostile army to set foot on Libya; and it appointed as generals of the armies Hanno and Bormilcar,1 men who had an inherited feud. The councillors thought, indeed, that because of the private mistrust and enmity of the generals the safety of the city as a whole would be secured; but they completely missed the truth. For Bormilcar, who had long had his heart set on tyranny but had lacked authority and a proper occasion for his attempt, now gained an excellent starting point by getting the command as general. The basic cause in this matter was the Carthaginians’ severity in inflicting punishments.

1This Hanno is otherwise unknown. Bormilcar (or
Bomilcar according to the more usual spelling) was the son
of a brother of the Hamilcar who had negotiated a treaty
between Agathocles and certain Sicilian cities (Book 19. 71. 6) and was recalled because of his supposed friendship with Agathocles (Justin, 22. 2. 6, 7. 10); cp. p. 28, note 1.167