Diodorus of Sicily

εἰς πολλὴν ἀπορίαν ἐνέπιπτεν καὶ1 τῶν μὲν
διαβεβηκότων οὐκ ἀξιομάχων ὄντων τοῖς πολεμίοις,
τῶν δ᾿ ἐν τῷ πέραν μὴ δυναμένων βοηθεῖν
τοῖς ἰδίοις προσέταξεν εἰς τοὐπίσω πάλιν ἀπιέναι
6πάντας. διόπερ ἀναγκασθέντων ἁπάντων περαιοῦσθαι
τὸ ῥεῖθρον οἱ μὲν ἐπιστάμενοι καλῶς νεῖν
καὶ τοῖς σώμασιν ἰσχυρότατοι μετὰ πολλῆς κακοπαθίας
διενήξαντο τὸν Νεῖλον πολλὰ τῶν ὅπλων
ἀποβαλόντες, τῶν δ᾿ ἄλλων διὰ τὴν ἀπειρίαν οἱ
μὲν ὑπὸ τοῦ ῥείθρου κατεπόθησαν, οἱ δὲ πρὸς τοὺς
πολεμίους ἐξέπεσον, οἱ πλεῖστοι δὲ παρενεχθέντες
ἐπὶ πολὺν χρόνον2 ὑπὸ τῶν ἐν τῷ ποταμῷ θηρίων
κατεβρώθησαν.
36. Ἀπολομένων δὲ πλειόνων ἢ δισχιλίων, ἐν
οἷς καὶ τῶν ἐπιφανῶν τινες ἡγεμόνων ὑπῆρχον,
ἀλλοτρίως τὸ πλῆθος ἔσχε πρὸς τὸν Περδίκκαν.
ὁ δὲ Πτολεμαῖος τὰ σώματα τῶν πρὸς αὐτὸν
ἐκπεσόντων καύσας καὶ τῆς ἁρμοζούσης κηδείας
ἀξιώσας ἀπέστειλε τὰ ὀστᾶ πρὸς τοὺς οἰκείους τε
καὶ φίλους τῶν τετελευτηκότων.
2Τούτων δὲ πραχθέντων οἱ παρὰ τῷ Περδίκκᾳ
Μακεδόνες πρὸς μὲν τοῦτον πολλῷ μᾶλλον ἀπεθηριώθησαν,
πρὸς δὲ τὸν Πτολεμαῖον ἀπέκλιναν
3ταῖς εὐνοίαις. ἐπιγενομένης δὲ νυκτὸς πλήρης ἦν ἡ
παρεμβολὴ κλαυθμοῦ καὶ πένθους, τοσούτων μὲν
ἀνδρῶν ἀλόγως ἀπολωλότων ἄνευ πολεμίας πληγῆς
καὶ τούτων οὐκ ἐλαττόνων ἢ χιλίων θηριοβρώτων
4γεγονότων. πολλοὶ μὲν οὖν3 τῶν ἡγεμόνων συνίσταντο
καὶ κατηγόρουν τοῦ Περδίκκου, πᾶσα δ᾿ ἡ



1καὶ added by Wesseling.2τόπον Dindorf.3οὖν added by Dindorf.112Book XVIII

and, as those who had crossed were not strong enough 321 b.c. to fight the enemy and those on the nearer bank were not able to go to the aid of their fellows, he ordered all to come back again. When all were thus forced to cross the stream, those who knew how to swim well and were strongest of body succeeded in swimming across the Nile with great distress, after throwing away a good deal of their equipment; but of the rest, because of their lack of skill some were swallowed by the river, and others were cast up on the shore toward the enemy, but most of them, carried along for some time, were devoured by the animals in the river.1
36. Since more than two thousand men were lost, among them some of the prominent commanders, the rank and file of the army became ill disposed toward Perdiccas. Ptolemy, however, burned the bodies of those who were cast up on his side of the river and, having bestowed on them a proper funeral, sent the bones to the relatives and friends of the dead.
These things having been done, the Macedonians with Perdiccas became much more exasperated with him, but they turned with favour toward Ptolemy. When night had come, the encampment was filled with lamentations and mourning, so many men having been senselessly lost without a blow from an enemy, and of these no fewer than a thousand having become food for beasts. Therefore many of the commanders joined together and accused Perdiccas, and all the

1i.e. by the crocodiles. Frontinus (Strategematica, 4. 7. 20) adds a picturesque and probably fictitious detail:
Ptolemy frightened Perdiccas into withdrawing by a cloud of dust raised by cattle dragging bundles of brush. Strabo (17. 1. 8) implies that Perdiccas succeeded in getting his army across to the island.113