Diodorus of Sicily
54. Ἀγαθοκλῆς γὰρ πυθόμενος τοὺς προειρημένους
δυνάστας ἀνῃρημένους τὸ διάδημα1 καὶ
νομίζων μήτε δυνάμεσι μήτε χώρᾳ μήτε τοῖς πραχθεῖσι
λείπεσθαι τούτων ἑαυτὸν ἀνηγόρευσε βασιλέα.
καὶ διάδημα μὲν οὐκ ἔκρινεν ἔχειν· ἐφόρει γὰρ αἰεὶ
στέφανον, ὃν κατὰ τὴν ἐπίθεσιν τῆς τυραννίδος ἔκ
τινος ἱερωσύνης2 περικείμενος οὐκ ἀπέθετο περὶ
τῆς δυναστείας ἀγωνιζόμενος· ἔνιοι δέ φασιν αὐτὸν
ἐπιτετηδεῦσθαι τοῦτον ἐξ ἀρχῆς φορεῖν διὰ τὸ μὴ
2λίαν αὐτὸν εὐχαίτην εἶναι.3 οὐ μὴν ἀλλὰ τῆς προσηγορίας
ταύτης ἄξιόν τι σπεύδων πρᾶξαι ἐπὶ μὲν
Ἰτυκαίους ἐστράτευσεν ἀφεστηκότας· ἄφνω δ᾿ αὐτῶν
τῇ πόλει προσπεσὼν καὶ τῶν ἐπὶ τῆς χώρας
ἀπειλημμένων πολιτικῶν ζωγρήσας εἰς τριακοσίους
τὸ μὲν πρῶτον διδοὺς ἄφεσιν τῶν ἐγκλημάτων
ἠξίου παραδιδόναι τὴν πόλιν· οὐ προσεχόντων δὲ
τῶν ἔνδον συνεπήγνυε μηχανὴν καὶ κρεμάσας ἐπ᾿
αὐτῇ τοὺς αἰχμαλώτους προσήγαγε τοῖς τείχεσιν.
3οἱ δ᾿ Ἰτυκαῖοι τοὺς μὲν ἠτυχηκότας ἠλέουν, πλείονα
δὲ λόγον τῆς τῶν ἁπάντων ἐλευθερίας ἢ τῆς ἐκείνων
σωτηρίας ποιούμενοι διέλαβον τὰ τείχη τοῖς στρατιώταις
καὶ τὴν πολιορκίαν εὐγενῶς ὑπέμενον.
4εἶθ᾿ ὁ μὲν Ἀγαθοκλῆς ἐπιστήσας τῇ μηχανῇ τούς
τε ὀξυβελεῖς καὶ σφενδονήτας καὶ τοξότας ἀπὸ
ταύτης ἀγωνιζόμενος ἤρχετο τῆς πολιορκίας καὶ
ταῖς ψυχαῖς τῶν ἔνδον ὥσπερ καυτήριά τινα προσῆγεν·





1τὸ διάδημα added by Rhodoman.2ἱερωσύνης ὃν MSS., ὃν transferred by Dindorf.3διὰ τὸ . . . εἶναι editors: διὰ τὸ μὴ τέλειον αὐτὸν εὐχαιτίαν
εἶναι F, ἐπὶ τῷ μὴ λίαν αὐ. εὐ. εἶ. Fischer.290Book XX
54. When Agathocles heard that the princes whom 307 b.c. we have just mentioned had assumed the diadem, since he thought that neither in power nor in territory nor in deeds was he inferior to them, he called himself king. He decided not to take a diadem; for he habitually wore a chaplet, which at the time when he seized the tyranny was his because of some priesthood and which he did not give up while he was struggling to gain the supreme power. But some say that he originally had made it his habit to wear this because he did not have a good head of hair.1 However this may be, in his desire to do something worthy of this title, he made a campaign against the people of Utica, who had deserted him.2 Making a sudden attack upon their city and taking prisoner those of the citizens who were caught in the open country to the number of three hundred, he at first offered a free pardon and requested the surrender of the city; but when those in the city did not heed his offer, he constructed a siege engine,3 hung the prisoners upon it, and brought it up to the walls. The Uticans pitied the unfortunate men; yet, holding the liberty of all of more account than the safety of these, they assigned posts on the walls to the soldiers and bravely awaited the assault. Then Agathocles, placing upon the engine his catapults, slingers, and bowmen, and fighting from this, began the assault, applying, as it were, branding-irons to the souls of



1Cp. Aelian, Var. Hist. 11. 4. For a similar reason Julius Caesar welcomed the right to wear a laurel wreath (Suetonius, Divus Iulius, 45. 2).2But, according to Polybius, 1. 82. 8, Utica and Hippu Acra (cp. chap. 55. 3) were the only cities that had remained true to Carthage.3Probably a movable tower like the “helepolis” of chap. 48. 2.291