Diodorus of Sicily

ὑπὸ τἀδελφοῦ1 Περδίκκα, βασιλεύσας ἔτη τρία·
τὴν δὲ ἀρχὴν διαδεξάμενος ὁ Περδίκκας ἐβασίλευσε
τῆς Μακεδονίας ἔτη πέντε.
78. Ἐπ᾿ ἄρχοντος δ᾿ Ἀθήνησι Τιμοκράτους ἐν
Ῥώμῃ μὲν ἀντὶ τῶν ὑπάτων χιλίαρχοι τρεῖς κατεστάθησαν,
Τίτος Κοΐνκτιος καὶ Σερούιος Κορνήλιος
καὶ Σερούιος Σουλπίκιος, ὀλυμπιὰς δὲ ὑπὸ
Πισατῶν καὶ Αρκάδων ἤχθη τετάρτη πρὸς ταῖς
ἑκατόν, καθ᾿ ἣν ἐνίκα στάδιον Φωκίδης Ἀθηναῖος.
2ἐπὶ δὲ τούτων Πισᾶται μὲν ἀνανεωσάμενοι τὸ
παλαιὸν ἀξίωμα τῆς πατρίδος καί τισι μυθικαῖς
καὶ παλαιαῖς ἀποδείξεσι χρώμενοι, τὴν θέσιν τῆς
Ὀλυμπικῆς2 πανηγύρεως αὑτοῖς προσήκειν ἀπεφαίνοντο.
κρίνοντες δὲ τὸν παρόντα καιρὸν εὔθετον
ἔχειν ἀμφισβητῆσαι τοῦ ἀγῶνος, συμμαχίαν ἐποιήσαντο
πρὸς Ἀρκάδας ὄντας πολεμίους Ἠλείων·
συναγωνιστὰς δὲ λαβόντες τούτους ἐστράτευσαν
3ἐπὶ τοὺς Ἠλείους ἄρτι τιθέντας τὸν ἀγῶνα. ἀντιστάντων
δὲ τῶν Ἠλείων πανδημεὶ συνέστη μάχη
καρτερά, θεωμένων τὴν μάχην τῶν παρόντων ἐπὶ
τὴν πανήγυριν Ἑλείων ἐστεφανωμένων καὶ μεθ᾿
ἡσυχίας ἀκινδύνως ἐπισημαινομένων τὰς ἑκατέρωθεν
ἀνδραγαθίας. τέλος Πισᾶται νικήσαντες
ἔθηκαν τὸν ἀγῶνα, καὶ τὴν ὀλυμπιάδα ταύτην
ὕστερον οὐκ ἀνέγραψαν Ἠλεῖοι διὰ τὸ δοκεῖν βίᾳ
καὶ ἀδίκως διατεθῆναι.
4Ἅμα δὲ τούτοις πραττομένοις Ἐπαμεινώνδας ὁ




1τἀδελφοῦ deleted by Vogel (cp. chap. 71. 1).2So Vogel with PAFK: Ὀλυμπιακῆς cet., Dindorf,
Bekker.166Book XV

Perdiccas1 after ruling three years; and 365/4 b.c. Perdiccas succeeded to the throne and ruled Macedon for five years.
78. When Timocrates was archon at Athens, in 364/3 b.c. Rome three military tribunes with consular power were elected, Titus Quinctius, Servius Cornelius, and Servius Sulpicius; and the hundred fourth Olympiad was celebrated by the Pisans and Arcadians, in which Phocides, an Athenian, won the stadium race. During their term of office the Pisans, renewing the ancient prestige2 of their country and resorting to mythical, antiquarian proofs, asserted that the honour of holding the Olympian festival was their prerogative. And judging that they had now a suitable occasion for claiming the games, they formed an alliance with the Arcadians, who were enemies of the Eleians. With them as supporters they took the field against the Eleians who were in the act of holding the games. The Eleians resisted with all their forces and a stubborn battle took place, having as spectators the Greeks who were present for the festival wearing wreaths on their heads and calmly applauding the deeds of valour on both sides, themselves out of reach of danger. Finally the Pisans won the day and held the games, but the Eleians later failed to record this Olympiad because they considered that it had been conducted by force and contrary to justice.
While these things were going on, Epameinondas

1See chap. 60. 3.2For the struggle over the presidency of the Olympian games see P.-W. Realencyclopädie, 17. 2531–2536. Xenophon recounts this strife in Hell. 7. 4. 28–35. Pausanias notes the omission of the 104th Olympiad from the record of the Eleians in 6, 4. 2, 8. 3, 22. 3, in the last passage using the term ἀνολυμπιάς. For the relations of Elis and Arcadia see Cary, Cambridge Ancient History, 6. 97–99.167