Diodorus of Sicily
4κυρίαν ἐποίησε. διὰ δὲ τὴν ἰδίαν ἀρετὴν μὲν
Ἑλλάδος ἁπάσης παρέλαβε τὴν ἡγεμονίαν ἑκουσίως
τῶν πόλεων ὑποταττομένων, τοὺς δὲ τὸ ἐν
Δελφοῖς ἱερὸν συλήσαντας καταπολεμήσας καὶ τῷ
μαντείῳ βοηθήσας μετέσχε τοῦ συνεδρίου τῶν
Ἀμφικτυόνων καὶ διὰ τὴν εἰς τοὺς θεοὺς εὐσέβειαν
ἔπαθλον ἔλαβε τὰς ψήφους τῶν κρατηθέντων Φωκέων.
5Ἰλλυριοὺς δὲ καὶ Παίονας καὶ Θρᾷκας καὶ
Σκύθας καὶ πάντα τὰ πλησιόχωρα τούτοις ἔθνη
καταπολεμήσας τὴν Περσῶν βασιλείαν ἐπεβάλετο
καταλῦσαι καὶ δυνάμεις μὲν εἰς τὴν Ἀσίαν διαβιβάσας
τὰς Ἑλληνίδας πόλεις ἠλευθέρου, μεσολαβηθεὶς
δ᾿ ὑπὸ τῆς πεπρωμένης τηλικαύτας καὶ
τοιαύτας δυνάμεις ἀπέλιπεν ὥστε τὸν υἱὸν Ἀλέξανδρον
μὴ προσδεηθῆναι συμμάχων εἰς τὴν κατάλυσιν
6τῆς Περσῶν ἡγεμονίας. καὶ ταῦτ᾿ ἔπραξεν
οὐ διὰ τύχην, ἀλλὰ διὰ τὴν ἰδίαν ἀρετήν. γέγονε
γὰρ ὁ βασιλεὺς οὗτος ἀγχινοίᾳ στρατηγικῇ καὶ
ἀνδρείᾳ καὶ λαμπρότητι ψυχῆς διαφέρων. ἵνα δὲ
μὴ διὰ τοῦ προοιμίου προλαμβάνωμεν αὐτοῦ τὰς
πράξεις, ἐπὶ τὸ συνεχὲς τῆς ἱστορίας πορευσόμεθα,
βραχέα τοῖς χρόνοις προσαναδραμόντες.
2. Ἐπ᾿ ἄρχοντος γὰρ Ἀθήνησι Καλλιμήδους1
ὀλυμπιὰς μὲν ἤχθη πέμπτη πρὸς ταῖς ἑκατὸν καθ᾿
ἣν ἐνίκα στάδιον Πῶρος Κυρηναῖος, Ῥωμαῖοι δὲ
κατέστησαν ὑπάτους Γναῖον Γενύκιον καὶ Λεύκιον
Αἰμίλιον. ἐπὶ δὲ τούτων Φίλιππος ὁ Ἀμύντου υἱός,
Ἀλεξάνδρου δὲ τοῦ Πέρσας καταπολεμήσαντος
πατὴρ παρέλαβε τὴν τῶν Μακεδόνων βασιλείαν διὰ



1See Kirchner, Pros. Att. no. 8035. Καλλιμέδους PX.234Book XVI

powerful tribes and states. And it was by his own valour that he took over the supremacy of all Hellas with the consent of the states, which voluntarily subordinated themselves to his authority. Having subdued in war the men who had been plundering the shrine at Delphi and having brought aid to the oracle, he won a seat in the Amphictyonic Council, and because of his reverence for the gods received as his prize in the contest, after the defeat of the Phocians, the votes which had been theirs. Then when he had conquered in war Illyrians, Paeonians, Thracians, Scythians, and all the peoples in the vicinity of these, he planned to overthrow the Persian kingdom, and, after transporting his armaments into Asia, was in the act of liberating the Greek cities; but, cut short by Fate in mid-career, he left armies so numerous and powerful that his son Alexander had no need to apply for allies in his attempt to overthrow the Persian supremacy.1 And these deeds he accomplished, not by the favour of Fortune, but by his own valour. For King Philip excelled in shrewdness in the art of war, courage, and brilliance of personality. But, not to anticipate his achievements in my introduction, I shall proceed to the continuous thread of the narrative after first briefly retracing his early period.
2. When Callimedes was archon at Athens, the one 360/59 b.c. hundred fifth celebration of the Olympian games was held at which Porus of Cyrenê won the stadion race, and the Romans elected as consuls Gnaeus Genucius and Lucius Aemilius. During their term of office Philip, the son of Amyntas and father of Alexander who defeated the Persians in war, succeeded to the Macedonian throne in the following manner. After
1The events in this chapter are taken up in the later
narrative where proper annotations will appear.235