Diodorus of Sicily
6θεσπιῳδεῖν δὲ τὸ ἀρχαῖον λέγεται παρθένους δια
τε τὸ τῆς φύσεως ἀδιάφθορον καὶ τὸ τῆς Ἀρτέμιδος
ὁμογενές· ταύτας γὰρ εὐθετεῖν πρὸς τὸ τηρεῖν τὰ
ἀπόρρητα τῶν χρησμῳδουμένων. ἐν δὲ τοῖς νεωτέροις
χρόνοις φασὶν Ἐχεκράτη τὸν Θετταλὸν
παραγενόμενον εἰς τὸ χρηστήριον καὶ θεασάμενον
τὴν χρησμολογοῦσαν παρθένον ἐρασθῆναι διὰ τὸ
κάλλος αὐτῆς καὶ συναρπάσαντα βιάσασθαι· τοὺς
δὲ Δελφοὺς διὰ τὸ γεγενημένον πάθος εἰς τὸ λοιπὸν
νομοθετῆσαι μηκέτι παρθένον χρηστηριάζειν, ἀλλὰ
γυναῖκα πρεσβυτέραν πεντήκοντα ἐτῶν χρησμολογεῖν·
κοσμεῖσθαι δ᾿ αὐτὴν παρθενικῇ σκευῇ,
καθάπερ ὑπομνήματι τῆς παλαιᾶς προφήτιδος.
Τὰ μὲν οὖν περὶ τῆς εὑρέσεως τοῦ μαντείου
μυθολογούμενα τοιαῦτ᾿ ἐστίν· ἡμεῖς δ᾿ ἐπανήξομεν1
ἐπὶ τὰς Φιλομήλου πράξεις.
27. Οὗτος γὰρ κρατῶν τοῦ μαντείου προσέταττε
τῇ Πυθίᾳ τὴν μαντείαν ἀπὸ τοῦ τρίποδος ποιεῖσθαι
κατὰ τὰ πάτρια. ἀποκριναμένης δ᾿ αὐτῆς ὅτι
τοιαῦτα οὐκ2 ἔστι τὰ πάτρια διηπειλήσατο καὶ
συνηνάγκασε τὴν ἀνάβασιν ποιεῖσθαι ἐπὶ τὸν τρίποδα.
ἀποφθεγξαμένης δ᾿ αὐτῆς πρὸς τὴν ὑπεροχὴν
τοῦ βιαζομένου ὅτι ἔξεστιν αὐτῷ πράττειν
ὃ βούλεται, ἀσμένως τὸ ῥηθὲν ἐδέξατο καὶ τὸν
προσήκοντα χρησμὸν ἔχειν ἀπεφαίνετο. εὐθὺς δὲ
καὶ τὸν χρησμὸν ἔγγραφον ποιήσας καὶ προθεὶς εἰς
τοὐμφανὲς ἅπασιν ἐποίησε φανερὸν ὅτι ὁ θεὸς αὐτῷ
2δίδωσιν ἐξουσίαν πράττειν ὅ τι βούλεται. συναγαγὼν
δ᾿ ἐκκλησίαν καὶ τὴν μαντείαν τοῖς πλήθεσι
δηλώσας καὶ παρακαλέσας θαρρεῖν ἐτρέπετο πρὸς


1So Rhodoman: ἐπανάξομεν.2τοιαῦτα F, οὐκ added by Rhodoman: ταυτά P, ταὐτα X.312Book XVI

at sufficient length. It is said that in ancient times 355/4 b.c. virgins delivered the oracles because virgins have their natural innocence intact and are in the same case as Artemis; for indeed virgins were alleged to be well suited to guard the secrecy of disclosures made by oracles. In more recent times, however, people say that Echecrates the Thessalian, having arrived at the shrine and beheld the virgin who uttered the oracle, became enamoured of her because of her beauty, carried her away with him and violated her; and that the Delphians because of this deplorable occurrence passed a law that in future a virgin should no longer prophesy but that an elderly woman of fifty should declare the oracles and that she should be dressed in the costume of a virgin, as a sort of reminder of the prophetess of olden times.
Such are the details of the legend regarding the discovery of the oracle; and now we shall turn to the activities of Philomelus.
27. When Philomelus had control of the oracle he directed the Pythia to make her prophecies from the tripod in the ancestral fashion. But when she replied that such was not the ancestral fashion, he threatened her harshly and compelled her to mount the tripod. Then when she frankly declared, referring to the superior power of the man who was resorting to violence: It is in your power to do as you please,” he gladly accepted her utterance and declared that he had the oracle which suited him. He immediately had the oracle inscribed and set it up in full view, and made it clear to everyone that the god gave him the authority to do as he pleased. Having got together an assembly and disclosed the prophecy to the multitude and urged them to be of good cheer, he turned to
313