Diodorus of Sicily

ἡλίου συνέβη γενέσθαι ὥστε ὁλοσχερῶς φανῆναι
νύκτα, θεωρουμένων τῶν ἀστέρων πανταχοῦ· διόπερ
οἱ περὶ τὸν Ἀγαθοκλέα, νομίσαντες καὶ τὸ θεῖον
αὐτοῖς προσημαίνειν τὸ δυσχερές, ἔτι μᾶλλον ὑπὲρ
τοῦ μέλλοντος ἐν ἀγωνίᾳ καθειστήκεισαν.
6. Ἓξ δ᾿ ἡμέρας καὶ τὰς ἴσας νύκτας αὐτῶν
πλευσάντων ὑποφαινούσης τῆς ἕω παραδόξως ὁ
στόλος τῶν Καρχηδονίων οὐκ ἄπωθεν ὢν ἑωράθη.
διόπερ1 ἀμφοτέροις ἐμπεσούσης σπουδῆς ἡμιλλῶντο
πρὸς ἀλλήλους ταῖς εἰρεσίαις, οἱ μὲν Φοίνικες νομίζοντες
ἅμα τῇ τῶν νεῶν ἁλώσει Συρακούσσας μὲν
ὑποχειρίους ἕξειν, τὴν δὲ πατρίδα μεγάλων ἐλευθερώσειν
κινδύνων· οἱ δ᾿ Ἕλληνες, εἰ μὴ φθάσειαν
2τῆς χώρας ἁψάμενοι, προκειμένην ἑώρων αὑτοῖς
μὲν τιμωρίαν, τοῖς δὲ καταλειφθεῖσιν ἐν οἴκῳ τὰ
τῆς δουλείας δεινά. καθορωμένης δὲ τῆς Λιβύης
παρακελευσμὸς ἐγίνετο τοῖς πληρώμασι καὶ φιλοτιμίας
ὑπερβολή· καὶ τάχιον μὲν ἔπλεον αἱ τῶν
βαρβάρων, ἐν πολυχρονίῳ μελέτῃ τῶν ἐρετῶν διαπεπονημένων,
ἱκανὸν δὲ διάστημα προεῖχον αἱ τῶν
Ἑλλήνων. ὀξύτατα δὲ τοῦ πλοῦ διανυσθέντος,
ἐπειδὴ πλησίον ἐγενήθησαν τῆς γῆς, συνεξέπιπτον
ἀλλήλοις εἰς τὸν αἰγιαλὸν ὡσπερεί τινες ἀγωνισταί·
3ταῖς γὰρ ἐσχάταις τῶν Ἀγαθοκλέους αἱ πρῶται
τῶν Καρχηδονίων ἐνέβαλλον ἐντὸς βέλους οὖσαι.
διόπερ ἐπ᾿ ὀλίγον χρόνον τοῖς τε τόξοις καὶ σφενδόναις
διαγωνισαμένων αὐτῶν καὶ ναυσὶν ὀλίγαις τῶν



1διόπερ Dindorf: διὸ παρ᾿.156Book XX

sun that utter darkness set in and the stars were seen 310 b.c. everywhere1; wherefore Agathocles’ men, believing that the prodigy portended misfortune for them, fell into even greater anxiety about the future.2
6. After they had sailed for six days and the same number of nights, just as day was breaking, the fleet of the Carthaginians was unexpectedly seen not far away. At this both fleets were filled with zeal and vied with each other in rowing, the Carthaginians believing that as soon as they destroyed the Greek ships they would have Syracuse in their hands and at the same time free their fatherland from great dangers; and the Greeks foreseeing that, if they did not get to land first, punishment was in store for themselves and the perils of slavery for those who had been left at home. When Libya came into sight, the men on board began to cheer and the rivalry became very keen; the ships of the barbarians sailed faster since their crews had undergone very long training, but those of the Greeks had sufficient lead. The distance was covered very quickly, and when the ships drew near the land they rushed side by side for the beach like men in a race; indeed, since they were within range, the first of the Carthaginian ships were sending missiles at the last of those of Agathocles. Consequently, when they had fought for a short time with bows and slings and the barbarians had come to close quarters with a few of the Greek


1August 15, 310 b.c., cp. Beloch, Griechische Geschichte2,
4. 1. 190. Calculations of the course of this eclipse indicate that Agathocles must have sailed north around Sicily (Cary in Cambridge Ancient History, 7. 625),2According to Justin, 22. 6. 2, he explained away the omen to his men, saying that if it had happened before the expedition started it would have portended evil to them, but since it took place after the sailing it foretold misfortune for their enemies.157