Diodorus of Sicily

φρουρουμένης ὑπὸ τῶν Πτολεμαίου τοῦ βασιλέως
στρατιωτῶν, ὧν ἦν ἐπιφανέστατος στρατηγὸς Φίλιππος,
νυκτὸς ἐπιθέμενος ἀπροσδοκήτως παρεισέπεσεν
ἐντὸς τοῦ τείχους. εἶτα οἱ μὲν φρουροὶ
συνέφυγον1 εἰς τὴν ἀκρόπολιν, ὁ δὲ Δημήτριος τῆς
πόλεως κυριεύσας τὸν μεταξὺ τόπον τῶν οἰκιῶν καὶ
τῆς ἄκρας κατεῖχε. μέλλοντος δ᾿ αὐτοῦ μηχανὰς
προσάγειν καταπλαγέντες τὴν μὲν ἀκρόπολιν δι᾿
ὁμολογίας παρέδοσαν, αὐτοὶ δ᾿ ἀπέπλευσαν εἰς
Αἴγυπτον. ὁ δὲ Δημήτριος τοὺς Σικυωνίους εἰς τὴν
ἀκρόπολιν μετοικίσας τὸ μὲν τῷ λιμένι συνάπτον
μέρος τῆς πόλεως κατέσκαψεν, ἀνοχύρου2 παντελῶς
ὄντος τοῦ τόπου, τῷ δὲ πολιτικῷ πλήθει συνεπιλαβόμενος
τῆς οἰκοδομίας καὶ τὴν ἐλευθερίαν ἀποκαταστήσας
τιμῶν ἰσοθέων ἔτυχε παρὰ τοῖς εὖ
3παθοῦσι· Δημητριάδα μὲν γὰρ τὴν πόλιν ὠνόμασαν,
θυσίας δὲ καὶ πανηγύρεις, ἔτι δ᾿ ἀγῶνας ἐψηφίσαντο
συντελεῖν αὐτῷ κατ᾿ ἐνιαυτὸν καὶ τὰς ἄλλας ἀπονέμειν
τιμὰς ὡς κτίστῃ. ἀλλὰ ταῦτα μὲν ὁ χρόνος
διαληφθεὶς πραγμάτων μεταβολαῖς ἠκύρωσεν, οἱ δὲ
Σικυώνιοι πολλῷ κρείττονα μεταλαβόντες τόπον
διετέλεσαν ἐν αὐτῷ μέχρι τῶν καθ᾿ ἡμᾶς χρόνων
4ἐνοικοῦντες. ὁ γὰρ τῆς ἀκροπόλεως περίβολος ἐπίπεδος
ὢν καὶ μέγας κρημνοῖς δυσπροσίτοις περιέχεται
πανταχόθεν, ὥστε μηδαμῇ δύνασθαι μηχανὰς
προσάγειν· ἔχει δὲ καὶ πλῆθος ὑδάτων, ἐξ οὗ κηπείας
δαψιλεῖς κατεσκεύασαν, ὥστε τὴν ἐπίνοιαν
τοῦ βασιλέως καὶ πρὸς ἀπόλαυσιν εἰρηνικὴν καὶ
πρὸς ἀσφάλειαν πολέμου δόξαι καλῶς προεωρᾶσθαι.
103. Ὁ δὲ Δημήτριος διοικήσας τὰ περὶ τοὺς


1συνέφυγον Bekker: συνεισέπεσον RX, συνέπεσον F.2ἀνοχύρου Dindorf: ὀχυροῦ.414Book XX

the city of Sicyon was garrisoned by King Ptolemy’s 303 b.c. soldiers, commanded by a very distinguished general, Philip. Attacking this city suddenly by night, Demetrius broke his way inside the walls. Then the garrison fled to the acropolis, but Demetrius took possession of the city and occupied the region between the houses and the acropolis. While he hesitated to bring up his siege engines, the garrison in panic surrendered the acropolis on terms and the men themselves sailed off to Egypt. After Demetrius had moved the people of Sicyon into their acropolis, he destroyed the part of the city adjacent to the harbour, since its site was quite insecure; then, after he had assisted the common people of the city in building their houses and had re-established free government for them, he received divine honours from those whom he had benefited; for they called the city Demetrias, and they voted to celebrate sacrifices and public festivals and also games in his honour every year and to grant him the other honours of a founder. Time, however, whose continuity has been broken by changes of conditions, has invalidated these honours; but the people of Sicyon, having thus obtained a much better location, continue to live there down to our times.1 For the enclosed area of the acropolis is level and of ample size, and it is surrounded on all sides by cliffs difficult to scale, so that on no side can engines of war be brought near; moreover, it has plenty of water by the aid of which they developed rich gardens, so that the king in his design seems to have made excellent provision both for comfort in time of peace and for safety in time of war.
103. After Demetrius had settled the affairs of the

1Cp. Pausanias, 2. 7. 1; Strabo 8. 6. 25.415