Diodorus of Sicily
4ταῦτα δ᾿ ἔπραττε προσποιούμενος διὰ τὴν πρὸς
Ἀντίπατρον φιλίαν συνεργεῖν, τῇ δ᾿ ἀληθείᾳ βουλόμενος
τοὺς περὶ Πολυπέρχοντα πολλοὺς1 καὶ μεγάλους
περισπασμοὺς ἔχειν, ὅπως αὐτὸς ἀκινδύνως
τὴν Ἀσίαν ἐπέλθῃ καὶ τὴν τῶν ὅλων ἡγεμονίαν εἰς
αὑτὸν περιστήσῃ.
55. Ἅμα δὲ τούτοις πραττομένοις κατὰ μὲν τὴν
Μακεδονίαν Πολυπέρχων ὁ τῶν βασιλέων ἐπιμελητὴς
μετὰ τὴν ἀπαλλαγὴν τοῦ Κασάνδρου
προεώρα μὲν τὸ μέγεθος τοῦ πρὸς Κάσανδρον
ἐσομένου πολέμου, οὐδὲν δ᾿ ἄνευ τῆς τῶν φίλων
γνώμης κρίνων πράττειν συνήγαγε τούς τε ἡγεμόνας
ἅπαντας καὶ τῶν ἄλλων Μακεδόνων τοὺς
2ἀξιολογωτάτους. φανεροῦ δ᾿ ὄντος Κάσανδρος
μὲν σωματοποιηθεὶς ὑπ᾿ Ἀντιγόνου τῶν κατὰ τὴν
Ἑλλάδα πόλεων ἀνθέξεται διὰ τὸ τὰς μὲν αὐτῶν
πατρικαῖς φρουραῖς φυλάττεσθαι, τὰς δ᾿ ὑπ᾿
ὀλιγαρχιῶν διοικεῖσθαι, κυριευομένας ὑπὸ τῶν
Ἀντιπάτρου φίλων καὶ ξένων, πρὸς δὲ τούτοις
συμμαχήσειν τῷ Κασάνδρῳ Πτολεμαῖόν τε τὸν
Αἰγύπτου κρατοῦντα καὶ Ἀντίγονον τὸν φανερῶς
ἤδη γενόμενον ἀποστάτην τῶν βασιλέων, ἀμφοτέρους
δὲ καὶ δυνάμεις μεγάλας καὶ χρημάτων
ἔχειν πλῆθος, ἔτι δὲ πολλῶν ἐθνῶν καὶ πόλεων ἀξιολόγων
κυριεύειν—προτεθείσης οὖν βουλῆς πῶς τούτοις
πολεμητέον ἐστὶ καὶ πολλῶν καὶ ποικίλων
λόγων περὶ τοῦ πολέμου ῥηθέντων ἔδοξεν αὐτοῖς
τὰς μὲν κατὰ τὴν Ἑλλάδα πόλεις ἐλευθεροῦν τὰς
δ᾿ ἐν αὐταῖς ὀλιγαρχίας καθεσταμένας ὑπ᾿ Ἀντιπάτρου
3καταλύειν· οὕτως γὰρ ἂν μάλιστα τὸν μὲν
Κάσανδρον ταπεινώσειν, ἑαυτοῖς δὲ μεγάλην δόξαν
4καὶ πολλὰς συμμαχίας ἀξιολόγους περιποιήσειν. εὐθὺς
1πολλοὺς Wurm: πολέμους.162Book XVIII

fleet. In doing this he pretended to be aiding him 319 b.c. because of his own friendship for Antipater, but in truth it was because he wished Polyperchon to be surrounded by many great distractions, so that he himself might proceed against Asia without danger and secure the supreme power for himself.
55. Meanwhile in Macedonia, Polyperchon, the guardian of the kings, after Cassander had slipped away, foresaw the serious character of the war that was to be fought with him, and since he had made up his mind to do nothing without the advice of his friends, he called together all the commanders and the most important of the other Macedonians. It was clear that Cassander, reinforced by Antigonus, would hold the Greek cities against them, since some of the cities were guarded by his father’s garrisons and others, dominated by Antipater’s friends and mercenaries, were ruled by oligarchies, and since Cassander would also gain as allies both Ptolemy the ruler of Egypt, and Antigonus, who had already openly rebelled against the kings, and each of them possessed great armies and abundant wealth and was master of many nations and cities of consequence. After the question how to fight against these had been laid before them and many shrewd suggestions had been made about the war, it was decided to free the cities throughout Greece and to overthrow the oligarchies established in them by Antipater; for in this way they would best decrease the influence of Cassander and also win for themselves great glory and many considerable allies. At once, therefore, they


163