Diodorus of Sicily
6χρείας ὑστεροῦντο. τὰ δὲ θηρία διά τε τὸ
πλῆθος τῶν βελῶν καὶ τὴν ἰδιότητα τῆς τῶν ἥλων
πληγῆς περιώδυνα γινόμενα τὴν διὰ τῶν φίλων1
ἐπιστροφὴν ἐποιοῦντο καὶ πολλοὺς αὐτῶν κατεπάτουν.
τέλος δὲ τὸ μὲν ἀνδρειότατον αὐτῶν καὶ
πλείστην ἔχον κατάπληξιν ἔπεσε, τῶν δὲ ἄλλων τὰ
μὲν ἄχρηστα παντελῶς ἐγένετο, τὰ δὲ πολλοῖς τῶν
ἰδίων θάνατον ἐπήνεγκεν.
72. Μετὰ δὲ τὴν εὐημερίαν ταύτην οἱ μὲν Μεγαλοπολῖται
ταῖς ψυχαῖς ἐθάρρησαν, ὁ δὲ Πολυπέρχων
μετανοηθεὶς ἐπὶ τῇ πολιορκίᾳ καὶ πολὺν χρόνον
ἐπιμένειν οὐ δυνάμενος ἐπὶ μὲν τῆς πολιορκίας
ἀπέλιπε μέρος τῆς δυνάμεως, αὐτὸς δ᾿ ἐφ᾿ ἑτέρας
2ἀναγκαιοτέρας πράξεις ἐτρέπετο. καὶ Κλεῖτον μὲν
τὸν ναύαρχον μετὰ τοῦ στόλου παντὸς ἐξέπεμψε,
προστάξας ἐφεδρεύειν τοῖς περὶ τὸν Ἑλλήσποντον
τόποις καὶ κωλύειν τὰς ἐκ τῆς Ἀσίας διαβιβαζομένας
δυνάμεις εἰς τὴν Εὐρώπην, προσλαβέσθαι δὲ
καὶ Ἀρριδαῖον τὸν συμπεφευγότα μὲν μετὰ τῶν
στρατιωτῶν εἰς τὴν τῶν Κιανῶν πόλιν, ἐχθρὸν δ᾿
3ὄντα τοῖς περὶ Ἀντίγονον. τούτου δὲ πλεύσαντος
ἐπὶ τὸν Ἑλλήσποντον καὶ προσαγαγομένου τὰς ἐν
τῇ Προποντίδι πόλεις, ἔτι δὲ προσδεξαμένου τὴν
μετ᾿ Ἀρριδαίου δύναμιν κατέπλευσεν εἰς τοὺς τόπους
ἐκείνους Νικάνωρ ὁ τῆς Μουνυχίας φρούραρχος,
ἐξαπεσταλμένος ὑπὸ Κασάνδρου μετὰ παντὸς
τοῦ στόλου· προσελάβετο δὲ καὶ τὰς παρ᾿
Ἀντιγόνου ναῦς, ὥστε τὰς πάσας ἔχειν πλείους τῶν
4ἑκατόν. γενομένης δὲ ναυμαχίας οὐ μακρὰν τῆς
τῶν Βυζαντίων πόλεως ἐνίκα ὁ Κλεῖτος καὶ κατέδυσε
μὲν τῶν ἐναντίων ναῦς ἑπτακαίδεκα, εἷλε δὲ

1φίλων editors: φιλίων.206Book XVIII

The elephants, suffering great pain because 318 b.c. of the cloud of missiles and the nature of the wounds caused by the spikes, wheeled about through their friends and trod down many of them. Finally the elephant that was the most valiant and formidable collapsed; of the rest, some became completely useless, and others brought death to many of their own side.
72. After this piece of good fortune the Megalopolitans were more confident, but Polyperchon repented of the siege; and as he himself could not wait there for a long time, he left a part of the army for the siege, while he himself went off about other more necessary business. He sent Cleitus the admiral out with the whole fleet, ordering him to lie in wait in the region of the Hellespont and block the forces that were being brought across from Asia into Europe. Cleitus was also to pick up Arrhidaeus, who had fled with his soldiers to the city of the Cianoi1 since he was an enemy of Antigonus. After Cleitus had sailed to the Hellespont, had won the allegiance of the cities of the Propontis, and had received the army of Arrhidaeus, Nicanor, the commander of Munychia, reached that region, Cassander having sent him with his entire fleet. Nicanor had also taken over the ships of Antigonus so that he had in all more than a hundred.2 A naval battle took place not far from Byzantium in which Cleitus was victorious, sinking seventeen ships of the enemy and capturing not less


1Cius, in Bithynia on the Cianian Gulf, which is part of the Propontis. For Cleitus and Antigonus cp. chap. 52. 5–6.2Polyaenus (4. 6. 8) says one hundred and thirty.207