Diodorus of Sicily

ποταμῷ τελευτῆς προκρίναντες ἥλωσαν, εἰς τετρακισχιλίους
ὄντες. Ἀντίγονος δὲ θεωρῶν τοσοῦτο
πλῆθος ἀπολλύμενον βοηθῆσαι μὲν οὐκ ἴσχυσε
διὰ τὴν τῶν πλοίων σπάνιν.
19. Ἀδύνατον δὲ εἶναι νομίζων τὴν διάβασιν
ἀνέζευξεν ἐπὶ πόλεως Βαδάκης, ἣ κεῖται παρὰ τὸν
Εὔλαιον ποταμόν. οὔσης δὲ τῆς ὁδοιπορίας ἐμπύρου
διὰ τὸ μέγεθος τῶν καυμάτων διεφθάρη τε
πολλὰ σώματα καὶ τὸ στρατόπεδον εἰς ἀθυμίαν
2ἐνέπεσεν. οὐ μὴν ἀλλ᾿ ἐν τῇ προειρημένῃ πόλει
μείνας ἡμέρας τινὰς καὶ τὸ στρατόπεδον ἐκ τῆς
κακοπαθείας ἀναλαβὼν ἔκρινε συμφέρειν ἀναζευγνύειν
εἰς Ἐκβάτανα τῆς Μηδικῆς κἀκεῖθεν ὁρμώμενος
κατακτᾶσθαι τὰς ἄνω σατραπείας. οὐσῶν
δ᾿ ὁδῶν δύο τῶν φερουσῶν εἰς Μηδίαν ἑκατέρᾳ
προσῆν τι δυσχερές· ἡ μὲν γὰρ ἐπὶ Κόλωνος ὑπῆρχε
καλὴ καὶ βασιλική, καυματώδης δὲ καὶ μακρά,
παρεκτείνουσα σχεδὸν ἐφ᾿ ἡμέρας τεσσαράκοντα,
ἡ δὲ διὰ τῶν Κοσσαίων ἐθνῶν χαλεπὴ μὲν καὶ
στενὴ καὶ παράκρημνος καὶ διὰ πολεμίας, ἔτι
δὲ τῶν ἀναγκαίων σπανίζουσα, σύντομος δὲ καὶ
3κατεψυγμένη. οὐ ῥᾴδιον δ᾿ ἐστὶ ταύτην παρελθεῖν
στρατόπεδον ἄνευ τοῦ πεῖσαι τοὺς τὴν ὀρεινὴν οἰκοῦντας
βαρβάρους· αὐτόνομαι γὰρ ὄντες ἐκ παλαιῶν
χρόνων κατοικοῦσιν ἐν σπηλαίοις, προσφέρονται
δὲ βαλάνους καὶ μύκητας, ἔτι δὲ τεταριχευμένα


282Book XIX

death in the river, were taken prisoners to the 317 b.c. number of four thousand. Antigonus, although he saw that great number being destroyed, could not go to their aid on account of his lack of boats.
19. Believing that the crossing was impossible, Antigonus set out toward the city of Badace, which is situated on the bank of the Eulaeus River.1 Since the march was scorching hot because of the intensity of the sun’s rays, many soldiers perished, and the army became discouraged. Nevertheless, after staying in the above mentioned city for a few days and letting the army recover from its sufferings, he decided that the best course was to march to Ecbatana in Media and with that as a base to gain control of the upper satrapies. There were two roads leading into Media, each having a disadvantage: the road leading to Colon2 was a good royal highway, but it was hot and long, extending for almost forty days’ march; while the other, which passed through the Cossaean tribes, was difficult and narrow, skirting precipices and passing through enemy territory, and moreover lacking in supplies, but it was short and cool. It is not easy for an army to follow this route without having gained the consent of the tribesmen who inhabited the mountain ranges. These men, who have been independent from ancient times, live in caves, eating acorns and mushrooms, and also the smoked flesh of


1The location of Badacê is not known. The Eulaeus
River cannot be recognized to-day with certainty because of
the great changes in the river system of lower Mesopotamia.
It lay between the Tigris, with which it was connected by a canal, and the Pasitigris, ran near Susa, and emptied into the Persian Gulf (Arrian, Anabasis, 7. 7. 1–2).2Colon, probably identical with Celon (Book 17. 110. 4), must be the chief city of Callonitis (Polybius, 5. 54. 7) or Chalonitis (Strabo, 16. 1. 1), called KallonS by Kiepert on his map of the Persian Empire. In taking this route from Badace’ to Ecbatana the army would march up the Tigris valley for some 250 miles before reaching the road from Babylon to Media and entering the mountains.283