Diodorus of Sicily
4ὅλης τῆς συγγενείας· ἦσαν γὰρ Ἀρταβάζῳ γεγονότες
ἐκ τῆς Μέντορος καὶ Μέμνονος ἀδελφῆς υἱοὶ
μὲν ἕνδεκα, θυγατέρες δὲ δέκα. ψυχαγωγούμενος
δ᾿ ἐπὶ τῷ πλήθει τῶν τέκνων ὁ Μέντωρ προῆγε
τοὺς παῖδας, παραδιδοὺς αὐτοῖς τὰς ἐπιφανεστάτας
5ἐν τοῖς στρατιωτικοῖς1 ἡγεμονίας. ἐστρατεύσατο
δ᾿ ἐπὶ πρῶτον Ἑρμίαν2 τὸν Ἀταρνέως τύραννον,
ἀφεστηκότα τοῦ βασιλέως καὶ πολλῶν ὀχυρωμάτων
6καὶ πόλεων κυριεύοντα. ἐπαγγειλάμενος δ᾿ αὐτῷ
πείσειν τὸν βασιλέα καὶ3 αὐτὸν τῶν ἐγκλημάτων
ἀπολῦσαι συνῆλθεν εἰς λόγους καὶ παρακρουσάμενος
αὐτὸν συνέλαβε. κυριεύσας δὲ τοῦ δακτυλίου
καὶ γράψας εἰς τὰς πόλεις ὅτι διήλλακται τῷ
βασιλεῖ διὰ Μέντορος καὶ σφραγισάμενος τὰς
ἐπιστολὰς τῷ τοῦ Ἑρμίου2 δακτυλίῳ συνεξέπεμψε
7τοὺς παραληψομένους τὰ χωρία. οἱ δ᾿ ἐν ταῖς
πόλεσι πιστεύσαντες τοῖς γεγραμμένοις καὶ τὴν
εἰρήνην ἀγαπητῶς προσδεξάμενοι παρέδωκαν πάντες
τὰ φρούρια καὶ τὰς πόλεις. Μέντωρ μὲν οὖν δι᾿
ἀπάτης ταχὺ παραλαβὼν ἀκινδύνως τὰ τῶν ἀποστατῶν
πολίσματα μεγάλης ἀποδοχῆς ἔτυχε παρὰ
τῷ βασιλεῖ, δόξας δύνασθαι στρατηγεῖν πραγματικῶς.
8ὁμοίως δὲ καὶ τοὺς ἄλλους ἡγεμόνας τοὺς



1So Fischer (cp. Xenophon, Respub. Lac. 12. 7): στρατιώταις.2Capps: Ἑρμείαν. Cp. Harpocration: Ἑρμίας; Suidas:
Ἑρμίας; Dittenberger3, 1, 229.3καὶ αὐτὸν Sherman (cp. § 3): καὶ. (See note in
Wesseling).384Book XVI

with all their families; for there had been born to 349/8 b.c. Artabazus by the sister of Mentor and Memnon eleven sons and ten daughters.1 And Mentor was so enchanted with the large number of children born to the marriage that he promoted the lads, giving them the most distinguished commands in the armed forces. He made his first campaign against Hermias2 the tyrant of Atarneus, who had revolted from the King and was master of many fortresses and cities. Having promised Hermias that he would prevail upon the King to dismiss the charges against him too, he met him at a conference and then, playing him false, arrested him. After getting possession of his signet-ring and writing to the cities that a reconciliation had been effected with the King through Mentor’s intervention, he sealed the letters with Hermias’ ring, and sent the letters and with them agents who were to take over the districts. The populations of the cities, trusting the documents and being quite content to accept the peace, all surrendered their fortresses and cities. Now that Mentor through deception had quickly and without risk recovered the towns of the rebels, he won great favour with the King, who concluded that he was capable of performing the duties of general realistically. Similarly with regard to the other commanders


1Some of their names are known (see P.-W. Realencyclopädie, s.v.
“Artabazus,” 3).2A philosopher, eunuch, and slave of Eubulus. Aristotle, who knew him through the Academy (cp. Plato, Epistle 6), lived with him, and after his death married his adopted daughter Pythias. The events of this chapter concerning the arrest of Hermias certainly occurred at a later date, since Aristotle is reported (Dionysius, Epist. ad Ammaeum, ch. 5) to have spent three years at the court of Hermias after the death of Plato. Tarn gives the date of Hermias’ arrest as 342 (Cambridge Ancient History, 6. 23).385