Diodorus of Sicily

θαρροῦντας καὶ νεαροὺς ταῖς ψυχαῖς γινομένους.
5τέλος δὲ πρὸς αὐταῖς ταῖς πύλαις ἔπεσόν τινες τῶν
Μακεδόνων καὶ σὺν αὐτοῖς Νεοπτόλεμος ἡγεμών,
ἀνὴρ ἐπιφανής.
Μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα δύο μὲν πύργων εἰς ἔδαφος καθῃρημένων
καὶ δυεῖν μεσοπυργίων ἐρριμμένων τῶν
μὲν Περδίκκου στρατιωτῶν τινες μεθυσθέντες προπετῶς
νυκτὸς προσέβαλλον τοῖς τῆς ἀκροπόλεως
τείχεσιν· οἱ δὲ περὶ τὸν Μέμνονα συννοήσαντες τὴν
ἀπειρίαν τῶν προσβαλλόντων καὶ ἐπεξελθόντες καὶ
τῷ πλήθει πολὺ προέχοντες ἐτρέψαντο τοὺς Μακεδόνας
6καὶ πολλοὺς ἀνῄρουν. γνωσθέντος δὲ τοῦ
συμβεβηκότος ἐξεβοήθουν πολλοὶ τῶν Μακεδόνων
καὶ μεγάλης μάχης γενομένης καὶ τῶν περὶ τὸν
Ἀλέξανδρον ἐπιφανέντων οἱ μὲν Πέρσαι βιασθέντες
συνεκλείσθησαν εἰς τὴν πόλιν, ὁ δὲ βασιλεὺς τοὺς
πεσόντας πρὸ τοῦ τείχους Μακεδόνας διακηρυκευσάμενος
ᾔτησεν ὑποσπόνδους. Ἐφιάλτης μὲν οὖν
καὶ Θρασύβουλος οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι συμμαχοῦντες τοῖς
Πέρσαις συνεβούλευον μὴ διδόναι τοὺς νεκροὺς
πρὸς ταφήν, ὁ δὲ Μέμνων συνεχώρησε.
26. Μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα Ἐφιάλτης βουλευομένων τῶν
ἡγεμόνων συνεβούλευε μὴ περιμένειν ἕως ἂν ἁλούσης
τῆς πόλεως αἰχμάλωτοι καταστῶσιν, ἀλλ᾿
αὐτοὺς τοὺς ἡγεμόνας προκινδυνεύοντας τῶν


188Book XVII

were renewed in spirit. At length, some of the 334/3 b.c. Macedonians were killed at the very gates, among them an officer Neoptolemus, a man of distinguished family.1
Presently two towers were levelled with the ground and two curtains overthrown, and some of Perdiccas’s soldiers, getting drunk, made a wild night attack on the walls of the citadel.2 Memnon’s men noticed the awkwardness of these attackers and issuing forth themselves in considerably larger numbers routed the Macedonians and killed many of them. As this situation became known, large numbers of Macedonians rushed up to help and a great struggle took place, and when Alexander and his staff came up, the Persians, forced back, were confined within the city, and the king through a herald asked for a truce to recover the Macedonians who had fallen in front of the walls. Now Ephialtes and Thrasybulus,3 Athenians fighting on the Persian side, advised not to give up the dead bodies for burial, but Memnon granted the request.
26. After this at a council of the commanders, Ephialtes advised them not to wait till the city was taken and they found themselves captives; he proposed that the leaders of the mercenaries should go out themselves in the front rank and lead an attack



1According to Arrian (1. 20. 10), Neoptolemus, the son
of Arrhabaeus and brother of that Amyntas who accompanied
Alexander as a staff officer (Arrian, 1. 12. 7; 14. 1; 28. 4),
had deserted to the Persians and was killed in the attack on
Halicarnassus. Diodorus here places him on the Macedonian side—and in view of the continued trust reposed by Alexander in his brother, this is a more reasonable account.2Two men only of Perdiccas’s battalion; the event took place some days later (Arrian, 1. 21. 1). Was Perdiccas trying to repeat his success at Thebes (chap. 12. 3)? It was the kind of exploit which Alexander would reward liberally. The drunkenness may have been a fiction, since Perdiccas acted without orders.3Two of the Athenian generals whose surrender had been demanded after the capture of Thebes (chap. 15. 1). Cp. Realencyclopädie, 5 (1905), 2852 £.; 5 A (1936), 575. Arrian (1. 10. 4) mentions Ephialtes but not Thrasybulus.189