Diodorus of Sicily

διαδεξάμενος ὁ υἱὸς Τιμόθεος ἦρξεν ἔτη πεντεκαίδεκα.
4Τυρρηνοὶ δὲ διαπολεμοῦντες Ῥωμαίοις
ἐπόρθησαν πολλὴν τῆς πολεμίας χώρας καὶ μέχρι
τοῦ Τιβέρεως καταδραμόντες ἐπανῆλθον εἰς τὴν
5οἰκείαν. ἐν δὲ ταῖς Συρακούσσαις στάσεως γενομένης
τοῖς Δίωνος φίλοις πρὸς Κάλλιππον οἱ μὲν
τοῦ Δίωνος φίλοι ἡττηθέντες ἔφυγον εἰς τοὺς Λεοντίνους·
μετὰ δέ τινα χρόνον Ἱππαρίνου τοῦ Διονυσίου
καταπλεύσαντος εἰς τὰς Συρακούσσας μετὰ
δυνάμεως ὁ μὲν Κάλλιππος ἡττηθεὶς ἐξέπεσεν τῆς
πόλεως, Ἱππαρῖνος δὲ ἀνακτησάμενος τὴν πατρῴαν
δυναστείαν ἦρξεν ἔτη δύο.
37. Ἐπ᾿ ἄρχοντος δ᾿ Ἀθήνησιν Ἀριστοδήμου
Ῥωμαῖοι κατέστησαν ὑπάτους Γάιον Σολπίκιον
καὶ Μάρκον Οὐαλέριον, ὀλυμπιὰς δ᾿ ἤχθη ἑβδόμη
πρὸς ταῖς ἑκατόν, καθ᾿ ἣν ἐνίκα στάδιον Μικρίνας
Ταραντῖνος. ἐπὶ δὲ τούτων Φάυλλος μὲν ὁ Φωκέων
στρατηγὸς μετὰ τὴν τοῦ ἀδελφοῦ τελευτήν τε καὶ
ἧτταν προσανέλαβε τὰ τῶν Φωκέων πράγματα τεταπεινωμένα
διά τε τὴν ἧτταν καὶ τὴν φθορὰν τῶν
2στρατιωτῶν. ἔχων γὰρ χρημάτων πλῆθος ἀνέκλειπτον
πολλοὺς μὲν μισθοφόρους ἤθροισεν, οὐκ
ὀλίγους δὲ συμμάχους ἔπεισε συνεπιλαβέσθαι τοῦ
πολέμου. τῇ γὰρ ἀφθονίᾳ τῶν χρημάτων ἀνέδην
χρώμενος οὐ μόνον ἰδιώτας πολλοὺς ἔσχε προθύμους
συναγωνιστάς, ἀλλὰ καὶ πόλεις τὰς ἐπιφανεστάτας
3ἐπεσπάσατο πρὸς τὴν κοινοπραγίαν. Λακεδαιμόνιοι
μὲν γὰρ ἀπέστειλαν αὐτῷ στρατιώτας χιλίους,
Ἀχαιοὶ δὲ δισχιλίους, Ἀθηναῖοι δὲ πεζοὺς



338Book XVI

his son Timotheüs1 succeeded to the throne and ruled 353/2 b.c. for fifteen years. The Etruscans,2 continuing their war with the Romans, sacked much of the enemy territory and after marauding as far as the Tiber returned to their own country. In Syracuse, civil strife having broken out between the friends of Dion and Callippus,3 Dion’s friends were defeated, fled to Leontini,
and, after a short time, when Hipparinus son of Dionysius4 had put ashore at Syracuse with troops, Callippus was defeated and driven from the city, and Hipparinus, having recovered his father’s realm, ruled for two years.
37. When Aristodemus was archon at Athens, the 352/1 b.c. Romans elected as consuls Gaius Sulpicius and Marcus Valerius, and the one hundred seventh celebration of the Olympian games was held, in which Micrinas of Tarentum won the stadion race. During their term of office Phaÿlius, the general of the Phocians after the death and defeat of his brother, effected another revival of the affairs of the Phocians, then at a low ebb on account of the defeat and slaughter of their soldiers. For since he had an inexhaustible supply of money he gathered a large body of mercenaries, and persuaded not a few allies to co-operate in renewing the war. In fact, by making lavish use of his abundance of money he not only procured many individuals as enthusiastic helpers, but also lured the most renowned cities into joining his enterprise. The Lacedaemonians, for example, sent him a thousand soldiers, the Achaeans two thousand, the Athenians five thousand foot and


1Memnon (FHG, 3), 2. 1 and Justin, l.c., say his brother
Satyrus seized the power. See Beloch, Griechische Geschichte2,
3. 2. 94 ff.2See Livy, 7. 17. 6 ff.3See chap. 31. 7; Plutarch, Dion, 58. 1–3; Polyaenus, 5. 4.4This Hipparinus was son of the elder Dionysius and of Dion’s sister Aristomachê, hence half-brother of the younger Dionysius.339