Diodorus of Sicily

δὲ διὰ τῆς κλίμακος ἀναβαίνοντας καταπεφρονηκότως
τύπτων καὶ κατατραυματίζων περιεκύλισεν
3εἰς τὸν ποταμὸν μετὰ τῶν ὅπλων. ἀκολούθως δὲ
τούτῳ καὶ τῶν φίλων τοῦ Πτολεμαίου διαγωνιζομένων
τὸ μὲν ἐχόμενον θηρίον κατακοντισθέντος
τοῦ κυβερνῶντος αὐτὸ Ἰνδοῦ παντελῶς ἄχρηστον
4ἐγένετο. ἐπὶ πολὺν δὲ χρόνον τῆς τειχομαχίας
συνεστώσης οἱ μὲν περὶ τὸν Περδίκκαν ἐκ διαδοχῆς
προσβάλλοντες πᾶσαν σπουδὴν εἰσεφέροντο
κατὰ κράτος ἑλεῖν τὸ χωρίον, ὁ δὲ Πτολεμαῖος
αὐτὸς ἀριστεύων καὶ τοὺς φίλους παρακαλῶν ἐνδείξασθαι
τὴν εὔνοιαν ἅμα καὶ τὴν ἀρετήν, ἡρωικοὺς
5ἀγῶνας συνεστήσατο. πολλῶν δ᾿ ἀπολλυμένων
παρ᾿ ἀμφοτέροις διὰ τὴν ὑπερβολὴν τῆς τῶν ἡγεμόνων
φιλοτιμίας καὶ τῶν περὶ τὸν Πτολεμαῖον ταῖς
ὑπεροχαῖς τῶν τόπων πλεονεκτούντων, τῶν δὲ
περὶ τὸν Περδίκκαν τοῖς πλήθεσιν ὑπερεχόντων,
τὸ τελευταῖον ἀμφοτέρων διημερευσάντων ἐν1 τοῖς
κινδύνοις ὁ μὲν Περδίκκας λύσας τὴν πολιορκίαν
ἐπανῆλθεν εἰς τὴν ἰδίαν στρατοπεδείαν.
6Νυκτὸς δ᾿ ἀναζεύξας λαθραίαν ἐποιεῖτο τὴν πορείαν
καὶ κατήντησεν εἰς τὸν ἀπέναντι τόπον τῆς
Μέμφεως, πρὸς ᾗ συμβαίνει σχίζεσθαι τὸν Νεῖλον
καὶ ποιεῖν νῆσον δυναμένην ἀσφαλῶς δέξασθαι
7στρατοπεδείαν τε καὶ δύναμιν τὴν μεγίστην. εἰς
ταύτην οὖν διεβίβαζε τὴν δύναμιν ἐπιπόνως τῶν
στρατιωτῶν περαιουμένων διὰ τὸ βάθος τοῦ ποταμοῦ·
μέχρι γὰρ τοῦ γενείου τὸ ῥεῦμα προσπῖπτον
ἐσάλευε τὰ σώματα τῶν διαβαινόντων, ἅτε καὶ τῶν
ὅπλων ἐμποδιζόντων τοὺς ἄνδρας.
35. Ὁ δὲ Περδίκκας κατανοήσας τὴν δυσκολίαν
τοῦ ῥείθρου τοὺς μὲν ἐλέφαντας,2 ἐκδεχόμενος τὴν
1ἐν added by Dindorf.2τοῦ ποταμοῦ after ἐλέφαντας deleted by Dindorf.108Book XVIII

of the danger, striking and disabling those who 321 b.c. were coming up the ladders, he sent them rolling down, in their armour, into the river. Following his example, his friends fought boldly and made the beast next in line entirely useless by shooting down the Indian who was directing it. The battle for the wall lasted a long time, as the troops of Perdiccas, attacking in relays, bent every effort to take the stronghold by storm, while many heroic conflicts were occasioned by the personal prowess of Ptolemy and by his exhortations to his friends to display both their loyalty and their courage. Many men were killed on both sides, such was the surpassing rivalry of the commanders, the soldiers of Ptolemy having the advantage of the higher ground and those of Perdiccas being superior in number. Finally, when both sides had spent the whole day in the engagement, Perdiccas gave up the siege and went back to his own camp.
Breaking camp at night, he marched secretly and came to the place that lies opposite Memphis, where it happens that the Nile is divided and makes an island large enough to hold with safety a camp of a very large army. To this island he began to transfer his men, the soldiers crossing with difficulty because of the depth of the river; for the water, which came up to the chins of those who were crossing, buffeted their bodies, especially as they were impeded by their equipment.
35. But Perdiccas, seeing the difficulty caused by the current, in an effort to break the downward rush



109