Diodorus of Sicily

προσώπου τῶν Φωκέων εὐσχημονέστερον ἔκρινον
ἀκυρῶσαι τὰς κρίσεις τῶν Ἀμφικτυόνων. διὰ δὴ
ταύτας τὰς αἰτίας ἑτοιμότατα συνεμάχουν τοῖς
Φωκεῦσι καὶ τὴν προστασίαν τοῦ ἱεροῦ συγκατεσκεύαζον
αὐτοῖς.
30. Φανεροῦ δ᾿ ὄντος ὅτι Βοιωτοὶ μεγάλῃ δυνάμει
στρατεύσουσιν ἐπὶ τοὺς Φωκεῖς ὁ Φιλόμηλος ἔκρινε
μισθοφόρων ἀθροίζειν πλῆθος. προσδεομένου δὲ
τοῦ πολέμου χρημάτων πλειόνων ἠναγκάζετο τοῖς
ἱεροῖς ἀναθήμασιν ἐπιβάλλειν τὰς χεῖρας καὶ συλᾶν
τὸ μαντεῖον. ὑποστησαμένου δ᾿ αὐτοῦ τοῖς ξένοις
μισθοὺς ἡμιολίους ταχὺ πλῆθος ἠθροίσθη μισθοφόρων,
πολλῶν ὑπακουόντων πρὸς τὴν στρατείαν
2διὰ τὸ μέγεθος τῶν μισθῶν. τῶν μὲν οὖν ἐπιεικῶν
ἀνδρῶν οὐδεὶς ἀπεγράψατο πρὸς τὴν στρατείαν διὰ
τὴν πρὸς τοὺς θεοὺς εὐσέβειαν, οἱ δὲ πονηρότατοι
καὶ θεῶν διὰ τὴν πλεονεξίαν καταφρονοῦντες προθύμως
συνέτρεχον πρὸς τὸν Φιλόμηλον καὶ ταχὺ
δύναμις ἰσχυρὰ συνέστη τῶν πρὸς τὴν ἱεροσυλίαν
3ὁρμωμένων. ὁ μὲν οὖν Φιλόμηλος διὰ τὸ μέγεθος
τῆς εὐπορίας ταχὺ δύναμιν ἀξιόχρεων κατεσκευάσατο.
εὐθὺς οὖν ἐστράτευσεν εἰς τὴν τῶν Λοκρῶν
χώραν ἔχων στρατιώτας ἱππεῖς τε καὶ πεζοὺς
πλείους τῶν μυρίων. ἀντιταχθέντων δὲ τῶν Λοκρῶν
καὶ τῶν Βοιωτῶν βοηθησάντων τοῖς Λοκροῖς
ἱππομαχία συνέστη, καθ᾿ ἣν προετέρησαν οἱ Φωκεῖς.
4μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα οἱ μὲν Θετταλοὶ μετὰ τῶν
πλησιοχώρων συμμάχων ἀθροισθέντες εἰς ἑξακισχιλίους
ἧκον εἰς τὴν Λοκρίδα καὶ συνάψαντες μάχην
τοῖς Φωκεῦσι περὶ λόφον Ἀργόλαν ὀνομαζόμενον
320Book XVI

seemly to annul the judgements of the Amphictyons 354/3 b.c. through the agency of the Phocians. For these particular reasons they were very ready to fight on the side of the Phocians and they co-operated in securing for them the guardianship of the sanctuary.
30. When it was clear that the Boeotians would take the field with a large army against the Phocians, Philomelus decided to gather a great number of mercenaries. Since the war required ampler funds he was compelled to lay his hands1 on the sacred dedications and to plunder the oracle. By setting the base pay for the mercenaries at half as much again as was usual he quickly assembled a large number of mercenaries, since many answered the summons to the campaign on account of the size of the pay. Now no men of honourable character enrolled for the campaign because of their reverence for the gods, but the worst knaves, and those who despised the gods, because of their own greed, eagerly gathered about Philomelus and quickly a strong army was formed out of those whose object it was to plunder the shrine. So Philomelus, because of the magnitude of his resources, soon had prepared a considerable army. He immediately advanced into the territory of the Locrians with soldiers both foot and horse amounting to more than ten thousand. When the Locrians marshalled their forces to meet him and the Boeotians came to the support of the Locrians, a cavalry battle ensued in which the Phocians had the superiority. After this the Thessalians together with the allies from neighbouring districts, having assembled to the number of six thousand, arrived in Locris and joining battle with the Phocians met with a defeat by a hill called

1For a contrary statement see chap. 56. 5.321