Diodorus of Sicily

δὲ καὶ τῆς χειμερινῆς ὥρας συγκλειούσης διέδωκε
τοὺς στρατιώτας κατὰ πόλιν εἰς τὴν χειμασίαν.
78. Ἅμα δὲ τούτοις πραττομένοις Κορκυραῖοι
μὲν βοηθήσαντες Ἀπολλωνιάταις καὶ τοῖς Ἐπιδαμνίοις
τοὺς μὲν στρατιώτας Κασάνδρου ὑποσπόνδους
ἀφῆκαν, τῶν δὲ πόλεων Ἀπολλωνίαν μὲν
ἠλευθέρωσαν, Ἐπίδαμνον δὲ Γλαυκίᾳ τῷ τῶν
2Ἰλλυριῶν βασιλεῖ παρέδωκαν. ὁ δ᾿ Ἀντιγόνου
στρατηγὸς Πτολεμαῖος χωρισθέντος εἰς Μακεδονίαν
Κασάνδρου καταπληξάμενος τοὺς φρουροῦντας τὴν
Χαλκίδα παρέλαβε τὴν πόλιν καὶ τοὺς Χαλκιδεῖς
ἀφῆκεν ἀφρουρήτους, ὥστε γενέσθαι φανερὸν ὡς
πρὸς ἀλήθειαν Ἀντίγονος ἐλευθεροῦν προῄρηται
τοὺς Ἕλληνας· ἐπίκαιρος γὰρ ἡ πόλις ἐστὶ τοῖς
βουλομένοις ἔχειν ὁρμητήριον πρὸς τὸ1 διαπολεμεῖν
3περὶ τῶν ὅλων. ὁ δ᾿ οὖν Πτολεμαῖος2 ἐκπολιορκήσας
Ὠρωπὸν παρέδωκε τοῖς Βοιωτοῖς καὶ τοὺς
Κασάνδρου στρατιώτας ὑποχειρίους ἔλαβε. μετὰ
δὲ ταῦτα Ἐρετριεῖς καὶ Καρυστίους εἰς τὴν συμμαχίαν
προσλαβόμενος ἐστράτευσεν εἰς τὴν Ἀττικήν,
Δημητρίου τοῦ Φαληρέως ἐπιστατοῦντος τῆς
4πόλεως. οἱ δ᾿ Ἀθηναῖοι τὸ μὲν πρῶτον λάθρᾳ
διεπέμποντο πρὸς Ἀντίγονον ἀξιοῦντες ἐλευθερῶσαι
τὴν πόλιν· τότε δὲ τοῦ Πτολεμαίου παραγενηθέντος
πλησίον τῆς πόλεως θαρρήσαντες ἠνάγκασαν τὸν
Δημήτριον ἀνοχὰς ποιήσασθαι καὶ πρεσβείας ἀποστέλλειν
5πρὸς Ἀντίγονον περὶ συμμαχίας. ὁ δὲ
Πτολεμαῖος ἀναζεύξας ἐκ τῆς Ἀττικῆς εἰς τὴν
Βοιωτίαν τήν τε Καδμείαν εἷλε καὶ τὴν φρουρὰν
ἐκβαλὼν ἠλευθέρωσε τὰς Θήβας. μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα


1πρὸς τὸ added by Kallenberg.2Πτολεμαῖος Palmer: Πολέμων.48Book XIX

was closing in upon him, distributed his soldiers 313 b.c. among the cities for the winter.1
78. While these things were going on, the Corcyraeans,2
who had gone to the aid of the people of Apollonia and Epidamnus, dismissed Cassander’s soldiers under a truce; and of these cities they freed Apollonia, but Epidamnus they gave over to Glaucias, the king of the Illyrians. After Cassander had departed for Macedonia, Antigonus’ general Ptolemaeus, striking fear into the garrison that was holding Chalcis, took the city; and he left the Chalcidians
without a garrison in order to make it evident that Antigonus in very truth proposed to free the Greeks, for the city is well placed for any who wish to have a base from which to carry through a war for supremacy.3 However that may be, when Ptolemaeus had taken Oropus by siege, he gave it back to the Boeotians and made captive the troops of Cassander.4 Thereafter, having received the people of Eretria and Carystus into the alliance, he moved into Attica, where Demetrius of Phalerum was governing the city. At first the Athenians kept sending secretly to Antigonus, begging him to free the city; but then, taking courage when Ptolemaeus drew near the city, they forced Demetrius to make a truce and to send envoys to Antigonus about an alliance. Ptolemaeus, moving from Attica into Boeotia, took the Cadmea, drove out the garrison, and freed Thebes. After this he advanced into Phocis




1The winter of 313/12 b.c.2Cp. chaps. 67. 6; 70. 7.3Philip V of Macedonia named Chalcis one of the “three fetters of Greece” (Polybius, 18. 11; Livy, 32. 37. 3).4i.e. the troops left in Oropus by Cassander as a garrison, cp. chap. 77. 6.49