Diodorus of Sicily

ἀναβῆναι καὶ τὴν σατραπείαν ἀνακτησάμενον καταβαίνειν
συντόμως ἐπὶ θάλασσαν.
5Ὁ μὲν οὖν Δημήτριος ὁρμήσας ἐκ Δαμασκοῦ τῆς
Συρίας τὸ συνταχθὲν ὑπὸ τοῦ πατρὸς ἐπετέλει μετὰ
σπουδῆς· ὁ δὲ καθεσταμένος ὑπὸ Σελεύκου τῆς
Βαβυλωνίας στρατηγὸς Πατροκλῆς πυθόμενος περὶ
Μεσοποταμίαν εἶναι τοὺς πολεμίους, ὑπομεῖναι μὲν
τὴν ἔφοδον αὐτῶν οὐκ ἐτόλμησεν, ὀλίγους ἔχων
περὶ αὑτόν, ἀλλὰ τοῖς μὲν ἄλλοις προσέταξεν ἐκλιπεῖν
τὴν πόλιν καὶ τοὺς μὲν αὐτῶν διαβάντας1 τὸν
Εὐφράτην φυγεῖν εἰς τὴν ἔρημον, τοὺς δὲ περάσαντας
τὸν Τίγριν ἀπελθεῖν εἰς τὴν Σουσιανὴν πρὸς
6Εὐτελῆ2 καὶ τὴν Ἐρυθρὰν θάλατταν, αὐτὸς δὲ μεθ᾿
ὧν εἶχε στρατιωτῶν προβολαῖς χρώμενος ῥεύμασι3
ποταμῶν καὶ διώρυξιν ἀνεστρέφετο περὶ τὴν σατραπείαν,
ἅμα μὲν ἐφεδρεύων τοῖς πολεμίοις, ἅμα δὲ
πέμπων πρὸς Σέλευκον εἰς Μηδίαν περὶ τῶν ἀεὶ
συντελουμένων καὶ παρακαλῶν βοηθεῖν τὴν ταχίστην.
7ὁ δὲ Δημήτριος ἐπειδὴ παραγενόμενος εἰς
Βαβυλῶνα τὴν πόλιν ἐκλελειμμένην εὗρεν, πολιορκεῖν
ἐπεχείρει τὰς ἀκροπόλεις. ὧν τὴν ἑτέραν
ἑλὼν ἔδωκε τοῖς ἰδίοις στρατιώταις εἰς διαρπαγήν·
τὴν δ᾿ ἑτέραν πολιορκήσας ἡμέρας τινάς,
ἐπειδὴ χρόνου προσεδεῖτο, Ἀρχέλαον μὲν ἕνα τῶν
φίλων ἀπέλιπε στρατηγὸν ἐπὶ τῆς πολιορκίας, δοὺς
αὐτῷ πεζοὺς μὲν πεντακισχιλίους, ἱππεῖς δὲ χιλίους,
αὐτὸς δέ, τοῦ χρόνου συντρέχοντος ἐν ᾧ
συντεταγμένον ἦν τὴν ἄφοδον αὐτῷ ποιήσασθαι,

1διαβάντας Rhodoman: ἐκλιπόντας.2πρὸς Εὐτελῆ deleted by earlier editors, restored by Fischer.3ῥεύμασι added by Fischer, cp. Book 17. 55. 1.106Book XIX

recovering the satrapy, to come down to the sea at 312 b.c. full speed.
So Demetrius, having set out from Damascus in Syria, carried out his father’s orders with zeal. Patrocles, who had been established as general of Babylonia by Seleucus, hearing that the enemy was on the frontiers of Mesopotamia, did not dare await their arrival since he had few men at hand; but he gave orders to the civilians to leave the city, bidding some of them cross the Euphrates and take refuge in the desert and some of them pass over the Tigris and go into Susianê to Euteles1 and to the Red Sea2; and he himself with what soldiers he had, using river courses and canals as defences, kept moving about in the satrapy, watching the enemy and at the same time sending word into Media to Seleucus about what was taking place from time to time and urging him to send aid as soon as possible. When Demetrius on his arrival at Babylon found the city abandoned, he began to besiege the citadels. He took one of these and delivered it to his own soldiers for plundering; the other he besieged for a few days and then, since the capture required time, left Archelaüs, one of his friends, as general for the siege, giving him five thousand infantry and one thousand cavalry, while he himself, the time being close at hand at which he had been ordered to return,





1If the proper name is retained (cp. the critical note) we must suppose Euteles to be the commander established in Susianê by Seleucus (chap. 92. 5).2i.e. the Persian Gulf.107