Diodorus of Sicily

εἴτε διὰ τὰ πεπολιτευμένα κατὰ Μακεδόνων φοβηθείς,
εἴτε βουλόμενος τῷ βασιλεῖ τῶν Περσῶν
8ἄμεμπτον αὑτὸν διαφυλάττειν. πολλὰ γὰρ χρήματά
φασιν αὐτὸν εἰληφέναι παρὰ Περσῶν, ἵνα
πολιτεύηται κατὰ Μακεδόνων· περὶ ὧν καὶ τὸν
Αἰσχίνην φασὶν ὀνειδίζοντα τῷ Δημοσθένει κατά
τινα λόγον τὴν δωροδοκίαν εἰπεῖν, Νῦν μέντοι τὴν
δαπάνην ἐπικέκλυκεν αὐτοῦ τὸ βασιλικὸν χρυσίον.
ἔσται δὲ οὐδὲ τοῦθ᾿ ἱκανόν· οὐδεὶς γὰρ πώποτε
9πλοῦτος τρόπου πονηροῦ περιεγένετο. ὁ δὲ Ἀλέξανδρος
τοῖς πρέσβεσι τῶν Ἀθηναίων φιλανθρώπους
ἀποκρίσεις δοὺς ἀπέλυσε τοῦ πολλοῦ φόβου τὸν
δῆμον.
Τοῦ δ᾿ Ἀλεξάνδρου παραγγείλαντος εἰς Κόρινθον
ἀπαντᾶν τάς τε πρεσβείας καὶ τοὺς συνέδρους,
ἐπειδὴ συνῆλθον οἱ συνεδρεύειν εἰωθότες, διαλεχθεὶς
ὁ βασιλεὺς καὶ λόγοις ἐπιεικέσι χρησάμενος
ἔπεισε τοὺς Ἕλληνας ψηφίσασθαι στρατηγὸν αὐτοκράτορα
τῆς Ἑλλάδος εἶναι τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον καὶ
συστρατεύειν ἐπὶ τοὺς Πέρσας ὑπὲρ ὧν εἰς τοὺς Ἕλληνας
ἐξήμαρτον. τυχὼν δὲ ταύτης τῆς τιμῆς ὁ
βασιλεὺς ἐπανῆλθε μετὰ τῆς δυνάμεως εἰς Μακεδονίαν.
5. Ἡμεῖς δ᾿ ἐπεὶ τὰ κατὰ τὴν Ἑλλάδα διήλθομεν,
μεταβιβάσομεν τὸν λόγον ἐπὶ τὰς κατὰ τὴν
Ἀσίαν πράξεις. μετὰ γὰρ τὴν Φιλίππου τελευτὴν
Ἄτταλος τὸ μὲν πρῶτον ἐπεχείρει νεωτερίζειν
καὶ πρὸς Ἀθηναίους συνετίθετο κοινοπραγίαν κατ᾿
Ἀλεξάνδρου, ὕστερον δὲ μετανοήσας τὴν μὲν ἀποδοθεῖσαν
αὐτῷ παρὰ Δημοσθένους ἐπιστολὴν τηρήσας
ἀπέστειλε πρὸς Ἀλέξανδρον καὶ λόγοις
φιλανθρώποις ἐπειρᾶτο τὰς καθ᾿ αὑτοῦ διαβολὰς
128Book XVII

turned to Athens, whether fearful because of the 335/4 b.c. anti-Macedonian course that he had pursued in politics, or merely wishing to leave no ground of complaint to the king of Persia. He was generally believed to have received large sums of money from that source in payment for his efforts to check the Macedonians, and indeed Aeschines is said to have referred to this in a speech when he taunted Demosthenes with his venality: “At the moment, it is true, his extravagance has been glutted by the king’s gold, but even this will not satisfy him; no wealth has ever proved sufficient for a greedy character.”1 Alexander addressed the Athenian envoys kindly and freed the people from their acute terror.
Then he called a meeting at Corinth of envoys and delegates, and when the usual representatives came, he spoke to them in moderate terms and had them pass a resolution appointing him general plenipotentiary of the Greeks and undertaking themselves to join in an expedition against Persia seeking satisfaction for the offences which the Persians had committed against Greece.2 Successful in this, the king returned to Macedonia with his army.
5. Now that we have described what took place in Greece, we shall shift our account to the events in Asia. Here, immediately after the death of Philip, Attalus actually had set his hand to revolt and had agreed with the Athenians to undertake joint action against Alexander, but later he changed his mind. Preserving the letter which had been brought to him from Demosthenes,3 he sent it off to Alexander and tried by expressions of loyalty to remove from him-



1Aeschines, 3. 173, with a slightly different word order.2Justin, 11. 2. 5.3Plutarch, Demosthenes, 23. 2.129