Diodorus of Sicily

ὁ κριὸς τύπτων κατέβαλε πολὺ μέρος τοῦ τείχους·
διὰ δὲ τοῦ πτώματος εἰσπεσόντων τῶν Μακεδόνων
καὶ τῶν περὶ τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον διὰ τῆς ἐπιβάθρας
διαβάντων ἐπὶ τὸ τεῖχος ἡ μὲν πόλις κατείληπτο,
οἱ δὲ Τύριοι πρὸς ἀλκὴν τραπέντες καὶ παρακαλέσαντες
ἀλλήλους ἐνέφραξαν τοὺς στενωποὺς καὶ
μαχόμενοι πλὴν ὀλίγων ἅπαντες κατεκόπησαν,
4ὄντες πλείους τῶν ἑπτακισχιλίων. ὁ δὲ βασιλεὺς
τέκνα μὲν καὶ γυναῖκας ἐξηνδραποδίσατο, τοὺς δὲ
νέους πάντας, ὄντας οὐκ ἐλάττους τῶν δισχιλίων,
ἐκρέμασε. σώματα δ᾿ αἰχμάλωτα τοσαῦτα τὸ πλῆθος
εὑρέθη ὥστε τῶν πλείστων εἰς Καρχηδόνα
κεκομισμένων τὰ ὑπολειφθέντα γενέσθαι πλείω τῶν
μυρίων καὶ τρισχιλίων.
5Τύριοι μὲν οὖν γενναιότερον μᾶλλον ἢ φρονιμώτερον
ὑποστάντες τὴν πολιορκίαν τοσαύταις περιέπεσον
6συμφοραῖς, πολιορκηθέντες μῆνας ἑπτά. ὁ
δὲ βασιλεὺς τοῦ μὲν Ἀπόλλωνος τὰς χρυσᾶς σειρὰς
καὶ τὰ δεσμὰ περιελόμενος παρήγγειλεν ὀνομάζειν
τὸν θεὸν τοῦτον Ἀπολλὼ φιλαλέξανδρον, τῷ δὲ
Ἡρακλεῖ μεγαλοπρεπεῖς θυσίας συντελέσας καὶ
τοὺς ἀνδραγαθήσαντας τιμήσας, ἔτι δὲ τοὺς τετελευτηκότας
μεγαλοπρεπῶς θάψας τῆς μὲν Τυρίων




250Book XVII

ram, put to its work, brought down a considerable 332/1 b.c. stretch of wall; and when the Macedonians entered through this breach and Alexander’s party poured over the bridge on to the wall, the city was taken. The Tyrians, however, kept up the resistance with mutual cries of encouragement and blocked the alleys with barricades, so that all except a few were cut down fighting, in number more than seven thousand.1 The king sold the women and children into slavery and crucified all the men of military age.2 These were not less than two thousand. Although most of the non-combatants had been removed to Carthage, those who remained to become captives were found to be more than thirteen thousand.3
So Tyre had undergone the siege bravely rather than wisely and come into such misfortunes, after a resistance of seven months.4 The king removed the golden chains and fetters from Anollo and gave orders that the god should be called “Apollo Philalexander.”5 He carried out magnificent sacrifices to Heracles, rewarded those of his men who had distinguished themselves, and gave a lavish funeral for his own dead. He installed as king of Tyre a man


1Curtius (4. 4. 16) gives the total as 6000, Arrian (2. 24. 4)
as 8000. Justin (11. 10. 14) states that Tyre was taken by
treachery.2Curtius (4. 4. 17) reports that 2000 men were “crucibus
affixi.”3Arrian (2. 24. 5) gives the number of survivors as 30,000,
and the Macedonian losses as 400. In chap. 41. 2 above,
Diodorus stated that only a few of the non-combatants were
removed to Carthage.4This length of the siege is given by Plutarch also (Alexander, 24. 3), and the city was taken in Hecatombaeon (July; Arrian, 2. 24. 6), probably, if the Macedonian months were equated to the Athenian, on the 29th day. Plutarch (Alexander, 25. 2) reports that Alexander, to save a prophecy of Aristander, redesignated that day as the 28th and not the 30th. (In other words, it was a “hollow” month and had no 29th day; Alexander intercalated a second 28th and was prepared to continue the process until the city was taken.)5Another version of the same story is given by Plutarch, Alexander, 24. 4. The Tyrians suspected that Apollo intended to desert them (chap. 41. 8), and tied him to his base, calling him an Ἀλεξανδριστής.251