Diodorus of Sicily

καὶ φρονήματος ὢν πλήρης, ἀνέσεισε μὲν τοὺς
βαρβάρους, ἀποστάτης δὲ γενόμενος Ἀλεξάνδρου
καὶ ταχὺ μεγάλης δυνάμεως κυριεύσας φανερῶς
6ἀπεκαλύψατο πρὸς τὸν πόλεμον. διόπερ Ἀντίπατρος
πᾶσαν ἀναλαβὼν τὴν δύναμιν προῆλθε διὰ
Μακεδονίας εἰς Θρᾴκην καὶ διεπολέμει πρὸς τὸν
Μέμνονα.
Τούτου δὲ περὶ ταῦτ᾿ ὄντος οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι
καιρὸν ἔχειν ὑπολαβόντες τοῦ παρασκευάσασθαι τὰ
πρὸς τὸν πόλεμον παρεκάλουν τοὺς Ἕλληνας συμφρονῆσαι
7περὶ τῆς ἐλευθερίας. Ἀθηναῖοι μὲν οὖν,
παρὰ πάντας τοὺς ἄλλους Ἕλληνας ὑπ᾿ Ἀλεξάνδρου
προτιμώμενοι, τὴν ἡσυχίαν ἦγον· Πελοποννησίων
δ᾿ οἱ πλείους καὶ τῶν ἄλλων τινὲς συμφρονήσαντες
ἀπεγράψαντο πρὸς τὸν πόλεμον καὶ κατὰ δύναμιν
τῶν πόλεων καταγράφοντες τῶν νέων τοὺς ἀρίστους
κατέλεξαν στρατιώτας πεζοὺς μὲν οὐκ ἐλάττους
τῶν δισμυρίων, ἱππεῖς δὲ περὶ δισχιλίους.
8τὴν δ᾿ ἡγεμονίαν ἔχοντες Λακεδαιμόνιοι πανδημεὶ
πρὸς τὸν ὑπὲρ τῶν ὅλων κίνδυνον ὥρμησαν, Ἄγιδος
τοῦ βασιλέως τὴν πάντων ἔχοντος ἡγεμονίαν.
63. Ἀντίπατρος δὲ πυθόμενος τὴν τῶν Ἑλλήνων
συνδρομὴν τὸν μὲν ἐν τῇ Θρᾴκῃ πόλεμον ὥς ποτ᾿
ἦν δυνατὸν κατέλυσεν, εἰς δὲ τὴν Πελοπόννησον
ἧκε μετὰ πάσης τῆς δυνάμεως. προσλαβόμενος
δὲ καὶ παρὰ τῶν συμμαχούντων Ἑλλήνων στρατιώτας
ἤθροισε τοὺς ἅπαντας οὐκ ἐλάττους τῶν
2τετρακισμυρίων. γενομένης δὲ παρατάξεως μεγάλης


296Book XVII

and was a man of spirit. He stirred up the tribesmen, 330/29 b.c. revolted against Alexander, quickly possessed a large army, and was openly bent on war. Antipater was forced to mobilize his entire army and to advance through Macedonia into Thrace to settle with him.1
While Antipater was occupied with this,2 the Lacedaemonians thought that the time had come to undertake a war and issued an appeal to the Greeks to unite in defence of their freedom. The Athenians had been favoured beyond all the other Greeks by Alexander and did not move. Most of the Peloponnesians, however, and some of the northern Greeks reached an agreement and signed an undertaking to go to war. According to the capacity of the individual cities they enlisted the best of their youth and enrolled as soldiers not less than twenty thousand infantry and about two thousand cavalry. The Lacedaemonians had the command and led out their entire levy for the decisive battle, their king Agis having the position of commander in chief.
63. When Antipater learned of this Greek mobilization, he ended the Thracian campaign on what terms he could and marched down into the Peloponnesus with his entire army. He added soldiers from those of the Greeks who were still loyal and built up his force until it numbered not less than forty thousand.3 When it came to a general engagement, Agis was struck



1He had been appointed by Alexander before the start of
the Asian campaign (Berve, Alexanderreich, 2, no. 499).
Antipater was Alexander’s viceroy in Macedonia. The cam- conducted reinforcements to Alexander and took part in his later operations in the East (Curtius, 9. 3. 21). His revolt is not otherwise mentioned.2The narrative is continued from chap. 48. 1 and concluded, chap. 73. 5–6. Cp. Curtius, 6. 1; Justin, 12. 1. 8–11.3Alexander sent him 3000 talents for the campaign (Arrian, 3. 16. 10).297