Diodorus of Sicily
5τοῦ πτώματος εἰς τὴν πόλιν εἰσπεσεῖν. Μέμνων
δὲ τὸ μὲν πρῶτον τοὺς προσβάλλοντας τοῖς τείχεσι
Μακεδόνας ῥᾳδίως ἠμύνετο, πολλῶν ὄντων ἐν τῇ
πόλει στρατιωτῶν· κατὰ δὲ τὰς τῶν ὀργάνων
προσβολὰς μετὰ πολλῶν στρατιωτῶν ἐκχεόμενος
ἐκ τῆς πόλεως νυκτὸς πῦρ ἐνέβαλλε ταῖς μηχαναῖς.
6μεγάλων δ᾿ ἀγώνων πρὸ τῆς πόλεως συνισταμένων
οἱ μὲν Μακεδόνες ταῖς ἀρεταῖς πολὺ προεῖχον, οἱ
δὲ Πέρσαι τῷ πλήθει καὶ ταῖς παρασκευαῖς ἐπλεονέκτουν·
συνήργουν γὰρ αὐτοῖς οἱ ἀπὸ τῶν τειχῶν
συναγωνιζόμενοι καὶ τοῖς ὀξυβελέσι καταπέλταις
οὓς μὲν ἀπέκτεινον τῶν πολεμίων, οὓς δὲ κατετίτρωσκον.
25. Ὁμοῦ δὲ αἵ τε σάλπιγγες ἐσήμαινον παρ᾿
ἀμφοτέροις τὸ πολεμικὸν καὶ βοὴ πανταχόθεν ἐγίνετο,
συνεπισημαινομένων τῶν στρατιωτῶν ταῖς
2παρ᾿ ἑκατέρων ἀνδραγαθίαις. οἱ μὲν γὰρ τὴν ἐν
ταῖς μηχαναῖς αἰρομένην εἰς ὕψος φλόγα κατέπαυον,
οἱ δ᾿ εἰς χεῖρας συμπλεκόμενοι πολὺν ἐποίουν φόνον,
ἄλλοι δ᾿ ἐντὸς τῶν πιπτόντων τειχῶν ἀντῳκοδόμουν
ἕτερα τείχη πολὺ τῶν προϋπαρχόντων
3βαρύτερα ταῖς παρασκευαῖς. τῶν δ᾿ ἡγεμόνων
τῶν περὶ τὸν Μέμνονα προκινδυνευόντων καὶ μεγάλας
δωρεὰς διδόντων τοῖς ἀνδραγαθοῦσιν ἀνυπέρβλητος
φιλοτιμία παρ᾿ ἀμφοτέροις ἐγίνετο περὶ
4τῆς νίκης. διὸ καὶ παρῆν ὁρᾶν τοὺς μὲν τραύμασιν
ἐναντίοις περιπίπτοντας καὶ κατὰ τὰς λιποψυχίας
ἀποφερομένους ἐκ τῆς μάχης, τοὺς δὲ περιβαίνοντας
τὰ πίπτοντα σώματα καὶ περὶ τῆς τούτων ἀναιρέσεως
μεγάλους ἀγῶνας συνισταμένους, ἄλλους δὲ
διὰ τὴν ὑπερβολὴν τῶν δεινῶν ἐνδιδόντας ἤδη καὶ
διὰ τῆς ὑπὸ τῶν ἡγεμόνων παρακλήσεως πάλιν
186Book XVII

entry into the city over the rubble. But Mernnon at 334/3 b.c. first easily beat off the Macedonians assaulting the walls, for he had large numbers of men in the city. Where the siege engines were attacking, he issued from the city at night with numbers of soldiers and applied fire to the machines. Fierce fights occurred in front of the city, in which the Macedonians showed far superior prowess, but the Persians had the advantage of numbers and of fire power. For they had the support of men who fought from the walls using engines to shoot darts, with which they killed some of the enemy and disabled others.
25. At the same moment, the trumpets sounded the battle signal on both sides and cheers came from all parts as the soldiers applauded in concert the feats of brave men on one side or the other. Some tried to put out the fires that rose aloft among the siege engines; others joined with the foe in close combat and wrought great slaughter; others erected secondary walls behind those which crumbled, heavier by far in construction than the preceding. The commanders under Memnon took their places in the front line and offered great rewards to those who distinguished themselves, so that the desire for victory rose very high on both sides. There could be seen men encountering frontal wounds or being carried unconscious out of the battle, others standing over the fallen bodies of their companions and struggling mightily to recover them, while others who were on the point of yielding to the storm of terrors were again put in heart by the appeals of their officers and
187