Diodorus of Sicily

ἀγωνιῶντες ὑπὲρ τῶν ἰδίων ἔφασαν δεῖν
2ἀντέχεσθαι τῶν ἄνω τόπων. αὐξομένης δὲ τῆς
διαφορᾶς Εὐμενὴς ὁρῶν ὅτι διαιρεθέντος τοῦ
στρατοπέδου κατ᾿ ἰδίαν ἑκάτερον τῶν μερῶν οὐκ
ἀξιόμαχόν ἐστι, συνεχώρησε τοῖς καταβεβηκόσι
σατράπαις. ἀναζεύξαντες οὖν ἀπὸ τοῦ Πασιτίγριος
προῆγον τῆς Περσίδος εἰς Περσέπολιν τὸ βασίλειον,
οὔσης τῆς ὁδοιπορίας ἡμερῶν εἴκοσι καὶ τεσσάρων,
ἧς ἦν ἡ πρώτη μὲν ἕως τῆς καλουμένης Κλίμακος
κοίλη, καυματώδης δὲ καὶ σπανίζουσα τῶν ἐπιτηδείων,
ἡ λοιπὴ δὲ μετέωρος καὶ τὸν ἀέρα παντελῶς
ὑγιεινὸν ἔχουσα καὶ πλήρης τῶν ἐπετείων
3καρπῶν· αὐλῶνάς τε γὰρ εἶχε πυκνοὺς καὶ συσκίους
καὶ παραδείσων φυτείας ποικίλας, ἔτι δὲ παντοδαπῶν
δένδρων φυσικὰς συναγκίας καὶ ῥύσεις1
ὑδάτων, ὥστε τοὺς ὁδοιποροῦντας μετὰ πολλῆς
τέρψεως ἐνδιατρίβειν τόποις ἡδίστοις πρὸς ἀνάπαυσιν.
ἦν δὲ καὶ λείας παντοδαπῆς πλῆθος, ἣν
μεταπεμπόμενος Πευκέστης παρὰ τῶν ἐγχωρίων
διεδίδου δαψιλῆ τοῖς στρατιώταις, ἐκκαλούμενος
αὐτῶν τὴν εὔνοιαν. κατοικοῦσι δὲ ταύτην τὴν
χώραν τῶν Περσῶν οἱ μαχιμώτατοι, πάντες ὄντες
τοξόται καὶ σφενδονῆται, πολυανθρωπίᾳ τε πολὺ
διαφέρειν συμβαίνει τὴν χώραν ταύτην τῶν ἄλλων
σατραπειῶν.
22. Ὡς δέ ποθ᾿ ἧκον εἰς Περσέπολιν τὸ βασίλειον,
Πευκέστης μέν, ὢν ταύτης τῆς χώρας
στρατηγός,2 θυσίαν ἐπετέλεσε μεγαλοπρεπῆ τοῖς
θεοῖς καὶ Ἀλεξάνδρῳ καὶ Φιλίππῳ, μεταπεμψάμενος
δὲ ἐξ ὅλης σχεδὸν τῆς Περσίδος ἱερείων καὶ
τῶν ἄλλων τῶν εἰς εὐωχίαν καὶ πανήγυριν χρησίμων

1ῥύσεις Rhodoman: φύσεις.2σατράπης καὶ added before στρατηγός by early editors, removed by Fischer.288Book XIX

about their own private affairs, asserted that it was 317 b.c. essential to maintain control of the upper country. As the disagreement became more violent, Eumenes, seeing that if the army should be divided neither part would be capable of fighting by itself, deferred to the wishes of the satraps who had come from the interior. Leaving the Pasitigris, accordingly, they proceeded to Persepolis, the capital of Persia, a march of twenty-four days. The first part of the road as far as the so-called Ladder was through an enclosed valley, torrid and lacking in provisions, but the rest was over high land, blessed with a very healthful climate and full of the fruits appropriate to the season. For there were glens heavily overgrown and shady, cultivated trees of various kinds in parks, also natural converging glades full of trees of every sort and streams of water, so that travellers lingered with delight in places pleasantly inviting repose. Also there was an abundance of cattle of every kind, which Peucestes gathered together from the inhabitants and distributed without stint to the soldiers, seeking their goodwill. But those who inhabited this country were the most warlike of the Persians, every man being a bowman and a slinger, and in density of population, too, this country far surpassed the other satrapies.
22. When they had arrived in Persepolis, the capital, Peucestes, who was general of this land, performed a magnificent sacrifice to the gods and to Alexander and Philip; and, after gathering from almost the whole of Persia a multitude of sacrificial animals and of whatever else was needed for festivities and religious gatherings, he gave a feast to the


289