Diodorus of Sicily

διετήρησαν μὲν χάριν τοῦ μὴ γενέσθαι ταραχήν,
τοὺς πρεσβευτὰς δὲ ταχέως ἐξέπεμψαν, τοὺς δὲ
τῶν φυγάδων συγγενεῖς καὶ φίλους καὶ τῶν ἄλλων
τοὺς δυσχεραίνοντας τοῖς ὑπ᾿ αὐτῶν πραττομένοις
ἐξέβαλον ἐκ τῆς πόλεως, ὄντας οὐκ ἐλάττους
4ὀκτακισχιλίων. κἄπειτα τοσούτου πλήθους ἄφνω
συναναγκαζομένου τὴν πατρίδα φεύγειν ἔγεμεν ἡ
πόλις διαδρομῆς καὶ θορύβου καὶ γυναικείων κλαυθμῶν·
οὐδεμία γὰρ ἦν οἰκία πένθους ἀκοινώνητος
5κατὰ τοῦτον τὸν καιρόν. οἱ μὲν γὰρ περὶ τὴν
τυραννίδα τοῦ Ἀγαθοκλέους καὶ τῶν τέκνων αὐτοῦ1
τὴν συμφορὰν ὠδύροντο, τῶν δ᾿ ἰδιωτῶν οἱ μὲν
τοὺς ἀπολωλέναι δοκοῦντας κατὰ Λιβύην ἔκλαιον,
οἱ δὲ τοὺς ἐκπίπτοντας ἀφ᾿ ἑστίας καὶ πατρῴων
θεῶν, οἷς οὔτε μένειν ἐξῆν οὔτ᾿ ἐκτὸς τῶν τειχῶν
προάγειν, πολιορκούντων τῶν βαρβάρων, πρὸς δὲ
τοῖς εἰρημένοις κακοῖς τηλικούτοις οὖσιν ἠναγκάζοντο
νηπίους παῖδας καὶ γυναῖκας συνεφέλκεσθαι
6τῇ φυγῇ. ὁ δ᾿ Ἀμίλκας, καταφυγόντων πρὸς
αὐτὸν τῶν φυγάδων, τούτοις μὲν τὴν ἀσφάλειαν
παρέσχετο, τὴν δὲ δύναμιν παρασκευάσας προῆγεν
ἐπὶ τὰς Συρακούσσας, ὡς αἱρήσων τὴν πόλιν διά
τε τὴν ἐρημίαν καὶ διὰ τὴν προσηγγελμένην τοῖς
ὑπολελειμμένοις συμφοράν.
16. Προαποστείλαντος δ᾿ αὐτοῦ πρεσβείαν καὶ
διδόντος Ἀντάνδρῳ καὶ τοῖς μετ᾿ αὐτοῦ, εἰ παραδιδόασι
τὴν πόλιν, ἀσφάλειαν, συνήδρευσαν2 τῶν
ἡγεμόνων οἱ μάλιστα ἀξίωμα δοκοῦντες ἔχειν.
ῥηθέντων οὖν πολλῶν λόγων Ἄντανδρος μὲν ᾤετο
1αὐτοῦ Dindort: αὐτῶν.2συνήδρευσαν Stephanus: συνεδρευσάντων.182Book XX

however, being in doubt, watched closely that there 310 b.c. might be no disorder, but they sent the envoys away at once; and the relatives and friends of the exiles and any others who were displeased with the actions of the magistrates they cast out of the city, in number not less than eight thousand. Thereupon, when so great a multitude was suddenly forced to leave its native place, the city was filled with running to and fro and with uproar and the lamentation of women; for there was no household that did not have its share of mourning at that time. Those who were of the party of the tyrant lamented at the misfortune of Agathocles and his sons; and some of the private citizens wept for the men believed to have been lost in Libya, and others for those who were being driven from hearth and ancestral gods, who could neither remain nor yet go outside the walls since the barbarians were besieging the city, and who, in addition to the aforesaid evils, which were great enough, were being compelled to drag along with them in their flight infant children and women. But when the exiles took refuge with Hamilcar, he offered them safety; and, making ready his army, he led it against Syracuse, expecting to take the city both because it was bereft of defenders and because of the disaster that had been reported to those who had been left there.
16. After Hamilcar had sent an embassy in advance and had offered safety to Antander and those with him if they surrendered the city, those of the leaders who were held in highest esteem came together in council. After prolonged discussion Antander thought



183