Diodorus of Sicily

καὶ τὸν σῖτον ἐκ τῆς χώρας τῶν πολεμίων
3φθείραντες κατὰ τὴν ἐπάνοδον ἡττήθησαν. ἅμα
δὲ τούτοις πραττομένοις Φάλαικος μὲν ὁ τῶν Φωκέων
στρατηγός, διαβληθεὶς ὅτι πολλὰ τῶν ἱερῶν
χρημάτων κέκλοφεν, ἐξέπεσεν ἐκ τῆς ἀρχῆς, ἀντὶ
δὲ τούτου στρατηγῶν αἱρεθέντων τριῶν, Δεινοκράτους
καὶ Καλλίου καὶ Σωφάνους, ἐγένετο ζήτησις
τῶν ἱερῶν χρημάτων καὶ λόγον τοὺς κεχειρικότας
οἱ Φωκεῖς ἀπῄτουν· ἦν δὲ πλεῖστα διῳκηκὼς Φίλων.
4οὗτος δ᾿ οὐ δυνάμενος ἀποδοῦναι τὸν λόγον κατεδικάσθη
καὶ στρεβλωθεὶς ὑπὸ τῶν στρατηγῶν τοὺς
μετέχοντας τῆς κλοπῆς ἐμήνυσεν, αὐτὸς δὲ ταῖς
ἐσχάταις αἰκίαις περιπεσὼν οἰκείαν τῆς ἀσεβείας
5ἔσχε τὴν τοῦ βίου καταστροφήν. οἱ δὲ νοσφισάμενοι
τὰ χρήματα τὰ σωζόμενα καὶ περιόντα τῶν
ἐκ τῆς κλοπῆς ἀπέδωκαν, αὐτοὶ δ᾿ ἐθανατώθησαν
ὡς ἱερόσυλοι. τῶν δὲ προγεγενημένων στρατηγῶν
ὁ μὲν πρῶτος ἄρξας Φιλόμηλος ἀπέσχετο τῶν ἀναθημάτων,
ὁ δὲ δεύτερος, προσαγορευόμενος μὲν
Ὀνόμαρχος, ἀδελφὸς δ᾿ ὢν Φιλομήλου, πλεῖστα
τῶν τοῦ θεοῦ χρημάτων κατεδαπάνησε, τρίτος δὲ
Φάυλλος ὁ ἀδελφὸς Ὀνομάρχου στρατηγήσας οὐκ
ὀλίγα τῶν ἀναθημάτων κατέκοψεν εἰς τὰς τῶν
6ξένων μισθοφοράς. τὰς γὰρ ἀνατεθείσας ὑπὸ Κροίσου
τοῦ Λυδῶν βασιλέως χρυσᾶς πλίνθους, οὔσας
ἑκατὸν καὶ εἴκοσι διταλάντους, κατέκοψεν εἰς νόμισμα,
φιάλας δὲ χρυσᾶς τριακοσίας καὶ ἑξήκοντα



394Book XVI

destroyed the grain in enemy territory, but were 347/6 b.c. defeated on the return journey. While these things were going on, Phalaecus, the general of the Phocians, who was accused of stealing many of the sacred properties, was removed from his command.1 Three generals having been chosen to replace him, Deinocrates,
Callias, and Sophanes, an investigation into the sacred property took place and the Phocians called upon those who had administered it to render an accounting. The man who had been in charge of most of it was Philon. Since he was unable to render a proper accounting, he was adjudged guilty, and after being tortured by the generals disclosed the names of his accomplices in the theft, while he himself, after being subjected to the utmost torments, obtained the kind of death that suited his impiety. Those who had diverted the properties to their own use restored whatever balance they still possessed of the stolen property and were themselves put to death as temple-robbers.
Of the generals who had been in office previously, the first to hold the office, Philomelus, had kept his hands off the dedications,2 but the second, named Onomarchus, brother of Philomelus, squandered much of the god’s money, while the third, Phaÿllus, the brother of Onomarchus, when he became general, struck into coin a large number of the dedications in order to pay the mercenaries. For he coined for currency one hundred twenty gold bricks which had been dedicated by Croesus3 king of the Lydians weighing two talents each, and three hundred sixty golden goblets weighing two minae each, and

1See Pausanias, 10. 2. 7.2Diodorus is inconsistent regarding Philomelus. In chap.
28. 2 he makes the same statement as here; in chap. 30. 1
he says the opposite.3Cp. Herod. 1. 50 and Plutarch, De Pythiae Oraculis, 401 E, r. For a discussion of values see Boeckh, Staatshaushandlung
der Athener, 13. 10 (2nd edition translated by G. C. Lewis, The Political Economy of Athens, 10).395