Diodorus of Sicily
Ὡς Ἀντίγονος Πτολεμαῖον1 στρατηγὸν ἐξαπέστειλε
μετὰ δυνάμεως ἐλευθερώσοντα τοὺς Ἕλληνας καὶ τὰ
πραχθέντα περὶ τὴν Ἑλλάδα.
Ἀπόστασις Κυρηναίων καὶ ἅλωσις, ἔτι δὲ Πτολεμαίου
στρατεία εἰς Κύπρον καὶ Συρίαν.
Μάχη Δημητρίου πρὸς Πτολεμαῖον καὶ νίκη Πτολεμαίου.
Ἀπόστασις Τελεσφόρου τοῦ στρατηγοῦ ἀπὸ
Ἀντιγόνου.
Τὰ περὶ τὴν Ἤπειρον καὶ τὸν Ἀδρίαν πραχθέντα
Κασάνδρῳ.
Ὡς Σέλευκος παρὰ Πτολεμαίου λαβὼν δύναμιν ὀλίγην
ἐκράτησε Βαβυλῶνος καὶ τὴν προϋπάρχουσαν αὐτῷ
σατραπείαν ἀνεσώσατο.
Ὡς Ἀντίγονος ἀκινδύνως παραλαβὼν Κοίλην Συρίαν
δύναμιν ἐξέπεμψεν εἰς τὴν Ἀραβίαν.
Περὶ τῶν νομίμων οἷς χρῆται τὰ ἔθην τῶν Ἀράβων.
Περὶ τῆς καλουμένης Ἀσφαλτίτιδος λίμνης.
Ὡς Ἀντίγονος τὸν υἱὸν Δημήτριον ἐξαπέστειλε μετὰ
τῆς δυνάμεως εἰς τὴν Βαβυλωνίαν.
Περὶ τῶν πραχθέντων Ῥωμαίοις καὶ Σαμνίταις.
Ὡς Ἀγαθοκλῆς Μεσσηνίους παρακρουσάμενος τῆς
πόλεως ἐκυρίευσεν.
Ὡς τοὺς ἀντιταξαμένους Μεσσηνίων καὶ Ταυρομενιτῶν,
ἔτι δὲ Κεντοριπίνων ἀπέσφαξεν.
Ὡς Ἀγαθοκλῆς Δεινοκράτη καὶ τοὺς φυγάδας περὶ
Γαλαρίαν ἐνίκησεν.
1Πτολεμαῖον Geer: Πολέμωνα (cp. chap. 77. 2; also chaps.
57 4, 68. 5 and notes).4Book XIX
How Antigonus sent Ptolemaeus as general with an army to liberate the Greeks, and about his operations in Greece (chaps. 77–78).
The revolt and the capture of Cyrenê, also the campaign of Ptolemy into Cyprus and Syria (chap. 79).
The battle of Demetrius against Ptolemy, and the victory of Ptolemy (chaps. 80–86).
The desertion of Antigonus by his general Telesphorus
(chap. 87).
The operations of Cassander in Epirus and on the Adriatic (chaps. 88–89).
How Seleucus received a small force from Ptolemy, gained control of Babylon, and recovered the satrapy that he had formerly possessed (chaps.
90–92).
How Antigonus took Coelê Syria without a battle, and how he dispatched an army into Arabia (chaps. 93–100).
About the customs observed by the Arabian tribes (chap. 94).
About what is called the Bituminous Sea (chaps. 98–99).
How Antigonus sent his son Demetrius with the army into Babylonia (chap. 100).
About the operations of the Romans and the Samnites
(chap. 101).
How Agathocles deceived the Messenians and became ruler of their city (chap. 102).
How he slew those of the Messenians, Tauromenians,
and Centoripians who opposed him (chaps. 102–103).
How Agathocles defeated Deinocrates and the exiles at Galaria (chap. 104).
5