Diodorus of Sicily

φυλακὴν τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων, καὶ δυνάμενος πολλοὺς
ἀνελεῖν τῶν πολεμίων, ἠρκέσθη τῷ προτερήματι
2καὶ τῆς ἐπὶ πλεῖον1 μάχης ἀπέστη. γενομένης
δὲ περὶ αὐτὸν ἱκανῆς ὑποψίας ὡς πεφεισμένου τῶν
Λακεδαιμονίων ἰδίας ἕνεκα χάριτος, οἱ φθονοῦντες
αὐτοῦ τῇ δόξῃ καιρὸν ἔλαβον εὐλόγου διαβολῆς.
ἐπενεγκάντων οὖν αὐτῷ προδοσίας ἔγκλημα, τὸ
πλῆθος παροξυνθὲν ἀπέστησεν αὐτὸν τῆς βοιωταρχίας,
καὶ ἰδιώτην ποιῆσαν2 ἐξαπέστειλε μετὰ
τῶν ἄλλων. ὡς δὲ ἀπὸ3 τῶν ἀποτελεσμάτων ἐξήλειψε
τὰς καθ᾿ ἑαυτοῦ διαβολάς, τότε ὁ δῆμος
ἀποκατέστησεν αὐτὸν εἰς τὴν προγεγενημένην εὐδοξίαν.
3μετ᾿ ὀλίγον δὲ χρόνον Λακεδαιμονίοις
πρὸς Ἀρκάδας ἐγένετο μεγάλη μάχη, ἐν ᾗ ἐνίκησαν
Λακεδαιμόνιοι ἐπιφανῶς. μετὰ γὰρ τὴν ἐν Λεύκτροις
ἧτταν τοῦτο πρῶτον αὐτοῖς παράδοξον εὐτύχημα
ἐγένετο· ἔπεσον γὰρ Ἀρκάδων μὲν ὑπὲρ
τοὺς μυρίους, Λακεδαιμονίων δ᾿ οὐδείς. προεῖπον
δ᾿ αὐτοῖς αἱ Δωδωνίδες4 ἱέρειαι διότι πόλεμος οὗτος
4Λακεδαιμονίοις ἄδακρυς ἔσται. μετὰ δὲ τὴν μάχην
οἱ Ἀρκάδες, φοβηθέντες τὰς τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων
εἰσβολάς, ἔκτισαν ἐπί τινος ἐπικαίρου τόπου τὴν
ὀνομαζομένην Μεγάλην πόλιν, συρρίψαντες εἰς αὐτὴν
κώμας εἴκοσι5 τῶν ὀνομαζομένων Μαιναλίων
καὶ Παρρασίων Ἀρκάδων.
Καὶ τὰ μὲν κατὰ τοὺς Ἕλληνας ἐν τούτοις ἦν.
1πλεῖον editors: πλείονα PAFJL.2ποιήσαν (sic) Wesseling: ποιήσας.3ἀπὸ] διὰ Reiske.4So Wesseling: Δωδωνίας.5εἴκοσι] μ΄ L (Pausanias, 8. 27. 3, 4), τετταράκοντα Dindorf,
Bekker.152Book XV

on the outwork, though he might have slain many of 368/7 b.c. the enemy, was satisfied with his advantage and desisted from further combat. A serious suspicion arose that he had spared the Lacedaemonians as a personal favour, and those who were jealous of his fame found an opportunity for plausible charges against him. They accordingly brought a charge of treason against him, and the populace, incensed, removed him from the board of boeotarchs, made him a private soldier, and sent him out with the rest. When he had by his achievements wiped out the feeling against him, the people then restored him to his former position of high repute. Shortly after this the Lacedaemonians fought a great battle with the Arcadians and defeated them signally. Indeed since the defeat at Leuctra this was their first stroke of good fortune, and it was a surprising one; for over ten thousand Arcadians fell and not one Lacedaemonian.1 The priestesses of Dodona2 had foretold to them that this war would be a tearless one for the Lacedaemonians. After this battle the Arcadians, fearful of the invasions of the Lacedaemonians, founded in a favourable location the city called Great, Megalopolis, by combining to form it twenty3 villages of the Arcadians known as Maenalians4 and Parrhasians.
Such were the events in Greece at this time.
1For the “tearless battle” see Xenophon, Hell. 7. 1. 28–32
and Plutarch, Agesilaüs, 33. 3 ff.2Ancient oracle of Zeus in Epeirus.3Pausanias (see critical notes) names forty villages. Cary, Cambridge Ancient History, 6. 91–92, accepts Diodorus’ figure but not his date. For the date of founding Pausanias, ibid. 27. 8, gives 371/0; the Parian Marble 370/69 or 369/8, while Beloch, Griechische Geschichte2, 3. 1. 187, accepts Diodorus.4Districts of southern Arcadia. In Maenalia was situated the new foundation, Megalopolis.153