Diodorus of Sicily

δῃώσας κατεστρατοπεδεύσατο πλησίον ποταμοῦ
τινος ῥέοντος παρὰ φρούριον ὀχυρόν. τούτῳ δὲ
προσβολὰς ποιησάμενος καὶ μὴ δυνάμενος ἑλεῖν
τῆς μὲν πολιορκίας ἀπέστη, πρὸς δὲ τοὺς Λοκροὺς
συνάψας μάχην ἀπέβαλε τῶν στρατιωτῶν εἴκοσι
καὶ τῶν νεκρῶν οὐ δυνηθεὶς κρατῆσαι τὴν ἀναίρεσιν
αὐτῶν διὰ κήρυκος ᾐτήσατο. οἱ δὲ Λοκροὶ τὴν
ἀναίρεσιν οὐ συγχωροῦντες ἀπόκρισιν ἔδωκαν ὅτι
παρὰ πᾶσι τοῖς Ἕλλησι κοινὸς νόμος ἐστὶν ἀτάφους
3ῥίπτεσθαι τοὺς ἱεροσύλους. ὁ δὲ Φιλόμηλος χαλεπῶς
φέρων τὸ συμβεβηκὸς συνῆψε μάχην τοῖς
Λοκροῖς καὶ πᾶσαν εἰσενεγκάμενος φιλοτιμίαν
ἀνεῖλέ τινας τῶν πολεμίων καὶ τῶν σωμάτων κυριεύσας
ἠνάγκασε τοὺς Λοκροὺς ἀλλαγὴν ποιήσασθαι
τῶν νεκρῶν. κρατῶν δὲ τῶν ὑπαίθρων
καὶ πολλὴν πορθήσας τῆς Λοκρίδος ἐπανῆλθεν εἰς
Δελφοὺς ἐμπεπληκὼς ὠφελείας τοὺς στρατιώτας.
μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα περὶ τοῦ πολέμου βουλόμενος χρήσασθαι
τῷ μαντείῳ τὴν Πυθίαν ἠνάγκασεν ἀναβᾶσαν
ἐπὶ τὸν τρίποδα δοῦναι τὸν χρησμόν.
26. Ἐπεὶ δὲ τοῦ τρίποδος ἐμνήσθην, οὐκ ἄκαιρον
προσαναλαβεῖν ἡγοῦμαι τὴν παλαιὰν περὶ αὐτοῦ
παραδεδομένην ἱστορίαν. λέγεται γὰρ τὸ παλαιὸν
αἶγας εὑρεῖν τὸ μαντεῖον· οὗ χάριν αἰξὶ μάλιστα
2χρηστηριάζονται μέχρι τοῦ νῦν οἱ Δελφοί. τὸν δὲ
τρόπον τῆς εὑρέσεως γενέσθαι φασὶ τοιοῦτον. ὄντος
χάσματος ἐν τούτῳ τῷ τόπῳ καθ᾿ ὅν ἐστι νῦν τοῦ
ἱεροῦ τὸ καλούμενον ἄδυτον, καὶ περὶ τοῦτο νενομένων1
αἰγῶν, διὰ τὸ μήπω κατοικεῖσθαι τοὺς
Δελφούς, αἰεὶ τὴν προσιοῦσαν τῷ χάσματι2 καὶ
προσβλέψασαν αὐτῷ σκιρτᾶν θαυμαστῶς καὶ προίεσθαι

1So Rhodoman: γενομένων.2τῷ χάσματι τὴν προσιοῦσαν RF.308Book XVI

encamped near a river that flowed past a stronghold. 355/4 b.c. Though he made assaults upon this, he was unable to take it and finally desisted from the siege, but joining battle with the Locrians he lost twenty of his men, and not being able to get possession of their bodies, he asked through a herald the privilege of taking them up. The Locrians, refusing to grant this, gave answer that amongst all the Greeks it was the general law that temple-robbers should be cast forth without burial. Philomelus so resented this that he joined battle with the Locrians and, bending every effort, slew some of the enemy, and having got possession of their bodies compelled the Locrians to make an exchange of the dead. As he was master of the open country, he sacked a large portion of Locris and returned to Delphi, having given his soldiers their fill of the spoils of war. After this, since he wished to consult the oracle for the war, he compelled the Pythian priestess to mount her tripod and deliver the oracle.
26. Since I have mentioned the tripod, I think it not inopportune to recount the ancient story which has been handed down about it. It is said that in ancient times goats discovered the oracular shrine, on which account even to this day the Delphians use goats preferably when they consult the oracle. They say that the manner of its discovery was the following. There is a chasm at this place where now is situated what is known as the “forbidden” sanctuary, and as goats had been wont to feed about this because Delphi had not as yet been settled, invariably any goat that approached the chasm and peered into it would leap about in an extraordinary fashion and utter a sound


309