Diodorus of Sicily

πόλεις ἀξιολόγους ἐν ταῖς δυσχωρίαις κτίσας ἀνελάμβανε
τὴν δύναμιν.1
112.2 Ἀλέξανδρος καταπεπολεμηκὼς τὸ τῶν
Κοσσαίων ἔθνος ἀνέζευξε μετὰ τῆς δυνάμεως καὶ
προῆγεν ἐπὶ Βαβυλῶνος, ἀεὶ δὲ κατὰ τὰς στρατοπεδείας
διαλείπων καὶ τὴν δύναμιν ἀναλαμβάνων
2ἡσυχῇ προῆγεν. ἀπέχοντος δὲ αὐτοῦ τριακοσίους
σταδίους τῆς Βαβυλῶνος οἱ Χαλδαῖοι καλούμενοι,
μεγίστην μὲν δόξαν ἐν ἀστρολογίᾳ περιπεποιημένοι,
διὰ δέ τινος αἰωνίου παρατηρήσεως προλέγειν
εἰωθότες τὰ μέλλοντα, προεχειρίσαντο μὲν ἐξ
ἑαυτῶν τοὺς πρεσβυτάτους καὶ μεγίστην ἐμπειρίαν
ἔχοντας, διὰ δὲ τῆς τῶν ἀστέρων μαντείας γνόντες
τὴν μέλλουσαν γίνεσθαι τοῦ βασιλέως τελευτὴν ἐν
Βαβυλῶνι προσέταξαν μηνῦσαι τῷ βασιλεῖ τὸν κίνδυνον
καὶ παρακελεύσασθαι3 μηδενὶ τρόπῳ τὴν
3εἰς τὴν πόλιν εἴσοδον ποιήσασθαι· δύνασθαι δὲ
αὐτὸν ἐκφυγεῖν τὸν κίνδυνον, ἐὰν ἀναστήσῃ τὸν
καθῃρημένον ὑπὸ Περσῶν τοῦ Βήλου τάφον καὶ τὴν
βεβουλευμένην ὁδὸν ἐπιστήσας παρέλθῃ τὴν πόλιν.
Τῶν δὲ ἀποσταλέντων Χαλδαίων ὁ προκριθείς,
ὄνομα Βελεφάντης, τῷ μὲν βασιλεῖ συνελθεῖν εἰς
λόγους οὐκ ἐτόλμησε διὰ τὸν φόβον, Νεάρχῳ δ᾿


1The abrupt ending of this paragraph, where we should
expect at least the length of Alexander’s stay, and the asyndetical
beginning of chap. 112 coincide with the intrusion
of an unwanted dating formula to indicate a lacuna in the
archetype.2The manuscripts begin this chapter with the words Ἐπ᾿
ἄρχοντος δ᾿ Ἀθήνησι . . . ἐν Ῥώμῃ κατεστάθησαν ὕπατοι Λεύκιος
Κορνήλιος Λέντλος καὶ Κόιντος Ποπίλλιος. ἐπὶ δὲ τούτων. Τhe archon’s name is missing and the consuls are repeated from chap. 110.3The manuscripts have παρασκευάσασθαι, which was corrected by Dindorf.448Book XVII

conquered this people. He founded strong cities at 325/4 b.c. strategic points and rested his army.
112. After the conclusion of his war with the Cossaeans, Alexander set his army in motion and marched towards Babylon in easy stages, interrupting the march frequently and resting the army.1 While he was still three hundred furlongs from the city, the scholars called Chaldaeans, who have gained a great reputation in astrology and are accustomed to predict future events by a method based on age-long observations, chose from their number the eldest and most experienced. By the configuration of the stars they had learned of the coming death of the king in Babylon, and they instructed their representatives to report to the king the danger which threatened. They told their envoys also to urge upon the king that he must under no circumstances make his entry into the city; that he could escape the danger if he re-erected the tomb of Belus which had been demolished by the Persians,2 but he must abandon his intended route and pass the city by.
The leader of the Chaldaean envoys, whose name was Belephantes,3 was not bold enough to address the king directly but secured a private audience with






1Justin, 12. 13. 3–5; Plutarch, Alexander, 73. 1–2; Arrian,
7. 16. 5–18. 6.2Arrian (7. 17. 1–4) makes the reverse statement, that the priests wanted to keep the revenues of the temple of Bel to themselves.3The name is not otherwise reported.449