Diodorus of Sicily

μὲν Ῥόδον πολιορκῶν, ἐπὶ ταῖς κατὰ θάλατταν
προσβολαῖς ἀποτυγχάνων, ἀπὸ τῆς γῆς διέγνω τὰς
2ἐπιθέσεις ποιεῖσθαι. παρασκευασάμενος οὖν ὕλης
παντοίας πλῆθος κατεσκεύασε μηχανὴν τὴν καλουμένην
ἑλέπολιν, ὑπεραίρουσαν πολὺ τῷ μεγέθει τῶν
πρὸ αὐτῆς γενομένων. ἐσχαρίου γὰρ ὄντος τετραγώνου
τὴν μὲν πλευρὰν ἑκάστην ὑπεστήσατο πηχῶν
σχεδὸν πεντήκοντα, συμπεπηγυῖαν ἐκ τετραγώνων
ξύλων σιδήρῳ δεδεμένων· τὴν δὲ ἀνὰ μέσον χώραν
διέλαβε δοκοῖς ἀλλήλων ἀπεχούσαις ὡσανεὶ πῆχυν,
ὅπως παράστασις ᾖ τοῖς προωθεῖν1 τὴν μηχανὴν
3μέλλουσιν. τὸ δὲ πᾶν βάρος ἦν ὑπότροχον, στερεοῖς
καὶ μεγάλοις ὀκτὼ τροχοῖς ὑπειλημμένον· τὰ γὰρ
πάχη τῶν ἀψίδων ὑπῆρχε πηχῶν δυεῖν, σεσιδηρωμένα
λεπίσιν ἰσχυραῖς. πρὸς δὲ τὴν ἐκ πλαγίας
μετάθεσιν2 ἦσαν ἀντίστρεπτα πεπραγματευμένα, δι᾿
ὧν ἡ πᾶσα μηχανὴ ῥᾳδίως παντοίαν ὑπελάμβανε
4κίνησιν. ἐκ δὲ τῶν γωνιῶν ὑπῆρχον κίονες ἴσοι
τῷ μήκει, βραχὺ λείποντες τῶν ἑκατὸν πηχῶν,
οὕτως συννενευκότες εἰς ἀλλήλους ὡς τοῦ παντὸς
κατασκευάσματος ὄντος ἐννεαστέγου τὴν μὲν πρώτην
στέγην ὑπάρχειν ἀκαινῶν3 τεσσαράκοντα τριῶν,







1προωθεῖν Reiske: παρωθεῖν.2τὴν ἐκ πλαγίας μετάθεσιν Reiske: ταῖς ἐκ πλαγίας μεταθέσεσιν
RX, ταῖς πλαγίαις μεταθέσεσιν F.3ἀκαινῶν Fischer: κλινῶν.382Book XX

these held office, Demetrius,1 who was besieging 304 b.c. Rhodes, failing in his assaults by sea, decided to make his attacks by land. Having provided therefore a large quantity of material of all kinds, he built an engine called the helepolis,2 which far surpassed in size those which had been constructed before it. Each side of the square platform he made almost fifty cubits in length,3 framed together from squared timber and fastened with iron; the space within he divided by bars set about a cubit4 from each other so that there might be standing space for those who were to push the machine forward. The whole structure was movable, mounted on eight great solid wheels; the width of their rims was two cubits and these were overlaid with heavy iron plates. To permit motion to the side, pivots had been constructed,5 by means of which the whole device was easily moved in any direction. From each corner there extended upward beams equal in length and little short of a hundred cubits long, inclining toward each other in such a way that, the whole structure being nine storeys high, the first storey had an area of forty-three hundred square feet and the topmost



1Continued from chap. 88. For the siege of Rhodes cp.
Plutarch, Demetrius, 21–22.2Literally, “taker of cities.” Cp. the helepolis described
in chap. 48. 2. According to Vitruvius, 10. 16. 4, this helepolis
was built by Epimachus of Athens. Cp. Plutarch,
Demetrius, 21. 1, and Athenaeus in Wescher, Poliorcétique,
pp. 27 ff.3About 75 feet. Tarn (Hellenistic Military and Naval Developments, pp. 15–16) suggests that there was a shorter Macedonian cubit of about 13 inches. This would reduce all the figures given in the notes by about 30 per cent, which seems probable in most cases, but impossible in the spacing of the crossbeams, see next note.4About 18 inches. Probably these crossbars or beams were below the platform, which would protect the men who stood on the ground and moved the tower by pushing on the bars. It is possible, however, that the “platform” was simply an open frame of cross timbers, between which the men stood.5i.e. the axles were connected to the frame by vertical pivots, castor fashion.383