Diodorus of Sicily

βουλῇ διαλεχθεὶς ἐν ἀπορρήτοις πεντήκοντα μὲν
ἔλαβε τάλαντα πρὸς τὴν μισθοδοσίαν, ὅπλων δὲ
πλῆθος ἱκανὸν εἰς1 τὰς κατεπειγούσας χρείας, πρὸς
δὲ Αἰτωλοὺς ἀλλοτρίως ἔχοντας πρὸς τὸν βασιλέα
περὶ συμμαχίας διεπρεσβεύσατο καὶ πάντα τὰ πρὸς
τὸν πόλεμον παρεσκευάζετο.
4Λεωσθένης μὲν οὖν προορώμενος τὸ μέγεθος τοῦ
πολέμου περὶ ταῦτα διέτριβεν. ὁ δ᾿ Ἀλέξανδρος
τῶν Κοσσαίων ἀπειθούντων ἐστράτευσεν ἐπ᾿ αὐτοὺς
εὐζώνῳ τῇ δυνάμει. τοῦτο δὲ τὸ ἔθνος ἀλκῇ διαφέρον
κατοικεῖ μὲν τῆς Μηδείας τὴν ὀρεινήν, πεποιθὸς
δὲ τῇ τῶν τόπων δυσχωρίᾳ καὶ ταῖς κατὰ
πόλεμον ἀρεταῖς οὐδέποτε δεσπότην ἔπηλυν προσεδέδεκτο,
ἀλλὰ καὶ κατὰ τὴν Περσῶν βασιλείαν
διέμεινεν ἀνάλωτον καὶ τότε πεφρονηματισμένον
5οὐ κατεπλάγη τὴν τῶν Μακεδόνων ἀρετήν. ὁ δὲ
βασιλεὺς προκαταλαβόμενος τὰς παρόδους καὶ τῆς
Κοσσαίας τὴν πλείστην πορθήσας καὶ κατὰ πάσας
τὰς συμπλοκὰς προτερῶν πολλοὺς μὲν ἀπέκτεινε
τῶν βαρβάρων, πολλαπλασίους δ᾿ ἐζώγρησεν.
Οἱ δὲ Κοσσαῖοι πάντῃ νικώμενοι καὶ διὰ τὸ
πλῆθος τῶν ἑαλωκότων χαλεπῶς φέροντες ἠναγκάσθησαν
τῆς τῶν αἰχμαλώτων σωτηρίας τὴν δουλείαν
6ἀλλάξασθαι. διὸ καὶ τὰ καθ᾿ αὑτοὺς ἐπιτρέψαντες
ἐτύγχανον εἰρήνης σὺν τῷ ποιεῖν τὸ προσταττόμενον
τῷ βασιλεῖ. ὁ δὲ Ἀλέξανδρος2 ἐν3 ἡμέραις ταῖς
πάσαις τεσσαράκοντα καταπολεμήσας τὸ ἔθνος καὶ


1πρὸς RX.2βασιλεὺς F.3ἐν omitted by F.446Book XVII

He conferred secretly with the council at Athens and 325/4 b.c. was granted fifty talents to pay the troops and a stock of weapons sufficient to meet pressing needs. He sent off an embassy to the Aetolians, who were unfriendly to the king, looking to the establishment of an alliance with them, and otherwise made every preparation for war.
So Leosthenes was occupied with such matters, being in no doubt about the seriousness of the proposed conflict, but Alexander launched a campaign with a mobile force against the Cossaeans, for they would not submit to him.1 This is a people outstanding in valour which occupied the mountains of Media; and relying upon the ruggedness of their country and their ability in war, they had never accepted a foreign master, but had remained unconquered throughout the whole period of the Persian kingdom, and now they were too proudly self-confident to be terrified of the Macedonian arms. The king, nevertheless, seized the routes of access into their country before they were aware of it, laid waste most of Cossaea, was superior in every engagement, and both slew many of the Cossaeans and captured many times more.
So the Cossaeans were utterly defeated, and, distressed at the number of their captives, were constrained to buy their recovery at the price of national submission. They placed themselves in Alexander’s hands and were granted peace on condition that they should do his bidding. In forty days at most, he had



1Plutarch, Alexander, 72. 3; Arrian 7. 15. 1–3. This activity took place in the winter of 324/3 b.c. and was intended to solace Alexander’s grief for the death of Hephaestion.447