Diodorus of Sicily

περιπεποιημένων πλούτους ταχὺ τριήρεις τε
πολλαὶ κατεσκευάσθησαν καὶ μισθοφόρων πλῆθος
ἠθροίσθη, πρὸς δὲ τούτοις ὅπλα καὶ βέλη καὶ σῖτος
καὶ τἄλλα πάντα τὰ πρὸς πόλεμον χρήσιμα συντόμως
5κατεσκευάσθη. κατάρχοντες δὲ τῆς ἔχθρας
τὸν μὲν βασιλικὸν παράδεισον ἐν ᾧ τὰς καταλύσεις
οἱ τῶν Περσῶν βασιλεῖς εἰώθεισαν ποιεῖσθαι, δενδροτομήσαντες
διέφθειραν· ἔπειτα τὸν ἠθροισμένον
ὑπὸ τῶν σατραπῶν εἰς τὸν πόλεμον τοῖς ἵπποις
χόρτον ἐνέπρησαν, τὸ δὲ τελευταῖον τοὺς τὰς ὕβρεις
ἐπιτελεσαμένους Πέρσας συλλαβόντες ἐτιμωρήσαντο.
6τοῦ δὲ πολέμου τοῦ1 πρὸς τοὺς Φοίνικας
ταύτην τὴν καταρχὴν λαβόντος ὁ βασιλεὺς πυθόμενος
τὰ τετολμημένα τοῖς ἀποστάταις πᾶσι μὲν
τοῖς Φοίνιξιν ἠπείλει, μάλιστα δὲ τοῖς Σιδωνίοις.
42. Ἐν δὲ τῇ Βαβυλῶνι συνηθροικὼς τὰς πεζικὰς
καὶ ἱππικὰς δυνάμεις εὐθὺς ἀναλαβὼν προῆγεν
ἐπὶ τοὺς Φοίνικας· ἐν ὅσῳ δ᾿ οὗτος κατὰ τὴν ὁδοιπορίαν
ἐβάδιζε, Βέλεσυς ὁ τῆς Συρίας σατράπης
καὶ Μαζαῖος ὁ τῆς Κιλικίας ἄρχων συνελθόντες
2ἐπολέμουν τοὺς Φοίνικας. Τέννης δ᾿ ὁ τῆς Σιδῶνος
βασιλεὺς προσελάβετο παρ᾿ Αἰγυπτίων στρατιώτας
μισθοφόρους Ἕλληνας τετρακισχιλίους, ὧν ἦν
στρατηγὸς Μέντωρ ὁ Ῥόδιος. μετὰ δὲ τούτων
καὶ τῶν πολιτικῶν στρατιωτῶν τοῖς προειρημένοις
σατράπαις συμβαλὼν ἐνίκησεν καὶ τοὺς πολεμίους
ἐξέβαλεν ἐκ τῆς Φοινίκης.
3Ἅμα δὲ τούτοις πραττομένοις καὶ κατὰ τὴν Κύπρον
συνέστη πόλεμος, συμπεπλεγμένας ἔχων τὰς
4πράξεις τῷ ὑποκειμένῳ πολέμῳ. ἐν γὰρ τῇ νήσῳ
ταύτῃ πόλεις ἦσαν ἀξιόλογοι μὲν ἐννέα, ὑπὸ δὲ
ταύτας ὑπῆρχε τεταγμένα μικρὰ πολίσματα τὰ
1τοῦ added by Hertlein.352Book XVI

had amassed great riches from its shipping, many 351/0 b.c. triremes were quickly outfitted and a multitude of mercenaries gathered, and, besides, arms, missiles, food, and all other materials useful in war were provided with dispatch. The first hostile act was the cutting down and destroying of the royal park in which the Persian Kings were wont to take their recreation; the second was the burning of the fodder for the horses which had been stored up by the satraps for the war; last of all they arrested such Persians as had committed the acts of insolence and wreaked vengeance upon them. Such was the beginning of the war with the Phoenicians, and Artaxerxes, being apprised of the rash acts of the insurgents, issued threatening warnings to all the Phoenicians and in particular to the people of Sidon.
42. In Babylon the King, after assembling his infantry and cavalry forces, immediately assumed command of them and advanced against the Phoenicians. While he was still on the way, Belesys, the satrap of Syria, and Mazaeus, the governor of Cilicia, having joined forces, opened the war against the Phoenicians. Tennes, the king of Sidon, acquired from the Egyptians four thousand Greek mercenary soldiers whose general was Mentor the Rhodian. With these and the citizen soldiery he engaged the aforementioned satraps, defeated them, and drove the enemy out of Phoenicia.
While these things were going on, a war broke out in Cyprus also, the actions in which were interwoven with the war we have just mentioned. For in this island were nine populous cities, and under them were ranged the small towns which were suburbs of the


353