Diodorus of Sicily

χρημάτων. ἀντὶ δὲ τοῦ Λεωσθένους κατεστάθη
στρατηγὸς Ἀντίφιλος, ἀνὴρ συνέσει στρατηγικῇ
καὶ ἀνδρείᾳ διαφέρων.
Καὶ τὰ μὲν κατὰ τὴν Εὐρώπην ἐν τούτοις ἦν.1
14. Κατὰ δὲ τὴν Ἀσίαν τῶν μεμερισμένων τὰς
σατραπείας Πτολεμαῖος μὲν ἀκινδύνως παρέλαβε
τὴν Αἴγυπτον καὶ τοῖς μὲν ἐγχωρίοις φιλανθρώπως
προσεφέρετο, παραλαβὼν δὲ ὀκτακισχίλια τάλαντα
μισθοφόρους ἤθροιζε καὶ δυνάμεις παρεσκευάζετο·
συνέτρεχε δὲ καὶ φίλων πλῆθος πρὸς αὐτὸν διὰ τὴν
2ἐπιείκειαν. πρὸς δὲ Ἀντίπατρον διαπρεσβευόμενος
κοινοπραγίαν συνέθετο, σαφῶς εἰδὼς ὅτι Περδίκκας
ἐπιβαλεῖται παρελέσθαι τὴν τῆς Αἰγύπτου σατραπείαν.
Λυσίμαχος δ᾿ ἐπιβαλὼν τοῖς κατὰ τὴν Θρᾴκην
τόποις καὶ καταλαβὼν Σεύθην τὸν βασιλέα κατεστρατοπεδευκότα
πεζοῖς μὲν δισμυρίοις ἱππεῦσι
δ᾿ ὀκτακισχιλίοις οὐ κατεπλάγη τὸ μέγεθος τῆς
δυνάμεως. ἔχων δὲ τοὺς σύμπαντας πεζοὺς μὲν οὐ
πλείους τῶν τετρακισχιλίων, ἱππεῖς δὲ δισχιλίους
3συνῆψε μάχην τοῖς βαρβάροις. ταῖς μὲν οὖν ἀνδραγαθίαις
προεῖχεν αὐτῶν, τοῖς δὲ πλήθεσι λειπόμενος
καρτερὰν μάχην συνεστήσατο καὶ πολλοὺς
μὲν τῶν ἰδίων ἀποβαλών, πολλαπλασίους δ᾿ ἀποκτείνας
ἐπανῆλθεν εἰς τὴν στρατοπεδείαν ἀμφίδοξον
4ἔχων τὴν νίκην. τότε μὲν οὖν ἐχωρίσθησαν ἐκ
τῶν τόπων αἱ παρ᾿ ἀμφοτέροις δυνάμεις καὶ παρασκευὰς

1Krebs and Kallenberg believe that there is a considerable
lacuna at this point.50Book XVIII

of Harpalus.1 In place of Leosthenes, Antiphilus 323 b.c. was made general, a man outstanding in military genius and courage.
Such was the situation in Europe.2
14. In Asia, of those who had shared in the division of the satrapies, Ptolemy took over Egypt without difficulty and was treating the inhabitants with kindness. Finding eight thousand talents in the treasury, he began to collect mercenaries and to form an army. A multitude of friends also gathered about him on account of his fairness. With Antipater he carried on a diplomatic correspondence that led to a treaty of co-operation, since he well knew that Perdiccas would attempt to wrest from him the satrapy of Egypt.3
Lysimachus, when he entered the Thracian region and found that the king of that country, Seuthes, had taken the field with twenty thousand infantry and eight thousand cavalry, was not frightened by the size of the army.4 And although he had in all no more than four thousand foot soldiers and only two thousand horsemen, he joined battle with the barbarians. In truth he was superior to them in the quality of his troops though inferior in numbers, and the battle was a stubborn one. After losing many of his own men but killing many times that number, he returned to his camp with but a doubtful claim to victory. Therefore for the moment the forces of both sides withdrew from the locality and busied




1According to A. Schäfer (Demosthenes und seine Zeit2 (Leipzig, 1885), 3. 341), Demosthenes had returned to Athens before this time. Cp. Plutarch, Demosthenes, 27. 4–5.2The account is continued in chap. 15. 1.3Cp. chap. 29. 1.4Cp. Arrian, FGrH, 156. 1. 10.51