Diodorus of Sicily

πρέσβεων δεῦρο κἀκεῖσε πολλὰ διαλεχθέντων πέρας
οὐ δυναμένων συμφωνῆσαι πάλιν ἐνηργεῖτο τὰ τῆς
πολιορκίας. καὶ Δημήτριος μὲν κατέβαλε τὸν
στερεώτατον τῶν πύργων, ᾠκοδομημένον ἐκ λίθων
τετραπέδων, καὶ μεσοπύργιον ὅλον διέσεισεν, ὥστε
μὴ δύνασθαι τοὺς ἐν τῇ πόλει πάροδον ἔχειν ἐπὶ
τὰς ἐπάλξεις κατὰ τοῦτον τὸν τόπον.
96.Ἐν δὲ ταῖς αὐταῖς ἡμέραις Πτολεμαῖος ὁ
βασιλεὺς ἀπέστειλε τοῖς Ῥοδίοις πλοίων πλῆθος
τῶν τὴν ἀγορὰν κομιζόντων, ἐν οἷς ἦσαν σίτου
τριάκοντα μυριάδες ἀρταβῶν σὺν τοῖς ὀσπρίοις.
2προσφερομένων δ᾿ αὐτῶν πρὸς τὴν πόλιν ἐπεχείρησε
Δημήτριος ἀποστέλλειν σκάφη τὰ κατάξοντα πρὸς
τὴν αὑτοῦ στρατοπεδείαν. φοροῦ δὲ πνεύματος
αὐτοῖς ἐπιγενομένου ταῦτα μὲν πλήρεσι τοῖς ἱστίοις
φερόμενα κατηνέχθη πρὸς τοὺς οἰκείους λιμένας, οἱ
δ᾿ ὑπὸ Δημητρίου πεμφθέντες ἐπανῆλθον ἄπρακτοι.
3ἔπεμψε δὲ τοῖς Ῥοδίοις καὶ Κάσανδρος κριθῶν
μεδίμνους μυρίους καὶ Λυσίμαχος πυρῶν μεδίμνους
τετρακισμυρίους καὶ κριθῶν τοὺς ἴσους. τηλικαύτης
οὖν χορηγίας τοῖς κατὰ τὴν πόλιν γενομένης
ἤδη κάμνοντες ταῖς ψυχαῖς οἱ πολιορκούμενοι πάλιν
ἀνεθάρρησαν καὶ κρίναντες συμφέρειν ἐπιθέσθαι ταῖς
μηχαναῖς τῶν πολεμίων πυρφόρων τε πλῆθος παρεσκευάσαντο
καὶ τοὺς πετροβόλους καὶ τοὺς ὀξυβελεῖς
4ἔστησαν ἅπαντας ἐπὶ τοῦ τείχους. νυκτὸς
δ᾿ ἐπιγενομένης περὶ δευτέραν φυλακὴν ἄφνω τοῖς
μὲν πυρφόροις συνεχῶς τὴν ἑλέπολιν ἔβαλλον,1 τοῖς
δ᾿ ἄλλοις βέλεσι παντοίοις χρώμενοι τοὺς ἐκεῖ



1τὴν ἑλέπολιν ἔβαλλον Reiske: τὴν φυλακὴν ἔβαλον.396Book XX

negotiations back and forth at great length; but in 304 b.c. the end they were not able to reach any agreement, and the siege was actively resumed. Demetrius also overthrew the strongest of the towers, which was built of squared stones, and shattered the entire curtain, so that the forces in the city were not able to maintain a thoroughfare on the battlements at this point.
96. At this same period King Ptolemy dispatched to the Rhodians a large number of supply ships in which were three hundred thousand measures1 of grain and legumes. While these ships were on their way to the city, Demetrius attempted to dispatch ships to bring them to his own camp. But a wind favourable to the Egyptians sprang up, and they were carried along with full sails and brought into the friendly harbours, but those sent out by Demetrius returned with their mission unaccomplished. Cassander also sent to the Rhodians ten thousand measures of barley, and Lysimachus sent them forty thousand measures of wheat and the same amount of barley. Consequently, when those in the city obtained such large supplies, the besieged, who were already disheartened, regained their courage. Deciding that it would be advantageous to attack the siege engines of the enemy, they made ready a large supply of fire-bearing missiles and placed all their ballistae and catapults upon the wall. When night had fallen, at about the second watch, they suddenly began to strike the helepolis with an unremitting shower of the fire missiles, and by using other missiles of all kinds, they shot down any who rushed to the

1This Egyptian measure, like the Greek medimnus (the measure referred to below), was somewhat more than a bushel.397