Diodorus of Sicily

οὐδὲ τὰς ἀνθρωπίνας ἐλπίδας ἐξελέγξας τῇ
πείρᾳ τηλικαύτην ἀρχὴν ἔκδοτον ἐποίει ταύταις1 ταῖς
ὁμολογίαις. ταύτας δ᾿ ἀσυντελέστους συνέβη γενέσθαι
τῇ μὲν Ἀγαθοκλέους προαιρέσει κυρωθείσας,
διὰ δὲ τὴν Δεινοκράτους πλεονεξίαν μὴ προσδεχθείσας.
2οὗτος γὰρ μοναρχίας ὢν ἐπιθυμητὴς τῆς μὲν
ἐν ταῖς Συρακούσσαις δημοκρατίας ἀλλότριος ἦν, τῇ
δὲ ἡγεμονίᾳ τῇ τότε οὔσῃ περὶ αὐτὸν εὐαρεστεῖτο·
ἀφηγεῖτο γὰρ πεζῶν μὲν πλειόνων ἢ δισμυρίων,
ἱππέων δὲ τρισχιλίων, πόλεων δὲ πολλῶν καὶ
μεγάλων, ὥστε αὐτὸν μὲν καλεῖσθαι τῶν φυγάδων
στρατηγόν, τῇ δ᾿ ἀληθείᾳ βασιλικὴν ἔχειν ὑπεροχήν,
3τῆς ἐξουσίας οὔσης περὶ αὐτὸν αὐτοκράτορος. εἰ
κατέλθοι δ᾿ εἰς τὰς Συρακούσσας, πάντως ἀναγκαῖον
ἂν ἦν ἰδιώτην ὑπάρχειν καὶ ἕνα τῶν πολλῶν
ἀριθμεῖσθαι, τῆς αὐτονομίας ἀγαπώσης τὴν ἰσότητα,
ἔν τε ταῖς χειροτονίαις ὑπὸ τοῦ τυχόντος
δημαγωγοῦ παρευημερεῖσθαι, τοῦ πλήθους ἀντικειμένου
ταῖς ὑπεροχαῖς τῶν ἀνδρῶν τῶν ἀγόντων
παρρησίαν. διόπερ Ἀγαθοκλῆς μὲν δικαίως ἂν
λέγοιτο λελοιπέναι τὴν τῆς τυραννίδος τάξιν, Δεινοκράτης
δ᾿ αἴτιος εἶναι νομίζοιτο τῶν ὕστερον τῷ
4δυνάστῃ κατορθωθέντων. οὗτος γάρ, συνεχῶς
Ἀγαθοκλέους διαπρεσβευομένου περὶ τῶν ὁμολογιῶν
καὶ δεομένου συγχωρῆσαι τὰ δύο φρούρια
πρὸς καταβίωσιν, ἀεὶ προφάσεις εὐλόγους κατεσκεύαζε
δι᾿ ὧν διέκοπτε τὰς ἐλπίδας τῶν ὁμολογιῶν,
ποτὲ μὲν ἀποφαινόμενος ἐκ Σικελίας αὐτὸν
ἀπαλλάττεσθαι, ποτὲ δὲ τὰ τέκνα πρὸς ὁμηρίαν
5αἰτῶν. ὁ δ᾿ Ἀγαθοκλῆς γνοὺς αὐτοῦ τὴν ἐπίνοιαν
πρὸς μὲν τοὺς φυγάδας διεπέμπετο κατηγορῶν τοῦ

1ἐποίει ταύταις Post, ἐποιεῖτο Dindorf: πεποίηται.350Book XX

consideration and failing to test his mortal hopes by 306 b.c. experience, was on the point of abandoning his empire, great as it was, on these terms. But as it happened, the treaty never went into effect, ratified indeed by the policy of Agathocles, but not accepted because of the ambition of Deinocrates. The latter, having set his heart upon sole rule, was hostile to the democracy in Syracuse and was well pleased with the position of leadership that he himself then had; for he commanded more than twenty thousand foot soldiers, three thousand horsemen, and many great cities, so that, although he was called general of the exiles, he really possessed the authority of a king, his power being absolute. But if he should return to Syracuse, it would inevitably be his lot to be a private citizen and be numbered as one of the many, since independence loves equality; and in the elections he might be defeated by any chance demagogue, since the crowd is opposed to the supremacy of men who are outspoken. Thus Agathocles might justly be said to have deserted his post as tyrant, and Deinocrates might be regarded as responsible for the later successes of the dynast. For Deinocrates, when Agathocles kept sending embassies to discuss the terms of peace and begging him to grant the two fortresses in which he might end his days, always trumped up specious excuses by which he cut off any hope of a treaty, now insisting that Agathocles should leave Sicily, and now demanding his children as hostages. When Agathocles discovered his purpose, he sent to the exiles and accused Deinocrates
351