Diodorus of Sicily

ἐκπεφευγὼς κινδύνους καὶ πρὸς ποταμὸν
ὁμοίως Ἀχιλλεῖ διαγωνισάμενος.
98. Μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα στρατεύσας ἐπὶ Συδράκας1
καὶ τοὺς ὀνομαζομένους Μαλλούς, ἔθνη πολυάνθρωπα
καὶ μάχιμα, κατέλαβε τοὺς ἐγχωρίους ἠθροικότας
πεζοὺς μὲν πλείους τῶν ὀκτακισμυρίων,
ἱππεῖς δὲ μυρίους, ἅρματα δ᾿ ἑπτακόσια. οὗτοι
πρὸ μὲν τῆς Ἀλεξάνδρου παρουσίας ἐπολέμουν
ἀλλήλοις, ὡς δ᾿ ὁ βασιλεὺς ἤγγισε τῇ χώρᾳ, συνεφρόνησαν
καὶ μυρίας παρθένους δόντες καὶ λαβόντες
2διὰ τῆς ἐπιγαμίας ταύτης διηλλάγησαν. οὐ
μὴν συγκατέβησαν εἰς παράταξιν, ἀλλὰ πάλιν
στασιάσαντες ὑπὲρ τῆς ἡγεμονίας εἰς τὰς σύνεγγυς
πόλεις ἀπεχώρησαν.
Ὁ δ᾿ Ἀλέξανδρος τῇ πρώτῃ πόλει πλησιάσας
3ἐξ ἐφόδου διενοεῖτο πολιορκεῖν ταύτην. ἔνθα δὴ
τῶν τερατοσκόπων τις Δημοφῶν ὄνομα προσελθὼν
αὐτῷ διά τινων οἰωνῶν ἔφη προδηλοῦσθαι τῷ βασιλεῖ
μέγαν κίνδυνον ἐκ τραύματος ἐσόμενον ἐν τῇ
πολιορκίᾳ. διόπερ ἠξίου τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον ἀφεῖναι
μὲν ταύτην τὴν πόλιν ἐπὶ τοῦ παρόντος, ἐφ᾿ ἑτέρας
4δὲ πράξεις ἐπιβάλλειν τὸν νοῦν. ὁ δὲ βασιλεὺς
τούτῳ μὲν ἐπέπληξεν ὡς ἐμποδίζοντι2 τὴν ἀρετὴν
τῶν ἀγωνιζομένων, αὐτὸς δὲ διατάξας τὰ περὶ τὴν
πολιορκίαν πρῶτος ἡγεῖτο πρὸς τὴν πόλιν, φιλοτιμούμενος
αὐτὴν διὰ τῆς βίας χειρώσασθαι. τῶν
δὲ μηχανικῶν ὀργάνων ὑστερούντων πρῶτος διακόψας




1Συρακούσας codd.; corrected by Fischer. Cp. Curtius,
9. 4. 15.2ἐμποδὼν γινομένῳ πρὸς F.400Book XVII

danger, reflecting that he, like Achilles, had done 326/5 b.c. battle with a river.1
98. Next Alexander undertook a campaign against the Sydracae2 and the people known as Mallians, populous and warlike tribes. He found them mobilized in force, eighty thousand infantry, ten thousand cavalry, and seven hundred chariots. Before the arrival of Alexander they had been at war with each other; but as he approached, they patched up their quarrel and made peace, giving and receiving ten thousand young women to establish a friendly relationship through marriage.3 Even so they did not come out to fight together but fell into a dispute over the command and retired into the neighbouring cities.
Alexander neared the first city and thought to take it by storm, but one of the seers, named Demophon,4 came to him and reported that there had been revealed to him by numerous portents a great danger which would come to the king from a wound in the course of the operation. He begged Alexander to leave that city alone for the present and to turn his mind to other activities. The king scolded him for dampening the enthusiasm of the soldiers, and then, disposing his army for the attack, led the way in person to the city, eager to reduce it by force. The engines of war were slow to come up, but he broke open




1Iliad, 21. 228–382. Cp. Curtius, 9. 4. 14: “cum amne
bellum fuisse crederes”; Plutarch, De Fortuna aut Virtute Alexandri, 2. 9. 340 e: θαλάτταν μαχομένην ἔπλευσε Curtius, like Arrian (6. 5. 1–4), says that Alexander was not wrecked.2This name appears variously as “Sydracae” (Strabo, 15. 1. 8. 687), “Sudracae” (Curtius, 9. 4. 15), “Sugambri” (Justin, 12. 9. 3), and “Oxydracae” (Arrian, 6. 4. 3). Their strength is given by Curtius as 90,000 infantry, 10,000 cavalry, and 900 chariots; by Justin as 80,000 infantry and 60,000 cavalry. The ethnic Sydracae recalls the name of the Hindu warrior caste, the Kshatriyas (so L. A. Post).3Curtius, 9. 4. 15.4Curtius, 9. 4. 27–29.401