Diodorus of Sicily

τῷ1 κατεσκευασμένῳ τείχει. εὑρὼν δὲ τοὺς
φύλακας διὰ τὴν καταφρόνησιν καὶ μέθην εἰς ὕπνον
τετραμμένους προσέθηκε τὰς παρεσκευασμένας κλίμακας
2πρὸς τὴν χρείαν. διὰ δὲ τούτων οἱ κράτιστοι
τῶν μισθοφόρων ἀνέβησαν ἐπὶ τὸ τεῖχος καὶ τοὺς
φύλακας φονεύσαντες ἀνέῳξαν τὰς πύλας. εἰσπεσόντων
δὲ τῶν στρατιωτῶν εἰς τὴν πόλιν οἱ μὲν
στρατηγοὶ τῶν Συρακοσίων ἐκ τῆς μέθης ἀνανήφοντες2
ἐπειρῶντο βοηθεῖν, ἐμποδιζόμενοι δὲ τὰς
ὁρμὰς3 διὰ τὸν οἶνον οἱ μὲν ἀνῃρέθησαν, οἱ δ᾿ ἔφυγον.
κατειλημμένης δὲ τῆς πόλεως καὶ τῶν ἐκ τῆς
ἀκροπόλεως στρατιωτῶν σχεδὸν ἁπάντων εἰσπεσόντων
ἐντὸς τοῦ περιτειχίσματος, τῶν δὲ Συρακοσίων
διὰ τὸ παράδοξον καὶ τὴν ἀταξίαν ἐκπεπληγμένων
3πολὺς ἐγίνετο φόνος. τῶν δὲ τοῦ τυράννου στρατιωτῶν
πλειόνων ἢ μυρίων ὄντων καὶ συντεταγμένων
καλῶς οὐδεὶς τὸ βάρος αὐτῶν ὑπομεῖναι
δυνατὸς ἦν, ἅτε τοῦ θορύβου καὶ τῆς ταραχῆς,
ἔτι δὲ ἀναρχίας τοὺς ἐλαττουμένους ἐμποδιζούσης.
4κρατηθείσης δὲ τῆς ἀγορᾶς ὑπὸ τῶν πολεμίων,
εὐθὺς ἐπὶ τὰς οἰκίας οἱ νενικηκότες ὥρμησαν· καὶ
πολλὰ μὲν χρήματα διεφορεῖτο, οὐκ ὀλίγα δὲ σώματα
γυναικῶν καὶ παίδων, ἔτι δ᾿ οἰκετῶν ἐξηνδραποδίζετο.
κατὰ δὲ τοὺς στενωποὺς καὶ τὰς ἄλλας
ὁδοὺς ἀντιταττομένων Συρακοσίων ἐγίνοντο συνεχεῖς
συμπλοκαὶ καὶ πολλοὶ μὲν ἀπέθνησκον οὐκ
ὀλίγοι δὲ τραύμασι περιέπιπτον. τὴν μὲν οὖν
νύκτα διετέλεσαν ἀλλήλους ἀναιροῦντες ὡς ἔτυχε
διὰ τὸ σκότος καὶ πᾶς τόπος νεκρῶν ἔγεμεν.
1Fischer would supply προσφάτως after τῷ (cp. chap. 13. 2).2So Madvig (cp. chap. 93. 8): μεθύοντες.3So Fischer (cp. Book 5. 3. 2): ταῖς ὁρμαῖς.290Book XVI

night unexpectedly attacked the wall which had been 356/5 b.c. constructed. And, finding that the guards through contempt and drunkenness had betaken themselves to sleep, he placed against it the ladders that had been constructed in case they were needed. The bravest of the mercenaries climbed on the wall with these, slaughtered the guards, and opened the gates. As the men poured into the city, the generals of the Syracusans, becoming sober after their drunkenness, tried to bring aid, but, their efforts being hampered by the wine, some were slain and some fled. When the city had been captured and almost all the soldiers from the citadel had rushed inside the circuit-walls, since the Syracusans were panic-stricken by the suddenness and confusion of the attack, a great slaughter took place. The soldiers of the tyrant numbered more than ten thousand and their lines were so well marshalled that no one was able to withstand their sheer weight, inasmuch as the din and disorder and, furthermore, the lack of a commander, impeded the Syracusans in their hour of defeat. Once the market-place had come into possession of the enemy, the victors straightway attacked the residences. They carried off much property and took off as slaves many women and children and household servants besides. Where the Syracusans formed to meet them in narrow alleys and other streets, continuous engagements occurred and many were killed and not a few wounded. So they passed the night slaying one another at random in the darkness, and every quarter teemed with dead.
291