Diodorus of Sicily

ἀναγκάζων τὴν αὐτὴν ἀναδέχεσθαι συμφορὰν πανδημεὶ
τῶν πόλεων θάνατον κατεγίνωσκεν.
9Ἀλλὰ γὰρ τῆς βύβλου ταύτης σὺν τοῖς ἄλλοις
περιεχούσης καὶ τὴν τυραννίδα τὴν Ἀγαθοκλέους
ἀφιέμενοι τὸ περὶ αὐτῆς προλέγειν τὰ συνεχῆ τοῖς
προειρημένοις προσθήσομεν, παραθέντες πρότερον
10τοὺς οἰκείους τῇ γραφῇ χρόνους. ἐν μὲν οὖν ταῖς
προειρημέναις ὀκτωκαίδεκα βίβλοις ἀνεγράψαμεν
τὰς ἀπὸ τῶν ἀρχαιοτάτων χρόνων πράξεις τὰς
γεγενημένας ἐν τοῖς γνωριζομένοις μέρεσι τῆς
οἰκουμένης, ἐφ᾿ ὅσον ἡμῖν δύναμις, ἄχρι πρὸς τὸν
ἐνιαυτὸν τὸν πρὸ τῆς Ἀγαθοκλέους τυραννίδος, εἰς
ὃν ἀπὸ Τροίας ἁλώσεως ἔτη συνάγεται ὀκτακόσια
ἑξήκοντα ἕξ· ἐν δὲ ταύτῃ τὴν ἀρχὴν ἀπὸ τῆς δυναστείας
ταύτης ποιησάμενοι καταλήξομεν εἰς τὴν
ἐφ᾿ Ἱμέρᾳ μάχην Ἀγαθοκλεῖ πρὸς Καρχηδονίους,
περιλαβόντες ἔτη ἑπτά.
2. Ἐπ᾿ ἄρχοντος γὰρ Ἀθήνησι Δημογένους Ῥωμαῖοι
μὲν κατέστησαν ὑπάτους Λεύκιον Πλώτιον
καὶ Μάνιον Φούλβιον, Ἀγαθοκλῆς δ᾿ ὁ Συρακόσιος
τύραννος ἐγένετο τῆς πόλεως. ἕνεκα δὲ τοῦ σαφεστέρας
γενέσθαι τὰς κατὰ μέρος πράξεις βραχέα
προαναληψόμεθα1 περὶ τοῦ προειρημένου δυνάστου.
2Καρκῖνος ὁ Ῥηγῖνος φυγὰς γενόμενος ἐκ τῆς
πατρίδος κατῴκησεν ἐν Θέρμοις τῆς Σικελίας,
τεταγμένης τῆς πόλεως ταύτης ὑπὸ Καρχηδονίους.
ἐμπλακεὶς δὲ τῶν ἐγχωρίων τινὶ γυναικὶ καὶ ποιήσας
αὐτὴν ἔγκυον συνεχῶς κατὰ τοὺς ὕπνους



1προαναληψόμεθα Dindorf: προσαναληψόμεθα.228Book XIX

who had done no evil at all, to suffer the same fate, 317 b.c. condemning to death the entire population of cities.
But since this Book embraces all other events as well as the tyranny of Agathocles, we shall forgo preliminary statements about it and set forth the events that follow those already related, stating first the time covered by the account. In the preceding eighteen Books we have described to the best of our ability the events that have occurred in the known parts of the inhabited world from the earliest times down to the year before the tyranny of Agathocles, up to which time the years from the destruction of Troy are eight hundred and sixty-six; in this Book, beginning with that dynasty, we shall include events up to the battle at Himera between Agathocles and the Carthaginians, embracing a period of seven years.
2. When Demogenes was archon in Athens, the Romans elected to the consulship Lucius Plotius and Manius Fulvius,1 and Agathocles of Syracuse became tyrant of his city. In order to make clearer the series of events, we shall briefly take up the life of that dynast at an earlier point.
Carcinus of Rhegium, an exile from his native city, settled in Therma in Sicily, a city that had been brought under the rule of the Carthaginians.2 Having formed a union with a native woman and made her pregnant, he was constantly troubled in his sleep.

1Demogenes was archon in 317/16. Livy (9. 20. 1) gives
as consuls for 318 M. Folius Flaccina and L. Plautius Venox.
Plotius is the plebeian form of Plautius.2Therma (called Thermae in Book 23. 9. 4, 20; both names seem to have been in use), the modern Termini, was founded as a Carthaginian colony in 407 (Book 13. 79. 8), but many of its settlers were Greeks from the near-by city of Himera, which had been razed two years before (Cicero, Against Verves, 2. 2. 35. 86). By 397 it was free from Carthage (Book 14. 47. 6). How it again fell into Carthaginian control is not known.229