Diodorus of Sicily

ψευδέσι διαβολαῖς φυγάδων πεισθεὶς ἢ καὶ χρημάτων
βουλόμενος εὐπορῆσαι, καὶ1 ἀπέσφαξε τῶν
Γελῴων πλείους τῶν τετρακισχιλίων καὶ τὰς οὐσίας
αὐτῶν ἀνέλαβε. προσέταξε δὲ καὶ τοῖς
ἄλλοις Γελῴοις πᾶσι τά τε νομίσματα καὶ τὸν
ἄσημον ἄργυρόν τε καὶ χρυσὸν ἀνενεγκεῖν, διαπειλησάμενος
5τιμωρήσασθαι τοὺς ἀπειθήσαντας. ταχὺ
δὲ πάντων πραξάντων τὸ προσταχθὲν διὰ τὸν φόβον
χρημάτων τε πλῆθος ἤθροισε καὶ πᾶσι τοῖς ταττομένοις
ὑφ᾿ ἑαυτὸν δεινὴν ἐνεποίησε κατάπληξιν.
δόξας δ᾿ ὠμότερον κεχρῆσθαι τοῦ καθήκοντος τοῖς
Γελῴοις τοὺς μὲν ἀποσφαγέντας εἰς τὰς ἐκτὸς τῶν
τειχῶν τάφρους συνέχωσεν, ἐν δὲ τῇ πόλει τὴν
ἱκανὴν φρουρὰν ἀπολιπὼν ἀντεστρατοπέδευσε τοῖς
πολεμίοις.
108. Κατεῖχον δὲ Καρχηδόνιοι μὲν τὸν Ἔκνομον
λόφον, ὅν φασι φρούριον γεγενῆσθαι Φαλάριδος.
ἐν τούτῳ δὲ λέγεται κατεσκευακέναι τὸν
τύραννον ταῦρον χαλκοῦν τὸν διαβεβοημένον, πρὸς
τὰς τῶν βεβασανισμένων τιμωρίας ὑποκαιομένου
τοῦ κατασκευάσματος· διὸ καὶ τὸν τόπον Ἔκνομον
ἀπὸ τῆς εἰς τοὺς ἀτυχοῦντας ἀσεβείας προσηγορεῦσθαι.
2ἐκ δὲ θατέρου μέρους Ἀγαθοκλῆς ἕτερον
τῶν Φαλάριδος γεγενημένων φρουρίων κατεῖχε, τὸ
προσαγορευθὲν ἀπ᾿ ἐκείνου Φαλάριον. καὶ διὰ
μέσων μὲν τῶν παρεμβολῶν ἦν ποταμός, ὃν ἀμφότεροι
πρόβλημα τῶν πολεμίων ἐπεποίηντο, φῆμαι
δὲ κατεῖχον ἀπὸ2 τῶν προτέρων χρόνων ὅτι δεῖ
περὶ τὸν τόπον τοῦτον πλῆθος ἀνθρώπων ἐν μάχῃ




1καὶ added by Bekker.2ἀπὸ Hertlein: ἐπὶ.124Book XIX

persuaded by false charges made by exiles, or again 311 b.c. because he wished to gain possession of wealth; and he slew more than four thousand of the Geloans and confiscated their property. He also ordered all the other Geloans to turn over to him their money and their uncoined silver and gold, threatening to punish those who disobeyed. Since all quickly carried out the command because of fear, he gathered together a large amount of money and caused a dreadful panic among all who were subject to him. Being thought to have treated the Geloans more cruelly than was proper, he heaped together in the ditches outside the walls those who had been slain; and, leaving behind in the city an adequate garrison, he took the field against the enemy.
108. The Carthaginians held the hill Ecnomus, which men say had been a stronghold of Phalaris. Here it is reported that the tyrant had constructed the bronze bull that has become famous, the device being heated by a fire beneath for the torment of those subjected to the ordeal; and so the place has been called Ecnomus1 because of the impiety practised upon his victims. On the other side Agathocles held another of the strongholds that had belonged to Phalaris, the one which was called Phalarium after him. In the space between the encamped armies was a river,2 which each of them used as a defence against the enemy; and sayings from earlier times were current that near this place a great number of men were destined to perish in


1Literally, “Lawless.” In Book 13. 90. 4–7, Diodorus claims that he himself had seen the brazen bull, which Hamilcar had taken to Carthage (about 480 b.c.) and Scipio Aemilianus had brought back to Acragas after the sack of Carthage. Cp. also Book 20. 71. 3.2The Himeras.125