Diodorus of Sicily

Φιλίππου καθ᾿ ἑαυτοὺς μὲν οὐκ ἦσαν ἀξιόμαχοι
προηττημένοι, κοινῇ δὲ πολεμοῦντες ὑπέλαβον
ῥᾳδίως αὐτοῦ περιέσεσθαι. διόπερ ἀθροιζόντων
τὰς δυνάμεις ἐπιφανεὶς ἀσυντάκτοις καὶ καταπληξάμενος
ἠνάγκασε προσθέσθαι τοῖς Μακεδόσιν.
23. Ἐπ᾿ ἄρχοντος δ᾿ Ἀθήνησι Καλλιστράτου Ῥωμαῖοι
κατέστησαν ὑπάτους Μάρκον1 Φάβιον καὶ
Γάιον Πλώτιον. ἐπὶ δὲ τούτων ὁ κληθεὶς ἱερὸς
πόλεμος συνέστη καὶ διέμεινεν ἔτη ἐννέα. Φιλόμηλος
γὰρ ὁ Φωκεύς, ἀνὴρ θράσει καὶ παρανομίᾳ
διαφέρων, κατελάβετο μὲν τὸ ἐν Δελφοῖς ἱερὸν
ἐξέκαυσε δὲ τὸν ἱερὸν πόλεμον διὰ τοιαύτας τινὰς
2αἰτίας. Λακεδαιμονίων πρὸς Βοιωτοὺς διαπολεμησάντων
τὸν Λευκτρικὸν πόλεμον καὶ καταπολεμηθέντων
οἱ μὲν Θηβαῖοι διὰ τὴν κατάληψιν τῆς
Καδμείας δίκας μεγάλας ἐπαγαγόντες τοῖς Λακεδαιμονίοις
ἐν Ἀμφικτύοσι κατεδίκασαν αὐτοὺς πολλοῖς
3χρήμασιν, οἱ δὲ Φωκεῖς ἐπεργασάμενοι πολλὴν
τῆς ἱερᾶς χώρας τῆς ὀνομαζομένης Κιρραίας δίκας
ὑπέσχον ἐν Ἀμφικτύοσι καὶ πολλοῖς ταλάντοις κατεκρίθησαν.
οὐκ ἐκτινόντων δ᾿ αὐτῶν τὰ ὀφλήματα
οἱ μὲν ἱερομνήμονες ἐν Ἀμφικτύοσι κατηγόρουν
τῶν Φωκέων καὶ τὸ συνέδριον ἠξίουν ἐὰν μὴ τὰ





1Gaius in Livy, 7. 12. 6 and Fasti Consulares.300Book XVI

of Philip; singly, however, they were not capable of 356/5 b.c. sustaining a combat, each having suffered defeat in the past, but they supposed that, if they should join their forces in a war, they would easily have the better of Philip. So it was that, while they were still gathering their armies, Philip appeared before their dispositions were made, struck terror into them, and compelled them to join forces with the Macedonians.1
23. When Callistratus was archon at Athens, the 355/4 b.c. Romans elected as consuls Marcus Fabius and Gaius Plautius. During their term of office the Sacred War, as it was called, began and lasted nine years.2 For Philomelus the Phocian, a man of unusual audacity and lawlessness, seized the shrine in Delphi and kindled the Sacred War for reasons somewhat as follows. When the Lacedaemonians had fought the Leuctrian War with the Boeotians and been defeated, the Thebans brought a serious charge against the Lacedaemonians in the Amphictyonic Council3 because of their seizure of the Cadmeia and obtained a judgement against them for a large indemnity; and the Phocians for having cultivated a large portion of the consecrated territory named Cirrhaean4 were arraigned in the Council and were fined a large number of talents. When they did not discharge the assessments, the hieromnemones5 of the Amphictyons brought charges against the Phocians and demanded


1See Justin, 12. 16. 6; Plutarch, Alexander, 3. 5 and discussion
in Beloch, Griechische Geschichte2, 3. 1. 231 and notes.2Should probably read “ten” years as in chap. 59. 1.
See chap. 14. 3 and notes. For an account of the beginnings
of the Sacred War see Pickard-Cambridge, Cambridge Ancient History, 6. 213 ff.3Originally the Council of the Amphictyonic League, an
association which had the care of the temple and oracle of
Delphi. Thebans and Thessalians with the aid of small
neigbouring tribes controlled the vote in the Council.4The plain near Cirrha on the Corinthian Gulf consecrated to Apollo of Delphi and so not supposed to be cultivated (cp. Aeschines, Against Ctesiphon, 107–112). Other causes for fining the Phocians are given in Pausanias, 10. 2. 1 and Justin, 8, 1, but this fine is mentioned in Pausanias, 10. 15. 1. See chap. 29. 2–3.5Recorders or officers in charge of sacred business at meetings of the Amphictyonic Council, two from each nation.301