Diodorus of Sicily

πάντας δ᾿ ἐνηθληκότας τοῖς πολεμικοῖς κινδύνοις
καὶ συνεστρατευμένους Φιλίππῳ καὶ σχεδὸν ἐν
πάσαις ταῖς μάχαις ἀηττήτους γεγονότας· ὧν δὴ
ταῖς ἀρεταῖς καὶ προθυμίαις πεποιθὼς Ἀλέξανδρος
ἐπεβάλετο καταλῦσαι τὴν τῶν Περσῶν ἡγεμονίαν.
4εἰ μὲν οὖν οἱ Θηβαῖοι τοῖς καιροῖς εἴξαντες διεπρεσβεύοντο
πρὸς τοὺς Μακεδόνας ὑπὲρ εἰρήνης καὶ
συνθέσεως, ἡδέως ἂν ὁ βασιλεὺς προσεδέξατο τὰς
ἐντεύξεις καὶ πάντα ἂν ἀξιούμενος συνεχώρησεν·
ἐπεθύμει γὰρ τὰς κατὰ τὴν Ἑλλάδα ταραχὰς ἀποτριψάμενος
ἀπερίσπαστον ἔχειν τὸν πρὸς Πέρσας
πόλεμον.
Νῦν δὲ δόξας ὑπὸ τῶν Θηβαίων καταφρονεῖσθαι
διέγνω τὴν πόλλιν ἄρδην ἀνελεῖν καὶ τῷ φόβῳ
τούτῳ τὰς ὁρμὰς τῶν ἀφίστασθαι τολμώντων ἀποτρέψαι.
5διόπερ τὴν δύναμιν ἑτοίμην κατασκευάσας
πρὸς τὸν κίνδυνον ἐκήρυξε τὸν βουλόμενον Θηβαίων
ἀπιέναι πρὸς αὐτὸν καὶ μετέχειν τῆς κοινῆς τοῖς
Ἕλλησιν εἰρήνης. οἱ δὲ Θηβαῖοι διαφιλοτιμηθέντες
ἀντεκήρυξαν ἀπό τινος ὑψηλοῦ πύργου τὸν βουλόμενον
μετὰ τοῦ μεγάλου βασιλέως καὶ Θηβαίων
ἐλευθεροῦν τοὺς Ἕλληνας καὶ καταλύειν τὸν τῆς
6Ἑλλάδος τύραννον παριέναι1 πρὸς αὐτούς. ὅθεν
Ἀλέξανδρος περιαλγὴς γενόμενος εἰς ὑπερβάλλουσαν
ὀργὴν προῆλθεν καὶ πάσῃ τιμωρίᾳ τοὺς
Θηβαίους μετελθεῖν ἔκρινεν. οὗτος μὲν οὖν ἀποθηριωθεὶς
τὴν ψυχὴν μηχανάς τε πολιορκητικὰς
συνεστήσατο καὶ τἄλλα πρὸς τὸν κίνδυνον παρεσκευάζετο.
1So Hultzsch: παρεῖναι.142Book XVII

of Philip’s campaigns who had hardly experienced a 335/4 b.c. single reverse. This was the army on the skill and loyalty of which he relied to overthrow the Persian empire. If the Thebans had yielded to the situation and had asked the Macedonians for peace and an alliance, the king would have accepted their proposals with pleasure and would have conceded everything they asked, for he was eager to be rid of these disturbances in Greece so that he might without distraction pursue the war with Persia.
Finally, however, he realized that he was despised by the Thebans, and so decided to destroy the city utterly and by this act of terror take the heart out of anyone else who might venture to rise against him. He made his forces ready for battle, then announced through a herald that any of the Thebans who wished might come to him and enjoy the peace which was common to all the Greeks. In response, the Thebans with equal spirit proclaimed from a high tower that anyone who wished to join the Great King and Thebes in freeing the Greeks1 and destroying the tyrant of Greece should come over to them. This epithet stung Alexander. He flew into a towering rage and declared that he would pursue the Thebans with the extremity of punishment. Raging in his heart, he set to constructing siege engines and to preparing whatever else was necessary for the attack.
1Plutarch, Alexander, 11. 4. That is, according to the terms of the Peace of Antalcidas (Xenophon, Hellenica, 5. 1. 31). In a similar manner, the Athenians had appealed to the Greeks against Sparta in the decree of Aristoteles setting up the so-called Second Athenian League (377 b.c.; SIG 147).143