Diodorus of Sicily
2ἐπίσκεψιν. δι᾿ ἃς αἰτίας πολλῶν1 τῶν στρατιωτῶν
ἀτακτούντων ὑπολοίπους εἶχον ἐν τῇ παρεμβολῇ
πεζοὺς μὲν δισμυρίους καὶ πεντακισχιλίους, ἱππεῖς
δὲ τρισχιλίους καὶ πεντακοσίους, ἐν οἷς μάλιστα
εἶχον τὰς τῆς νίκης ἐλπίδας διά τε τὰς τῶν ἀνδρῶν
ἀρετὰς καὶ διὰ τὸ πεδινὴν ὑποκεῖσθαι χώραν.
3Τέλος δὲ τῶν περὶ Ἀντίπατρον καθ᾿ ἡμέραν
προαγόντων τὰς δυνάμεις καὶ προκαλουμένων εἰς
μάχην τὸ μὲν πρῶτον ἀνέμενον τοὺς ἀπὸ τῶν πόλεων
παραγενησομένους, τῶν δὲ καιρῶν κατεπειγόντων
ἠναγκάζοντο συγκαταβαίνειν εἰς τὸν ὑπὲρ
τῶν ὅλων κίνδυνον. ἐκτάξαντες δὲ τὴν δύναμιν
καὶ σπεύδοντες διὰ τῶν ἱππέων κρῖναι τὸν πόλεμον
τούτους πρὸ τῆς τῶν πεζῶν φάλαγγος ἔστησαν.
4γενομένης δὲ ἱππομαχίας καὶ τῶν Θετταλῶν ἱππέων
πλεονεκτούντων διὰ τὰς ἀρετὰς οἱ περὶ τὸν
Ἀντίπατρον ἐπήγαγον τὴν ἰδίαν φάλαγγα καὶ
τοῖς πεζοῖς τῶν πολεμίων ἐπιρράξαντες πολὺν
ἐποιοῦντο φόνον. οἱ δ᾿ Ἕλληνες τὸ βάρος καὶ τὸ
πλῆθος τῶν πολεμίων οὐ δυνάμενοι φέρειν εὐθὺς
ἀπεχώρησαν πρὸς τὰς δυσχωρίας, τηροῦντες τὰς
τάξεις ἐπιμελῶς. διὸ καὶ δραξάμενοι τόπων ὑπερδεξίων
ῥᾳδίως ἠμύναντο τοὺς Μακεδόνας, ὑπερδέξιον
5ἔχοντες τὴν στάσιν. οἱ δὲ τῶν Ἑλλήνων
ἱππεῖς ἐπὶ τοῦ προτερήματος ὄντες, ὡς ἔγνωσαν
τὴν τῶν πεζῶν ἀποχώρησιν, εὐθὺς πρὸς ἐκείνους
ἀφίππευσαν. τότε μὲν οὖν τοῦτον τὸν τρόπον
ἀγωνισάμενοι διελύθησαν, ῥεπούσης τῆς νίκης πρὸς
τοὺς Μακεδόνας· ἀπέθανον δ᾿ ἐν τῇ μάχῃ τῶν μὲν

1πολλῶν Post: πολλοὶ MSS., deleted by Wesseling and
Fischer.60Book XVIII

look after their private affairs. Since many soldiers 322 b.c. were absent from duty for this reason, there remained in camp only twenty-five thousand foot soldiers and thirty-five hundred cavalry. They placed their chief hope of victory in the latter, because the men were brave and the ground was level.
At last Antipater began to draw up his forces each day and challenge the Greeks to battle. For a while these waited for their men to return from their cities, but since time was pressing, they were forced to come out and stake all. They drew up their line, placing the cavalry in front of the phalanx of infantry, since they were eager to decide the battle by means of this arm. When the cavalry had met in battle and the Thessalian horsemen were getting the advantage because of their valour, Antipater led out his own phalanx and, rushing upon the infantry of the enemy, began to make great slaughter. The Greeks, since they were not able to withstand the weight and number of the enemy, immediately withdrew to the rough ground, carefully keeping their ranks. Thus they occupied the higher ground and easily repulsed the Macedonians thanks to their possession of the superior position. Although the Greek cavalry had gained the advantage, as soon as the horsemen learned of the withdrawal of the infantry, they at once retired toward them. Then, after such a combat as I have described, the battle was broken off, as the scales of victory swung in favour of the Macedonians. More than five hundred of the Greeks
61