Diodorus of Sicily

τῆς τε πόλεως καὶ χώρας καὶ κατὰ τοὺς Σόλωνος
νόμους ἐπολιτεύοντο· πάντες δὲ τὰς οὐσίας εἰάθησαν
ἔχειν ἀναφαιρέτους. φρούραρχον δὲ Μένυλλον καὶ
φρουρὰν ἠναγκάσθησαν δέξασθαι τὴν οὐκ ἐπιτρέψουσαν
6οὐδενὶ νεωτερίζειν. περὶ δὲ τῆς Σάμου τὴν
ἀναφορὰν ἐπὶ τοὺς βασιλεῖς ἐποιήσαντο. Ἀθηναῖοι
μὲν οὖν παρ᾿ ἐλπίδα φιλανθρωπευθέντες ἔτυχον τῆς
εἰρήνης καὶ τὸ λοιπὸν ἀταράχως πολιτευόμενοι καὶ
τὴν χώραν ἀδεῶς καρπούμενοι ταχὺ ταῖς οὐσίαις
προσανέδραμον.
7Ὁ δ᾿ Ἀντίπατρος ἐπανελθὼν εἰς τὴν Μακεδονίαν
τὸν μὲν Κρατερὸν ταῖς ἁρμοζούσαις τιμαῖς
τε καὶ δωρεαῖς ἐκόσμησε καὶ τῶν θυγατέρων μίαν
συνοικίσας αὐτῷ τὴν πρεσβυτάτην Φίλαν τὴν εἰς
8τὴν Ἀσίαν ἐπάνοδον συγκατεσκεύασεν. ὁμοίως δὲ
καὶ ταῖς ἄλλαις Ἑλληνίσι πόλεσιν ἐπιεικῶς προσενεχθεὶς
καὶ τὰ πολιτεύματα συναγαγὼν καὶ
καλῶς1 καταστήσας ἐπαίνων καὶ στεφάνων ἔτυχεν.
9ὁ δὲ Περδίκκας ἀποκαταστήσας τοῖς Σαμίοις τήν
τε πόλιν καὶ χώραν κατήγαγεν αὐτοὺς εἰς τὴν
πατρίδα, πεφευγότας ἔτη τρισὶ πλείω τῶν τεσσαράκοντα.
19. Ἡμεῖς δ᾿ ἐπεὶ τὰς κατὰ τὸν Λαμιακὸν πόλεμον
ἐπιτελεσθείσας πράξεις διήλθομεν, μεταβησόμεθα
πρὸς τὸν ἐν τῇ Κυρήνῃ γενόμενον πόλεμον,
ἵνα μὴ μακρὰν τοῖς χρόνοις ἀποπλανῶμεν τὸ
συνεχὲς τῆς ἱστορίας. ἀναγκαῖον δ᾿ ἐστὶ βραχὺ
τοῖς χρόνοις προσαναδραμεῖν, ὅπως σαφεστέρας

1καὶ καλῶς Fischer: καλῶς καὶ.66Book XVIII

were designated as masters of both city and territory 322 b.c. and conducted the government according to the constitution of Solon. All were permitted to keep their property uncurtailed. They were, however, forced to receive a garrison with Menyllus as its commander, its purpose being to prevent anyone from undertaking changes in the government. The decision in regard to Samos was referred to the kings. The Athenians, being thus humanely treated beyond their hopes, secured peace; and, since henceforth they conducted their public affairs without disturbance and enjoyed the produce of the land unmolested, they quickly made great progress in wealth.
When Antipater had returned to Macedonia, he presented Craterus with suitable honours and gifts, giving him also his eldest daughter Phila in marriage, and helped him to prepare for his return to Asia. He likewise showed moderation in dealing with the other Greek cities, both reducing their citizen bodies and wisely reforming them, for which he received eulogies and crowns. Perdiccas, restoring their city and territory to the Samians, brought them back to their fatherland after they had been exiles for forty-three years.1
19. Now that we have narrated all the actions in the course of the Lamian War, we shall turn to the war that took place in Cyrenê, so that the course of our history may not deviate too much from the chronological sequence. But it is necessary to go back a little in time in order to make clearer the

1Samos had been captured by the Athenian general Timotheüs in 366/5 (IG, 2. 699. 20; Nepos, Timotheüs, 1; Demosthenes, For the Rhodians, 9; cp. Beloch, Griechische Geschichte2, 3. 2. 245 f.). Diodorus returns to Greek affairs in chap. 24.67