Diodorus of Sicily

συμμάχων καὶ τῶν ἄλλων τῶν εἰς πόλεμον χρησίμων.
33. Ἐπῆρε δ᾿ αὐτὸν πρὸς τὴν ὑπόστασιν ταύτην
ὄνειρος ἔμφασιν διδοὺς μεγάλης αὐξήσεώς τε καὶ
δόξης· κατὰ γὰρ τὸν ὕπνον ἔδοξε τὸν κολοττὸν τὸν
χαλκοῦν ὃν ἀνέθηκαν ἐν τῷ ἱερῷ τοῦ Ἀπόλλωνος
οἱ Ἀμφικτύονες, ἀναπλάττειν εἰς ὕψος ταῖς ἰδίαις
χερσὶ καὶ ποιῆσαι πολὺ μείζονα. ὑπέλαβεν οὖν
αὐτῷ σημαίνεσθαι παρὰ τῶν θεῶν αὔξησιν δόξης
ἔσεσθαι διὰ τῆς αὑτοῦ1 στρατηγίας· τὸ δ᾿ ἀληθὲς
οὐχ οὕτως εἶχε, τοὐναντίον δὲ παρεσημαίνετο· διὰ τὸ
τοὺς Ἀμφικτύονας ἐκ τοῦ ζημιώματος ἀναθεῖναι,2
τῶν Φωκέων εἰς τὸ ἱερὸν παρανομησάντων καὶ διὰ
τοῦτο ζημιωθέντων, ἐσημαίνετο ἡ ζημία τῶν Φωκέων
αὔξησιν ἀπολήψεσθαι ταῖς τοῦ Ὀνομάρχου
2χερσίν· ὅπερ καὶ συνέβη γενέσθαι. ὁ δ᾿ οὖν3 Ὀνόμαρχος
στρατηγὸς4 αὐτοκράτωρ ᾑρημένος ἐκ μὲν τοῦ
χαλκοῦ καὶ σιδήρου κατεσκεύασεν ὅπλων πλῆθος, ἐκ
δὲ τοῦ ἀργυρίου καὶ χρυσίου νόμισμα κόψας ταῖς
τε συμμαχούσαις πόλεσι διεδίδου καὶ μάλιστα τοὺς
προεστηκότας ἐδωροδόκει. διέφθειρε δὲ καὶ τῶν
πολεμίων πολλούς, οὓς μὲν συμμαχεῖν πείθων, οὓς
3δὲ τὴν ἡσυχίαν ἔχειν ἀξιῶν. πάντα δὲ ῥᾳδίως
ἐπετέλει διὰ τὴν τῶν ἀνθρώπων φιλαργυρίαν· καὶ
γὰρ τοὺς Θετταλούς, μέγιστον ἔχοντας τῶν συμμάχων
ἀξίωμα, δωροδοκήσας ἔπεισε τὴν ἡσυχίαν




1So Dindorf: αὐτοῦ.2ἀναθεῖναι added by Post. Fischer proposed τὸν κολοττὸν
ἀνατεθεικέναι παρεσημαίνετο after ζημιωθέντων with omission of
παρεσημαίνετο above.3So Hertlein: ὁ οὖν.4στρατηγὸς added by Fischer (cp. chaps. 32. 4, 52. 2,
etc.).328Book XVI

allies and of everything else that is serviceable for 353/2 b.c. war.
33. He was greatly encouraged in this undertaking by a dream which gave intimation of great increase of power and glory. In his sleep, namely, it seemed that he was remodelling with his own hands the bronze statue1 which the Amphictyons had dedicated in the temple of Apollo, making it much taller and larger. He accordingly assumed that a sign was being given to him from the gods that there would be an increase of glory because of his services as general. But the truth turned out to be otherwise, rather the contrary was indicated because of the fact that the Amphictyons had dedicated the statue out of the fines paid by the Phocians who had acted lawlessly toward the shrine and had been fined for so doing. What was indicated was that the fine of the Phocians would take on an increase at the hands of Onomarchus; and such turned out to be the case. Onomarchus, when he had been chosen general in supreme command, prepared a great supply of weapons from the bronze and iron, and having struck coinage from the silver and gold distributed it among the allied cities and chiefly gave it as bribes to the leaders of those cities. Indeed he succeeded in corrupting many of the enemy too, some of whom he persuaded to fight on his side, and others he required to maintain the peace. He easily accomplished everything because of man’s greed. In fact he persuaded even the Thessalians, who were held in highest esteem amongst the allies, by bribes to

1No mention of a “colossus” has been found. Pausanias (10. 15. 1) mentions a statue of Apollo dedicated by the Amphictyons from the fines levied upon the Phocians.329