Diodorus of Sicily

Στύμφηλον1 εἴς τι2 χάσμα καταδυόμενος ἐπὶ διακοσίους
σταδίους φέρεται κεκρυμμένος κατὰ γῆς
6καὶ παρὰ τὴν τῶν Ἀργείων πόλιν ἐξίησιν. πρὸς
δὲ τοῖς εἰρημένοις λέγουσιν, ὅτι πλὴν τῶν ἀσεβησάντων
οὐδεὶς ἄλλος περιέπεσε τῇ συμφορᾷ. καὶ
περὶ μὲν τῶν γενομένων σεισμῶν καὶ κατακλυσμῶν
ἀρκεσθησόμεθα τοῖς ῥηθεῖσιν.
50. Ἐπ᾿ ἄρχοντος δ᾿ Ἀθήνησιν Ἀλκισθένους
Ῥωμαῖοι μὲν ἀντὶ τῶν ὑπάτων χιλιάρχους κατέστησαν
ὀκτώ, Λεύκιον Οὐαλέριον καὶ Πόπλιον,3
ἔτι δὲ Γάιον Τερέντιον καὶ Λεύκιον Μενήνιον, πρὸς
δὲ τούτοις Γάιον Σολπίκιον καὶ Τίτον Παπίριον
καὶ Λεύκιον Αἰμίλιον,4 παρὰ δὲ Ἠλείοις ὀλυμπιὰς
ἤχθη δευτέρα πρὸς ταῖς ἑκατόν, καθ᾿ ἣν ἐνίκα
2στάδιον Δάμων Θούριος. ἐπὶ δὲ τούτων, Λακεδαιμονίων
ἔτη σχεδὸν πεντακόσια τῆς Ἑλλάδος
ἐχόντων τὴν ἡγεμονίαν, τὸ θεῖον προεσήμαινεν αὐτοῖς
τῆς ἀρχῆς τὴν ἀποβολήν· ὤφθη μὲν γὰρ κατὰ
τὸν οὐρανὸν ἐπὶ πολλὰς νύκτας λαμπὰς μεγάλη
καομένη, ἀπὸ τοῦ σχήματος ὀνομασθεῖσα πυρίνη
δοκίς· μικρὸν δ᾿ ὕστερον ἡττηθέντες οἱ Σπαρτιᾶται
παραδόξως μεγάλῃ μάχῃ τὴν ἡγεμονίαν ἀπέβαλον







1Στύμφηλον Vogel: τὸ στύμφην Pa, τὸ στύμφιον cet.2τι Dindorf: τὸ.3Πόπλιον PA (cp. Livy, 6. 27. 2), Πόπλιον Ἄγκον cet.4Αἰμίλιον PA, Αἰμίλιον καὶ Φάβιον Μάκρον cet.88Book XV

plunges into a chasm and flows for two hundred 373/2 b.c. stades concealed underground, then pours forth by the city of the Argives. In addition to these statements the pious say further that except for those who committed the sacrilege no one perished in the disaster.2 Concerning the earthquakes and floods which occurred we shall rest content with what has been said.
50. When Alcisthenes was archon at Athens, the 372/1 b.c. Romans elected eight military tribunes with consular power, Lucius and Publius Valerius, Gaius Terentius, Lucius Menenius, Gaius Sulpicius, Titus Papirius, and Lucius Aemilius, and the Eleians celebrated the hundred second Olympiad in which Damon of Thurii won the stadium race. During their term of office, after the Lacedaemonians had held the supremacy in Greece for almost five hundred years, a divine portent foretold the loss of their empire; for there was seen in the heavens during the course of many nights a great blazing torch which was named from its shape a “flaming beam,”3 and a little later, to the surprise of all, the Spartans were defeated in a great battle


1The first is the river Ladon, a tributary of the Alpheüs,
flowing past Pheneüs, and the second is the Stymphalus.
In Frazer’s Pausanias (8. 20, 22) on pp. 262 and 268 (vol. 4)
are found descriptions of these rivers. See also Strabo, 8. 8. 4.
Both towns were in Arcadia, the first being represented by
Virgil (Aeneïd, 8. 165) as the home of Evander.2One might ask about the guilt of the crews of the ten
Spartan ships which chanced to be anchored off Helicê and were destroyed by the tidal wave (cp. Aelian, De Nat. Animal. 11. 19 and Wesseling’s note on this passage of Diodorus). For the fate of similar arguments see Voltaire, Candide 5.3Seneca, Q.N. 7.5: “talem effigiem ignis longi fuisse Callisthenes tradit, antequam Burin et Helicen mare absconderet. Aristoteles ait non trabem illam sed cometen fuisse” Translation by John Clarke: “Callisthenes puts it on record that a similar appearance of a trail of fire was observed before the sea swallowed up Buris and Helice. Aristotle says it was not a ‘beam,’ but a comet.” On the basis of this passage of Diodorus and the passage of Seneca it would seem that ὁδός in Aristotle, Meteor. 1. 6, 343 b 23 (διὸ καὶ ἐκλήθη ὁδός, ed. by F. H. Fobes) should read δοκός (see Wesseling’s note). Aristotle dates the occurrence in 373/2 (ibid. b 19).89