Diodorus of Sicily

παρεμβολῆς τῶν πολεμίων εἰς φωνῆς ἀκοὴν ἔδειξε
τοῖς πολεμίοις καὶ τὴν τῶν στρατοπέδων ἧτταν
2διεσάφησεν. οἱ δὲ Καρχηδόνιοι περιαλγεῖς γενόμενοι
καὶ βαρβαρικῶς προσκυνήσαντες συμφορὰν
ἑαυτῶν ἐποιοῦντο τὸν τοῦ βασιλέως θάνατον καὶ
πρὸς τὸν ὅλον πόλεμον ἄθυμοι καθειστήκεισαν.
οἱ δὲ περὶ τὸν Ἀγαθοκλέα τοῖς περὶ Λιβύην προτερήμασιν
ἐπαρθέντες τηλικούτων εὐτυχημάτων
προσγενομένων μετέωροι ταῖς ἐλπίσιν ἐγενήθησαν,
3ὡς ἀπηλλαγμένοι τῶν δεινῶν. οὐ μὴν ἡ τύχη γε
εἴασε τὴν εὔροιαν μένειν ἐπὶ τῆς αὐτῆς τάξεως, ἀλλ᾿
ἐκ τῶν ἰδίων στρατιωτῶν τῷ δυνάστῃ τοὺς μεγίστους
ἐπήνεγκε κινδύνους. Λυκίσκος γάρ τις
τῶν ἐφ᾿ ἡγεμονίᾳ τεταγμένων, παραληφθεὶς ὑπ᾿
Ἀγαθοκλέους ἐπὶ τὸ δεῖπνον, οἰνωθεὶς ἐβλασφήμει
4τὸν δυνάστην. ὁ μὲν οὖν Ἀγαθοκλῆς διὰ τὰς ἐν
τῷ πολέμῳ χρείας ἀποδεχόμενος τὸν ἄνδρα τῇ
παιδιᾷ τὰ πρὸς πικρίαν λεγόμενα διέσυρεν· ὁ δ᾿
υἱὸς Ἀρχάγαθος χαλεπῶς φέρων ἐπετίμα τε καὶ
5διηπειλεῖτο. διαλυθέντος δὲ τοῦ πότου καὶ πρὸς
τὴν σκηνὴν ἀπιόντων ἐλοιδόρησεν ὁ Λυκίσκος τὸν
Ἀρχάγαθον εἰς τὴν τῆς μητρυιᾶς μοιχείαν· ἐδόκει
γὰρ ἔχειν λάθρᾳ τοῦ πατρὸς τὴν Ἀλκίαν· τοῦτο
6γὰρ ἦν ὄνομα τῇ γυναικί. ὁ δ᾿ Ἀρχάγαθος εἰς
ὀργὴν ὑπερβάλλουσαν προαχθεὶς καὶ παρά τινος
τῶν ὑπασπιστῶν ἁρπάσας σιβύνην διήλασε διὰ τῶν
πλευρῶν. τοῦτον μὲν οὖν παραχρῆμα τελευτήσαντα
πρὸς τὴν ἰδίαν ἀπήνεγκαν σκηνὴν οἷς ἦν ἐπιμελές·
ἅμα δ᾿ ἡμέρᾳ συνελθόντες οἱ τοῦ φονευθέντος φίλοι
καὶ πολλοὶ τῶν ἄλλων στρατιωτῶν συνδραμόντες
ἠγανάκτουν ἐπὶ τοῖς πραχθεῖσι καὶ θορύβου τὴν
7παρεμβολὴν ἐπλήρωσαν. πολλοὶ δὲ καὶ τῶν ἐφ᾿
228Book XX

within hearing distance, showed it to the enemy and 309 b.c. related to them the defeat of their expedition. The Carthaginians, deeply grieved and prostrating themselves on the ground in barbarian fashion, regarded the death of the king as their own misfortune, and they fell into deep despair in regard to the whole war. But Agathocles, who was already elated by his successes in Libya, when such strokes of fortune were now added, was borne aloft by soaring hopes, thinking himself freed from all dangers. Fortune notwithstanding did not permit success to remain long on the same side but brought the greatest danger to the prince from his own soldiers. For Lyciscus, one of those who had been placed in command, invited to dinner by Agathocles, became drunk and insulted the prince. Now Agathocles, who valued the man for his services in the war, turned aside with a joke what had been said in bitterness; but his son, Archagathus,1 becoming angry, censured and threatened Lyciscus. When the drinking was concluded and the men were going away to their quarters, Lyciscus taunted Archagathus on the score of his adultery with his stepmother; for he was supposed to possess Alcia, for this was the woman’s name, without his father’s knowledge. Archagathus, driven into an overpowering rage, seized a spear from one of the guard and thrust Lyciscus through his ribs. Now he died at once and was carried away to his own tent by those whose task it was; but at daybreak the friends of the murdered man came together, and many of the other soldiers hastened to join them, and all were indignant at what had happened and filled the camp with uproar. Many, too, of those who

1For the form of this name cp. chap. 11. 1, and note.229