Diodorus of Sicily

Ῥωμαῖοι κατέστησαν ὑπάτους Κόιντον Ποπίλλιον
καὶ Κόιντον Πόπλιον. ἐπὶ δὲ τούτων Ἀντίγονος
καταπεπολεμηκὼς τοὺς περὶ τὸν Εὐμενῆ ἔκρινε
στρατεύειν ἐπὶ τὸν Ἀλκέταν καὶ Ἄτταλον· οὗτοι
γὰρ ὑπελείποντο τῶν Περδίκκου φίλων καὶ οἰκείων
ἡγεμόνες μὲν ἀξιόλογοι, στρατιώτας δ᾿ ἔχοντες
ἱκανοὺς ἀμφισβητῆσαι πραγμάτων. ἀναζεύξας οὖν
μετὰ πάσης τῆς δυνάμεως ἐκ Καππαδοκίας προῆγεν
ἐπὶ τὴν Πισιδικήν, ἐν ᾗ συνέβαινε διατρίβειν τοὺς
2περὶ τὸν Ἀλκέταν. ὀξεῖαν δὲ καὶ παντελῶς ἐπιτεταμένην
τὴν πορείαν ποιησάμενος ἐν ἡμέραις
ἑπτὰ καὶ ταῖς ἴσαις νυξὶ διήνυσε σταδίους δισχιλίους
καὶ πεντακοσίους εἰς τὴν ὀνομαζομένην
Κρητῶν πόλιν. λαθὼν δὲ τοὺς πολεμίους διὰ τὴν
ὀξύτητα τῆς πορείας καὶ γενόμενος πλησίον αὐτῶν
ἀγνοούντων τὴν παρουσίαν ἔφθασεν ἀκρολοφίας
3τινὰς καὶ δυσχωρίας προκαταλαβόμενος. οἱ δὲ
περὶ τὸν Ἀλκέταν πυθόμενοι τὴν παρουσίαν τῶν
πολεμίων τὴν μὲν φάλαγγα ταχέως ἐξέταξαν, τοῖς
δ᾿ ἱππεῦσι προσπεσόντες τοῖς τὴν ἀκρώρειαν προκατέχουσιν
ἐφιλοτιμοῦντο βίᾳ κρατῆσαι καὶ ἀπὸ
4τῆς ἀκρολοφίας ἐκβαλεῖν. γενομένης δὲ μάχης
ἰσχυρᾶς καὶ πολλῶν παρ᾿ ἀμφοτέρων πεσόντων ὁ
μὲν Ἀντίγονος ἔχων ἱππεῖς ἑξακισχιλίους ἀπὸ
κράτους ἤλαυνεν ἐπὶ τὴν τῶν ἐναντίων φάλαγγα,
σπεύδων ἀποκόψαι τῶν περὶ τὸν Ἀλκέταν τὴν ἐπὶ
5ταύτην καταφυγήν. οὗ συντελεσθέντος οἱ μὲν ἐπὶ
τῆς ἀκρωρείας ὄντες, πολὺ τοῖς τε πλήθεσιν ὑπερέχοντες


1chaps. 26–43 two sets of annual magistrates and some of the events belonging to their years of office have been lost (cp. note on chap. 39. 7).134Book XVIII

Romans elected Quintus Popillius and Quintus Poplius
319 b.c. to the consulship.1 During their term Antigonus, who had defeated Eumenes, decided to make war against Alcetas and Attalus; for these two remained from the friends and household of Perdiccas, noteworthy generals with soldiers enough to make a bid for power.2Therefore Antigonus set out with all his forces from Cappadocia and pushed on toward Pisidia, where Alcetas and his army were staying. Making a forced march that strained the endurance of his men to the utmost, he traversed two thousand five hundred stades in seven days and the same number of nights,3 reaching Cretopolis, as it is called. He escaped the notice of the enemy because of the rapidity of his march, and drawing close to them while they were still ignorant of his coming, he stole a march on them by occupying certain rugged ridges. As soon as Alcetas learned that the enemy was at hand, he drew up his phalanx at top speed and with a mounted force attacked the troops that were holding the ridge, trying with all his might to get the best of them by force and hurl them from the hill. A stubborn battle was waged and many fell on both sides; then Antigonus led six thousand horsemen in a violent charge against the phalanx of the enemy in order to cut Alcetas’ line of retreat to it. When this manœuvre had been successfully completed, the forces on the ridge, who were far superior in number



1Apollodorus was archon in 319/18. Livy (9. 7. 15) gives
the consuls for 320 as Q. Publilius Philo for the third time
and L. Papirius Cursor for the second time. Diodorus’
“Poplius” is certainly due to dittography. Somewhere in2Cp. chaps. 37. 2–3 and 41. 7.3About 287 miles, or 41 miles in each 24 hours. The exact site of the “City of the Cretans,” like the significance of its name, is unknown, but it seems to have been somewhere in Cabalia or northern Lycia.135