Diodorus of Sicily

τῆς παρουσίας πτοηθέντες καὶ τὴν διαβεβοημένην
δόξαν τῶν Μακεδόνων καταπλαγέντες,
ἔτι δὲ τῶν πρεσβυτέρων συμβουλευσάντων μὴ διαγωνίζεσθαι
πεντήκοντα τοὺς ἐπιφανεστάτους πρεσβευτὰς
ἐξαπέστειλαν, ἀξιοῦντες φιλανθρώπως αὐτοῖς
4προσενεχθῆναι. ὁ δὲ βασιλεὺς ἐπαινέσας τοὺς
ἄνδρας καὶ συγχωρήσας τὴν εἰρήνην δωρεαῖς τε
μεγάλαις καὶ τιμαῖς ἡρωικαῖς ὑπὸ τῶν ἐγχωρίων
ἐτιμήθη.
Μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα τοὺς παρὰ τὸν ποταμὸν ἐξ ἀμφοτέρων
τῶν μερῶν κατοικοῦντας, ὀνομαζομένους δὲ
Σόδρας καὶ Μασσανούς, προσηγάγετο. περὶ δὲ
τούτους τοὺς τόπους ἔκτισε πόλιν Ἀλεξάνδρειαν
κατὰ τὸν ποταμόν, μυρίους καταλέξας οἰκήτορας.
5μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα εἰς τὴν Μουσικάνου τοῦ βασιλέως
χώραν καταντήσας τόν τε δυνάστην ὑποχείριον
λαβὼν ἀπέκτεινε καὶ τὸ ἔθνος ὑποχείριον ἐποίησεν.
ἑξῆς δ᾿ εἰς τὴν Πορτικάνου δυναστείαν ἐμβαλὼν
δύο μὲν ἐξ ἐφόδου πόλεις ἐξεπολιόρκησε καὶ τοῖς
στρατιώταις ἐφεὶς διαρπάσαι τὰς οἰκίας ἐνέπρησεν,
αὐτὸν δὲ τὸν Πορτικᾶνον εἰς χωρίον ὀχυρὸν καταφυγόντα
χειρωσάμενος ἀπέκτεινε μαχόμενον. τὰς
δὲ πόλεις ἁπάσας τὰς ὑπὸ τοῦτον τεταγμένας ἐκπολιορκήσας
κατέσκαψε καὶ πολὺν φόβον τοῖς πλησιοχώροις
ἐπέστησεν.
6Ἑξῆς δὲ τήν τε Σάμβου βασιλείαν ἐξεπόρθησε καὶ
τὰς πλείστας πόλεις ἐξανδραποδισάμενος καὶ κατασκάψας


412Book XVII

at the strange and unanticipated manner of its arrival 326/5 b.c. and trembled at the great reputation of the Macedonians. Besides, their own older men advised them not to risk a fight, so they sent out fifty of their leading citizens as envoys, begging Alexander to treat them kindly. The king praised them and agreed to a peace, and was showered with large gifts and heroic honours by them.
Next Alexander received the submission of those who dwelt on either side of the river; they were called Sodrae and Massani.1 Here he built a city Alexandria by the river, and selected for it ten thousand inhabitants.2 Next he came to the country of King Musicanus; getting him into his hands he killed him and made the country subject.3 Then he invaded the kingdom of Porticanus,4 took two cities by storm, allowed the soldiers to plunder the houses, and then set them on fire. Porticanus himself escaped to a stronghold, but Alexander captured it and slew him, still fighting. Then he proceeded to take all of the other cities of his kingdom and destroyed them, and spread the terror of his name throughout the whole region.
Next he ravaged the kingdom of Sambus.5 He enslaved the population of most of the cities and,




1Curtius. 9. 8. 8, merely says “another nation.” The
ethnic Sodrae recalls the name of the lowest Hindu caste, the
Sudras.2Curtius, 9. 8. 8; Arrian, 6. 15. 2 (at the junction of the Acesines and the Indus).3Arrian, 6. 15. 5–7. He revolted later, Arrian, 6. 17. 1–2. Curtius speaks of a people called Musicani (9. 8. 8–10) and mentions this revolt (9. 8. 16). Onesicritus is the source of anecdotes about this kingdom (Strabo, 15. 1. 34; Jacoby, Fragmente der griechischen Historiker, no. 134, F 24).4Curtius, 9. 8. 11–12; Arrian, 6. 16. 1–2 (calling him “Oxycanus”).5Curtius, 9. 8. 13–16; Plutarch, Alexander, 64. 1 (Sabbas; Strabo, 15. 1. 33, has Sabus); Arrian, 6. 16. 3–4.413