Diodorus of Sicily
3τῶν Καθαίων1 χώραν παρεγένετο. παρὰ δὲ τούτοις
νόμιμον ἦν τὰς γυναῖκας τοῖς ἀνδράσι συγκατακαίεσθαι·
τοῦτο δ᾿ ἐκυρώθη τὸ δόγμα παρὰ τοῖς
βαρβάροις διὰ μίαν γυναῖκα φαρμάκοις ἀνελοῦσαν
4τὸν ἄνδρα. ὁ δ᾿ οὖν βασιλεὺς τὴν μεγίστην καὶ
ὀχυρωτάτην πόλιν μετὰ πολλῶν κινδύνων ἐκπολιορκήσας
ἐνέπρησεν. ἄλλην δ᾿ ἀξιόλογον πολιορκοῦντος
αὐτοῦ καὶ μεθ᾿ ἱκετηριῶν δεηθέντων τῶν Ἰνδῶν
ἀπέλυσε τῶν κινδύνων αὐτούς.
Μετὰ δὲ ταῦτ᾿ ἐστράτευσεν ἐπὶ τὰς ὑπὸ Σωπείθην
τεταγμένας πόλεις, εὐνομουμένας καθ᾿ ὑπερβολήν.
τά τε γὰρ ἄλλα πρὸς δόξαν πολιτεύονται
καὶ τὸ κάλλος παρ᾿ αὐτοῖς τιμιώτατον νενόμισται.
5διόπερ ἐκ νηπίου παρ᾿ αὐτοῖς τὰ βρέφη διακρίνεται
καὶ τὰ μὲν ἄρτια καὶ τὴν φύσιν ἔχοντα πρὸς
εὐπρέπειαν καὶ ἰσχὺν εὔθετον τρέφεται, τὰ δὲ καταδεῆ
τοῖς σώμασιν ἀνάξια τροφῆς ἡγούμενοι διαφθείρουσιν.
6ἀκολούθως δὲ τούτοις καὶ τοὺς γάμους
ποιοῦνται προικὸς μὲν καὶ τῆς ἄλλης πολυτελείας
ἀφροντιστοῦντες, κάλλους δὲ καὶ τῆς τοῦ σώματος
7ὑπεροχῆς μόνον φροντίζοντες. διόπερ οἱ πλεῖστοι
τῶν ἐν ταύταις ταῖς πόλεσι κατοικούντων διαφέρουσι
τῶν ἄλλων ἀξιώμασιν.
Παρὰ δὲ πάντας ὁ βασιλεὺς Σωπείθης περίβλεπτος
ὢν ἐπὶ τῷ κάλλει καὶ τῷ μήκει τοὺς τέτταρας
πήχεις ὑπεράγων προῆλθε μὲν ἐκ τῆς πόλεως
τῆς ἐχούσης τὰ βασίλεια, παραδοὺς δ᾿ αὑτὸν καὶ
τὴν βασιλείαν Ἀλεξάνδρῳ πάλιν ταύτην ἀπέλαβε



1Καθαρῶν codd.; corrected by Wesseling on the basis of
general usage.384Book XVII

into the country of the Cathaeans, among whom it 326/5 b.c. was the custom for wives to be cremated together with their husbands. This law had been put into effect there because of a woman who had killed her husband with poison.1 Here he captured their greatest and strongest city after much fighting and burned it. He was in process of besieging another notable city when the Indians came to him with suppliant branches and he spared them further attack.2
Next he undertook a campaign against the cities under the rule of Sopeithes. These are exceedingly well-governed. All the functions of this state are directed toward the acquiring of good repute, and beauty is valued there more than anything. From birth, their children are subjected to a process of selection. Those who are well formed and designed by nature to have a fine appearance and bodily strength are reared, while those who are bodily deficient are destroyed as not worth bringing up. So they plan their marriages without regard to dower or any other financial consideration, but consider only beauty and physical excellence. In consequence, most of the inhabitants of these cities enjoy a higher reputation than those elsewhere.3
Their king Sopeithes was strikingly handsome and tall beyond the rest, being over four cubits in height.4 He came out of his capital city and gave over himself and his kingdom to Alexander, but received it back



1Strabo (15. 1. 30) credits this story to Onesicritus
(Jacoby, op. cit. no. 134, F 21).2Curtius (9. 1. 23) is as vague as Diodorus. The city was Sangala (Arrian, 5. 22–24. 5).3Curtius, 9. 1. 24–26; Strabo, 15. 1. 30 (where the story is credited to Onesicritus: Jacoby, op. cit. no. 134, F 21).4Curtius, 9. 1. 28–30. Tarn supposes that he and Poms would have been about the same height, but that the cubit used in measuring them was different (p. 376, note 1).385