Diodorus of Sicily

πράξεις οἰκεῖον εἶναι νομίζομεν ἐκθεῖναι πρότερον
τάς τε αἰτίας τῆς ἀποστάσεως καὶ τῆς ὅλης Ἀσίας
τὴν θέσιν καὶ τῶν σατραπειῶν τὰ μεγέθη καὶ τὰς
ἰδιότητας. οὕτως γὰρ μάλιστα εὐπαρακολούθητος
τοῖς ἀναγινώσκουσιν ἡ διήγησις ἔσται, πρὸ ὀφθαλμῶν
τεθείσης τῆς ὅλης τοποθεσίας καὶ τῶν διαστημάτων.
2Ἀπὸ τοίνυν τοῦ κατὰ Κιλικίαν Ταύρου συνεχὲς
ὄρος δι᾿ ὅλης τῆς Ἀσίας διήκει μέχρι τοῦ Καυκάσου
καὶ τοῦ πρὸς ἀνατολὰς Ὠκεανοῦ· τοῦτο δὲ
παντοδαποῖς ἀναστήμασι λόφων διειλημμένον ἰδίας
3καθ᾿ ἕκαστον ἔχει προσηγορίας. τοῦτον δὲ τὸν
τρόπον εἰς δύο μέρη διαιρουμένης τῆς Ἀσίας τὸ
μὲν πρὸς τὰς ἄρκτους αὐτῆς νένευκεν, τὸ δὲ πρὸς
τὴν μεσημβρίαν. ἀκολούθως δὲ τούτοις τοῖς κλίμασι
τῶν ποταμῶν τὰς ῥύσεις ἐχόντων ἀντιπροσώπους,
οἱ μὲν εἰς τὴν Κασπίαν θάλατταν, οἱ δὲ εἰς
τὸν Εὔξεινον Πόντον, ἔνιοι δὲ εἰς τὸν ὑπὸ τὰς
ἄρκτους Ὠκεανὸν ἐξερεύγονται. οἱ δ᾿ ἀντικείμενοι
τούτοις οἱ μὲν εἰς τὸν κατὰ τὴν Ἰνδικήν, οἱ δ᾿ ἐπὶ
τὸν συνεχῆ τῆς ἠπείρου ταύτης κείμενον Ὠκεανὸν
ἐκβάλλουσιν, ἔνιοι δ᾿ εἰς τὴν καλουμένην Ἐρυθρὰν
4θάλατταν καταφέρονται. ὁμοίως δὲ τούτοις διειλημμένων
τῶν σατραπειῶν αἱ μὲν ἐπὶ τὴν ἄρκτον, αἱ
δ᾿ ἐπὶ τὴν μεσημβρίαν ἔχουσι τὰς κλίσεις. καὶ
πρώτη μὲν τῶν πρὸς τὴν ἄρκτον ἐστραμμένων
κεῖται παρὰ τὸν Τάναϊν ποταμὸν Σογδιανὴ καὶ
Βακτριανή, καὶ τούτων ἐχομένη Ἀρία καὶ Παρθυαία
24Book XVIII

I think it proper first to set forth the causes of the 323 b.c. revolt, the situation of Asia as a whole, and the size and characteristics of the satrapies; for by placing before my readers’ eyes the topography in general and the distances I shall best make the narrative easy for them to follow.
Now from the Cilician Taurus a continuous range of mountains extends through the whole of Asia as far as the Caucasus and the Eastern Ocean.1 This range is divided by crests of varying heights, and each part has its proper name. Asia is thus separated into two parts, one sloping to the north, the other to the south. Corresponding to these slopes, the rivers flow in opposite directions. Of those on one side, some enter the Caspian Sea, some the Pontus Euxinus, and some the Northern Ocean. Of the rivers that lie opposite to these, some empty into the ocean that faces India, some into the ocean that is adjacent to this continent, and some flow into what is called the Red Sea.2 The satrapies likewise are divided, some sloping toward the north, the others toward the south. The first of those that face the north lie along the Tanais River3: Sogdianê and Bactrianê; and next to these are Aria, Parthia,



1The Caucasus is the Hindu Kush. The Eastern Ocean is specifically the Bay of Bengal, but thought of as forming the eastern boundary of Asia. The division of Asia by the Taurus Range follows Eratosthenes (Strabo, 2. 1. 1, 2. 5. 31–32).2These three bodies of water are, respectively, the Arabian Sea, the Bay of Bengal (called the Eastern Ocean above), and the Persian Gulf. This continent” is probably Asia.3Properly the Don, but here the Oxus (modern Amu-Darya),
or possibly the Jaxartes (Syr-Darya), both of which are frequently confused with the Don by ancient writers: or, perhaps, are thought to be part of the Don River system.25