Diodorus of Sicily

Παίονας διαπρεσβευσάμενος καὶ τοὺς μὲν δωρεαῖς
διαφθείρας, τοὺς δ᾿ ἐπαγγελίαις φιλανθρώποις
πείσας κατὰ τὸ παρὸν εἰρήνην ἄγειν πρὸς αὐτοὺς
συνέθετο. ὁμοίως δὲ καὶ τὸν Παυσανίαν ἀπέστησε
τῆς καθόδου τὸν κατάγειν μέλλοντα βασιλέα δωρεαῖς
5πείσας. Μαντίας δ᾿ ὁ τῶν Ἀθηναίων στρατηγὸς
καταπλεύσας εἰς Μεθώνην αὐτὸς μὲν ἐνταῦθα
κατέμεινε τὸν Ἀργαῖον δὲ μετὰ τῶν μισθοφόρων
ἐπὶ τὰς Αἰγὰς ἀπέστειλεν. οὗτος δὲ προσελθὼν
τῇ πόλει παρεκάλει τοὺς ἐν ταῖς Αἰγαῖς προσδέξασθαι
τὴν κάθοδον καὶ γενέσθαι τῆς αὑτοῦ1 βασιλείας
6ἀρχηγούς. οὐδενὸς δ᾿ αὐτῷ προσέχοντος ὁ
μὲν ἀνέκαμπτεν εἰς τὴν Μεθώνην, ὁ δὲ Φίλιππος
ἐπιφανεὶς μετὰ στρατιωτῶν καὶ συνάψας μάχην
πολλοὺς μὲν ἀνεῖλε τῶν μισθοφόρων, τοὺς δὲ λοιποὺς
εἴς τινα λόφον καταφυγόντας ὑποσπόνδους
ἀφῆκεν, λαβὼν παρ᾿ αὐτῶν ἐκδότους τοὺς φυγάδας.
Φίλιππος μὲν οὖν ταύτην πρώτην μάχην νικήσας
εὐθαρσεστέρους ἐποίησε τοὺς Μακεδόνας πρὸς τοὺς
7ἐφεξῆς ἀγῶνας. ἅμα δὲ τούτοις πραττομένοις
Θάσιοι μὲν ᾤκισαν τὰς ὀνομαζομένας Κρηνίδας,
ἃς ὕστερον ὁ βασιλεὺς ἀφ᾿ ἑαυτοῦ ὀνομάσας Φιλίππους
ἐπλήρωσεν οἰκητόρων.
8Τῶν δὲ συγγραφέων Θεόπομπος ὁ Χῖος τὴν






1αὑτοῦ Dindorf: αὐτοῦ.242Book XVI

he sent an embassy to the Paeonians, and by corrupting 390/59 b.c. some with gifts and persuading others by generous promises he made an agreement with them to maintain peace for the present. In similar fashion he prevented the return of Pausanias by winning over with gifts the king1 who was on the point of attempting his restoration. Mantias, the Athenian general, who had sailed into Methonê,2 stayed behind there himself but sent Argaeus with his mercenaries to Aegae.3 And Argaeus approached the city and invited the population of Aegae to welcome his return and become the founders of his own kingship. When no one paid any attention to him, he turned back to Methonê, but Philip, who suddenly appeared with his soldiers, engaged him in battle, slew many of his mercenaries, and released under a truce4 the rest, who had fled for refuge to a certain hill, after he had first obtained from them the exiles, whom they delivered to him.
Now Philip by his success in this first battle encouraged the Macedonians to meet the succeeding contests with greater temerity. While these things were going on, the Thasians settled the place called Crenides,5 which the king afterward named Philippi for himself and made a populous settlement.
Among the writers of history Theopompus of

1The Thracian king mentioned chap. 2. 6.2See chap. 2. 6. Methonê is above Pydna near the Macedonian
border.3Old capital of Macedonia, considerably inland.4Some of these were Athenians whose losses he made good
and through whom he tried to arrange an alliance with
Athens. See Demosthenes, 23. 121.5North-east of Mt. Pangaeus in Thrace. “Philippi is a city that was formerly called Datus, and before that Crenides, because there are many springs bubbling around a hill there. Philip fortified it because he considered it an excellent stronghold against the Thracians, and named it from himself, Philippi.” Appian, Civil Wars, 4. 105, translated by White (L. C. L.). Datus was the older name found in Herodotus, 9. 75. Κρηνίδες is found in IG 22. 127 of the year 356/5. This seems to be the first instance of the practice, later so common, of naming cities for a king.243