Diodorus of Sicily

Ὀξυάρτῃ τῷ Βακτριανῷ,1 οὗ τὴν θυγατέρα
Ῥωξάνην γεγαμηκὼς ἦν Αλέξανδρος. καὶ
Σιβυρτίῳ μὲν ἔδωκεν Ἀραχωσίαν καὶ Κεδρωσίαν,
Στασάνορι δὲ τῷ Σολίῳ τὴν Ἀρίαν καὶ Δραγγινήν,
Φιλίππῳ δὲ προσώρισε Βακτριανὴν καὶ
Σογδιανήν, Φραταφέρνῃ δὲ Παρθυαίαν καὶ Ὑρκανίαν
καὶ Πευκέστῃ μὲν Περσίδα, Τληπολέμῳ
δὲ Καρμανίαν, Ἀτροπάτῃ2 δὲ Μηδίαν, Ἄρχωνι δὲ
τὴν Βαβυλωνίαν, Ἀρκεσιλάῳ δὲ Μεσοποταμίαν.
4Σέλευκον δ᾿ ἔταξεν ἐπὶ τὴν ἱππαρχίαν τῶν ἑταίρων,
οὖσαν ἐπιφανεστάτην· ταύτης γὰρ Ἡφαιστίων
πρῶτος μὲν ἡγήσατο, μετὰ δὲ τοῦτον Περδίκκας,
5τρίτος δ᾿ ὁ προειρημένος Σέλευκος. ἐπὶ δὲ τὴν
κατακομιδὴν τοῦ σώματος καὶ τὴν κατασκευὴν τῆς
ἁρμαμάξης τῆς μελλούσης κομίζειν τὸ σῶμα τοῦ
τετελευτηκότος βασιλέως εἰς Ἄμμωνα ἔταξαν
Ἀρριδαῖον.
4. Κρατερὸς δὲ τῶν ἐπιφανεστάτων ἀνδρῶν3
ὑπάρχων ἔτυχε προαπεσταλμένος εἰς Κιλικίαν ὑπ᾿
Ἀλεξάνδρου μετὰ τῶν ἀπολυθέντων τῆς στρατείας,
ὄντων μυρίων. ἅμα δ᾿ εἰληφὼς ἐντολὰς ἦν
ἐγγράπτους, ἃς ἔδωκε μὲν ὁ βασιλεὺς αὐτῷ συντελέσαι,
μεταλλάξαντος δ᾿ Ἀλεξάνδρου τοῖς διαδόχοις
2ἔδοξε μὴ συντελεῖν τὰ βεβουλευμένα. ὁ







1βασιλεῖ after Βακτριανῷ deleted by Wesseling.2Ἀτροπάτῃ Bongars: Ἀτράπη RX, Ἀτραπῆ F.3ἀνδρῶν added by Fischer.18Book XVIII

he assigned to Oxyartes the Bactrian, whose daughter 323 b.c. Roxanê Alexander had married. He gave Arachosia and Cedrosia to Sibyrtius, Aria and Dranginê to Stasanor of Soli, Bactrianê and Sogdianê to Philip, Parthia and Hyrcania to Phrataphernes,1 Persia to Peucestes, Carmania to Tlepolemus,2 Media to Atropates,3
Babylonia to Archon, and Mesopotamia to Arcesilaüs. He placed Seleucus in command of the cavalry of the Companions, a most distinguished office; for Hephaestion commanded them first, Perdiccas
after him, and third the above-named Seleucus. The transportation of the body of the deceased king and the preparation of the vehicle that was to carry the body to Amnion they assigned to Arrhidaeus.4
4. It happened that Craterus, who was one of the most prominent men, had previously been sent away by Alexander to Cilicia with those men who had been discharged from the army, ten thousand in number.5 At the same time he had received written instructions which the king had given him for execution; nevertheless, after the death of Alexander, it seemed best to the successors not to carry out these plans.6 For




1Dexippus gives this name as Rhadaphernes.2Dexippus gives this name as Neoptolemus.3Atropates, father-in-law of Perdiccas, had been satrap
of all Media (Arrian, Anabasis, 4. 18. 3, 7. 4. 5). He now
retained the north-west portion, henceforth known as Lesser Media or Media Atropatenê, which soon became independent and was ruled by his descendants for many years (Strabo, 11. 13. 1).4In spite of Justin (13. 4. 6), this is not Philip Arrhidaeus, the king. Cp. chaps. 26–28 and 36. 7. Pausanias (1. 6. 3) states that the body was to be buried at Aegae in Macedon, and Arrian (FGrH, 156. 9. 25) implies that the body was not to go to Egypt.5Cp. Book 17. 109. 1.6For a discussion of these plans in general, and in particular of the plan for invading Africa and Europe, see W. W. Tarn, Journal of Hellenic Studies, 49 (1939), pp. 124–135; and C. A. Robinson, Jr., American Journal of Philology, 61 (1940), pp. 402–412.19