Diodorus of Sicily

Κυρήνην πλοῦν ἐποιοῦντο. τῆς δὲ τούτων πρότερον
παρουσίας1 οἱ μὲν Κυρηναῖοι θαρρήσαντες
τοῖς γεγονόσι προτερήμασι μάχην συνῆψαν καὶ
νικήσαντες τὸν Θίβρωνα πολλοὺς τῶν στρατιωτῶν
3ἀπέκτειναν. διὰ δὲ τὰς ἐλαττώσεις ὁ Θίβρων
ἀπογινώσκων ἤδη τὰ κατὰ τὴν Κυρήνην παραδόξως
πάλιν ἐθάρρησε· τῶν γὰρ ἀπὸ Ταινάρου στρατιωτῶν
καταπλευσάντων καὶ μεγάλης αὐτῷ χειρὸς
4προσγενομένης εὔελπις ἐγένετο τῇ ψυχῇ. οἱ δὲ
Κυρηναῖοι πάλιν θεωροῦντες τὸν πόλεμον αὐξόμενον
μετεπέμψαντο τὴν συμμαχίαν παρὰ τῶν
πλησιοχώρων Λιβύων καὶ παρὰ τῶν Καρχηδονίων,
ἀθροίσαντες δὲ τοὺς ἅπαντας μετὰ τῶν πολιτικῶν
στρατιώτας τρισμυρίους ἡτοιμάζοντο παρατάξει
περὶ τῶν ὅλων διακριθῆναι. γενομένης δὲ παρατάξεως
μεγάλης ὁ μὲν Θίβρων νικήσας τῇ μάχῃ
καὶ πολλοὺς ἀνελὼν περιχαρὴς ἦν, ὡς αὐτίκα μάλα
5κυριεύσων τῶν πλησίον πόλεων, οἱ δὲ Κυρηναῖοι
τῶν στρατηγῶν ἁπάντων ἀνῃρημένων ἐν τῇ μάχῃ
τὸν Κρῆτα Μνασικλῆν μεθ᾿ ἑτέρων εἵλοντο στρατηγόν.
Θίβρων δ᾿ ἐπαρθεὶς τῇ νίκῃ τὸν λιμένα τῶν
Κυρηναίων ἐπολιόρκησε καὶ τῇ Κυρήνῃ καθ᾿ ἡμέραν
6προσβολὰς ἐποιεῖτο. χρονίζοντος δὲ τοῦ πολέμου
Κυρηναῖοι μὲν σπανίζοντες τροφῆς ἐστασίασαν πρὸς
ἀλλήλους· ἐπικρατούντων δὲ τῶν δημοτικῶν καὶ
τοὺς κτηματικοὺς ἐκβαλλόντων οἱ τῆς πατρίδος
στερηθέντες ἔφυγον οἱ μὲν πρὸς Θίβρωνα, οἱ δ᾿ εἰς
7Αἴγυπτον. οὗτοι δὲ πείσαντες τὸν Πτολεμαῖον
κατάγειν αὐτοὺς ἧκον ἄγοντες δύναμιν ἀξιόλογον
πεζικήν τε καὶ ναυτικὴν καὶ στρατηγὸν Ὀφέλλαν·
ὧν τὴν παρουσίαν ἀκούσαντες οἱ παρὰ τῷ Θίβρωνι
φυγάδες, νυκτὸς ἐπιχειρήσαντες πρὸς τούτους ἀπιέναι
1τῆς δὲ τούτων πρότερον παρουσίας Fischer, πρὸ δὲ τῆς τούτων παρουσίας Rhodoman, τῇ δὲ τούτων ἀπουσίᾳ . . . θαρρήσαντες καὶ τοῖς Wesseling: τῇ δὲ τούτων παρουσίᾳ R (ἀπουσίᾳ written above by second hand) XF.74Book XVIII

Cyrenê. But before their arrival the Cyrenians, encouraged 322 b.c. by their successes, joined battle and defeated Thibron, killing many of his soldiers. But when, on account of these failures, Thibron was now ready to abandon the operations against Cyrenê, he unexpectedly regained courage; for as soon as the soldiers from Taenarum put into port and a large force was added to his strength, he became confident in spirit. As the Cyrenians saw the tide of war again rising, they summoned the allied forces from the neighbouring Libyans and from the Carthaginians, and having collected in all thirty thousand men including their citizen soldiers, they made ready to reach a final decision in battle. When a great battle had taken place, Thibron, having won the victory with great slaughter of the enemy, was overjoyed, believing that he would at once capture the adjacent cities; but the Cyrenians, whose commanders had all been killed in the battle, elected the Cretan Mnasicles general along with others. Thibron, elated by the victory, laid siege to the port of the Cyrenians and made daily assaults on Cyrenê. As the war continued a long time, the Cyrenians, who were in want of food, quarrelled among themselves; and the commons, gaining the upper hand, drove out the rich, who, bereft of their fatherland, fled, some to Thibron, others to Egypt. The latter, after persuading Ptolemy to restore them, returned bringing with them a considerable force, both infantry and naval, with Ophellas as general. The exiles who were with Thibron, hearing of the approach of these men and attempting to


75