Diodorus of Sicily

Μήδιον, τοῦ δὲ στρατοπέδου καταστήσας στρατηγὸν
4Δόκιμον. οὗτοι δὲ παραγενόμενοι πρὸς τὴν
πόλιν τῶν Μιλησίων τούς τε πολίτας ἐκάλου ἐπὶ
τὴν ἐλευθερίαν καὶ τὴν φρουρουμένην ἄκραν ἐκπολιορκήσαντες
εἰς αὐτονομίαν ἀποκατέστησαν τὸ
5πολίτευμα. περὶ ταῦτα δ᾿ ὄντων τούτων Ἀντίγονος
Τράλλεις ἐξεπολιόρκησεν· εἰς δὲ Καῦνον
παρελθὼν καὶ τὸν στόλον μεταπεμψάμενος εἷλε καὶ
ταύτην τὴν πόλιν πλὴν τῆς ἄκρας· ταύτην δὲ περιχαρακώσας,
καθ᾿ ὃ μέρος ἦν προμάχεσθαι, συνεχεῖς
προσβολὰς ἐποιεῖτο. ἐπὶ δὲ τὴν Ἰασὸν πόλιν
ἐκπεμφθεὶς Πτολεμαῖος μετὰ δυνάμεως ἱκανῆς
6ἠνάγκασε1 προσθέσθαι τοῖς περὶ Ἀντίγονον. αὗται
μὲν οὖν τῆς Καρίας οὖσαι τοῦτον τὸν τρόπον ὑπετάγησαν
Ἀντιγόνῳ. μετ᾿ ὀλίγας δ᾿ ἡμέρας
ἐλθόντων πρὸς αὐτὸν πρεσβευτῶν παρ᾿ Αἰτωλῶν
καὶ Βοιωτῶν πρὸς μὲν τούτους συμμαχίαν συνέθετο,
τῷ δὲ Κασάνδρῳ συνελθὼν εἰς λόγους ὑπὲρ
εἰρήνης περὶ τὸν Ἑλλήσποντον ἀπῆλθεν ἄπρακτος,
οὐ δυναμένων αὐτῶν οὐδαμῶς συμφωνῆσαι. διόπερ
ὁ Κάσανδρος ἀπογνοὺς τὰς διαλύσεις διέγνω τῶν
κατὰ τὴν Ἑλλάδα πάλιν πραγμάτων ἀντέχεσθαι.
7ἀναζεύξας οὖν μετὰ τριάκοντα νεῶν εἰς Ὠρεὸν
ἐπολιόρκει τὴν πόλιν. ἐνεργῶς δ᾿ αὐτοῦ ταῖς
προσβολαῖς χρωμένου καὶ τοῦ πολίσματος ἤδη
κατὰ κράτος ἁλισκομένου παρεγένετο βοηθήσων
τοῖς Ὠρείταις Τελεσφόρος μὲν ἐκ Πελοποννήσου
μετὰ νεῶν εἴκοσι καὶ στρατιωτῶν χιλίων, Μήδιος
8δ᾿ ἐκ τῆς Ἀσίας ἔχων ναῦς ἑκατόν. οὗτοι δ᾿
ὁρῶντες ἐφορμούσας τῷ λιμένι τὰς τοῦ Κασάνδρου

1ἠνάγκασε Wesseling: ἠναγκάσθη.40Book XIX

admiral of the fleet and making Docimus general 313 b.c. of the army.1 These men, coming to the city of the Milesians, encouraged the citizens to assert their freedom; and, after taking by siege the citadel, which was held by a garrison, they restored the independence of the government. While they were thus engaged, Antigonus besieged and took Tralles; then, proceeding to Caunus and summoning the fleet, he captured that city also except for its citadel. Investing this, he kept making continuous attacks on the side where it was most easily assailed. Ptolemaeus,2
who had been sent to Iasus with an adequate force, compelled that city to support Antigonus. In this way, then, these cities, which were in Caria, were made subject to Antigonus. A few days later, when ambassadors came to the latter from the Aetolians and the Boeotians, he made an alliance with them; but, when he entered into negotiations with Cassander about peace in the Hellespontine region, he accomplished nothing since they could in no way agree. For this reason Cassander gave up hope of settlement and decided to play a part once more in the affairs of Greece. Setting out for Oreüs,3 therefore, with thirty ships, he laid siege to the city. While he was vigorously attacking and was already at the point of taking the city by storm, reinforcements appeared for the people of Oreüs: Telesphorus from the Peloponnesus with twenty ships and a thousand soldiers, and Medius from Asia with a hundred ships. They saw the ships of Cassander blockading the harbour and threw fire



1For Medius cp. chap. 69. 3 and note. Nothing is known of the earlier career of Docimus.2The nephew of Antigonus, cp. chap. 68. 5.3At the northern end of Euboea.41