Diodorus of Sicily

ἐν οἷς καὶ τῶν ἐπιφανεστάτων ἡγεμόνων Ἡφαιστίων
μὲν εἰς τὸν βραχίονα ξυστῷ βληθεὶς ἐτρώθη,
τῶν σωματοφυλάκων ἡγούμενος, τῶν δὲ στρατηγῶν
Περδίκκας καὶ Κοῖνος,1 ἔτι δὲ Μενίδας καί τινες
ἕτεροι τῶν ἐπιφανῶν ἡγεμόνων.
Ἡ μὲν οὖν περὶ Ἄρβηλα γενομένη παράταξις
τοιοῦτον ἔσχε τὸ πέρας.
62. Ἐπ᾿ ἄρχοντος δ᾿ Ἀθήνησιν Ἀριστοφῶντος
ἐν Ῥώμῃ διεδέξαντο τὴν ὑπατικὴν ἀρχὴν Γάιος Δομέττιος
καὶ Αὖλος Κορνήλιος. ἐπὶ δὲ τούτων εἰς
τὴν Ἑλλάδα τῆς περὶ Ἄρβηλα μάχης διαδοθείσης
πολλαὶ τῶν πόλεων ὑφορώμεναι τὴν αὔξησιν τῶν
Μακεδόνων ἔγνωσαν, ἕως ἔτι τὰ Περσῶν πράγματα
2διαμένει, τῆς ἐλευθερίας ἀντέχεσθαι· βοηθήσειν
γὰρ αὐτοῖς Δαρεῖον καὶ χρημάτων τε πλῆθος
χορηγήσειν πρὸς τὸ δύνασθαι ξενικὰς μεγάλας
δυνάμεις συνίστασθαι καὶ τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον μὴ δυνήσεσθαι
3διαιρεῖν τὰς δυνάμεις. εἰ δὲ περιόψονται
τοὺς Πέρσας καταπολεμηθέντας, μονωθήσεσθαι
τοὺς Ἕλληνας καὶ μηκέτι δυνήσεσθαι φροντίσαι τῆς
ἑαυτῶν ἐλευθερίας.
4Προεκαλέσατο δὲ πρὸς τὴν ἀπόστασιν τοὺς Ἕλληνας
καὶ ὁ περὶ τὴν Θρᾴκην νεωτερισμὸς κατὰ
5τοὺς ὑποκειμένους καιροὺς γενόμενος· Μέμνων γὰρ
ὁ καθεσταμένος στρατηγὸς τῆς Θρᾴκης, ἔχων δύναμιν



1Κόϊντος RX; Κόννος F.294Book XVII

group of commanders, Hephaestion was wounded with 331/0 b.c. a spear thrust in the arm; he had commanded the bodyguards.1 Perdiccas and Coenus, of the general’s group, were also wounded, so also Menidas and others of the higher commanders.2
That was the outcome of the battle near Arbela.
62. When Aristophon was archon at Athens, the 330/29 b.c. consular office at Rome was assumed by Gaius Domitius and Aulus Cornelius.3 In this year word was brought to Greece about the battle near Arbela, and many of the cities became alarmed at the growth of Macedonian power and decided that they should strike for their freedom while the Persian cause was still alive. They expected that Dareius would help them and send them much money so that they could gather great armies of mercenaries, while Alexander would not be able to divide his forces. If, on the other hand, they watched idly while the Persians were utterly defeated, the Greeks would be isolated and never again be able to think of recovering their freedom.
There was also an upheaval in Thrace at just this time which seemed to offer the Greeks an opportunity for freeing themselves. Memnon, who had been designated governor-general there, had a military force



1Curtius, 4. 16. 32; Arrian, 3. 15. 2. The meaning of
this designation of Hephaestion is obscure. He did not command
the footguards, the ὑπασπισταί, for Nicanor, Parmenion’s
son, was still their commander in 330 (Arrian, 3. 21. 8) and
only died later in that year (Arrian, 3. 25. 4). The small
group of bodyguards proper had no commander, and it is quite uncertain when Hephaestion became a member. He is first so called in 325 (Arrian, 6. 28. 4) and is conspicuously not so called in 328 (Arrian, 4. 12. 6; but Arrian’s usage is not consistent, cp. 4. 24. 10). He was presumably not a bodyguard in 330 when he and Cleitus divided Philotas’s command of the Companion Cavalry. This seems to exclude the translation: “fighting first among the bodyguards.”2Curtius, 4. 16. 32. Menidas had commanded a cavalry unit on the extreme right (Arrian, 3. 12. 3).3Aristophon was archon at Athens from July 330 to June 329 b.c. The consuls of 332 b.c. were Cn. Domitius Calvinus and A. Cornelius Cossus Arvina (Broughton, 1. 141).295