Diodorus of Sicily

τῶν στρατιωτῶν διὰ τὴν ὑπερβολὴν τοῦ
καύματος, ἅτε καὶ τῆς ὥρας οὔσης περὶ κυνὸς ἀνατολάς.
3ἐπεὶ δὲ παρεγενήθη πρὸς τὸν Κοπράτην
ποταμόν, τὰ πρὸς τὴν διάβασιν παρεσκευάζετο.
οὗτος δὲ ἔκ τινος ὀρεινῆς ῥέων ἐξέπιπτεν εἰς τὸν
Πασιτίγριν, ὃς ἀπεῖχε τῆς Εὐμενοῦς στρατοπεδείας
σταδίους ὀγδοήκοντα καὶ τὸ μὲν πλάτος εἶχεν ὡς ἂν
τεσσάρων πλέθρων, ὀξὺς δὲ ὢν ἐν τῇ καταφορᾷ
4προσεδεῖτο πλοίων ἢ ζεύγματος. καταλαβὼν δ᾿
ὀλίγα πλοῖα κοντωτὰ διεβίβασεν ἐν τούτοις τινὰς
τῶν πεζῶν, προστάξας τάφρον ὀρύττειν καὶ χάρακα
βαλομένους ὑποδέχεσθαι τὴν λοιπὴν δύναμιν. Εὐμενὴς
δὲ πυθόμενος παρὰ τῶν κατασκόπων τὴν
ἐπιβολὴν τῶν πολεμίων, διαβὰς τὸ ζεῦγμα τοῦ
Τίγριδος μετὰ στρατιωτῶν μὲν πεζῶν τετρακισχιλίων
ἱππέων δὲ χιλίων τριακοσίων, κατέλαβε
διαβεβηκότας τῶν Ἀντιγόνου πεζοὺς μὲν πλείους
τῶν τρισχιλίων, ἱππεῖς δὲ τετρακοσίους καὶ τῶν
εἰωθότων σποράδην διαβαίνειν ἐπὶ τὰς προνομὰς
5οὐκ ἐλάττους ἑξακισχιλίων. ἄφνω δὲ προσπεσὼν
τεθορυβημένοις τοὺς μὲν ἄλλους εὐθὺς ἐτρέψατο,
τῶν δὲ Μακεδόνων τοὺς ὑποστάντας τῇ βίᾳ καὶ τῷ
πλήθει κατισχύσας φυγεῖν εἰς τὸν ποταμὸν πάντας
6κατηνάγκασε. πάντων δὲ ὁρμησάντων ἐπὶ τὰ
πλοῖα, ταῦτα μὲν ὑπὸ τοῦ πλήθους τῶν ἐπιβάντων
κατεποντίσθη, τῶν δὲ διανήχεσθαι τολμησάντων οἱ
πλεῖστοι μὲν ὑπὸ τοῦ ῥεύματος παρενεχθέντες
7διεφθάρησαν, ὀλίγοι δὲ διεσώθησαν. οἱ δὲ ἄπειροι
τοῦ κολυμβᾶν ὄντες τὴν αἰχμαλωσίαν τῆς ἐν τῷ


280Book XIX

of men because of the extreme heat, for it was in 317 b.c. fact the season when the Dog Star rises.1 When he reached the Coprates River, he began to make preparations for crossing. This river, running from a certain mountainous region, enters the Pasitigris, which was at a distance of about eighty stades2 from Eumenes’ camp. It is about four plethra in width,3 but since it is swift in current, it required boats or a bridge. Seizing a few punts, he sent some of the infantry across in them, ordering them to dig a moat and build a palisade in front of it, and to receive the rest of the army. But as soon as Eumenes heard from scouts of the enemy’s move, he crossed the pontoon bridge over the Tigris4 with four thousand foot soldiers and thirteen hundred horsemen and surprised the soldiers of Antigonus who had crossed—more than three thousand foot soldiers, four hundred cavalry, and not less than six thousand of those soldiers who were in the habit of crossing in scattered groups in search of forage. Falling suddenly upon them while they were in disorder, Eumenes routed the rest of them at once, and those of the Macedonians who resisted he overcame by his onset and by weight of numbers and compelled them all to flee to the river. They all rushed to the boats, but these were submerged by the great number of the men who embarked, and most of those who ventured to swim were carried away by the current and drowned, only a few getting safely over. Those who did not know how to swim, preferring captivity to



1In the latter part of June. The battle on the Coprates
River, accordingly, is to be placed in July, 317.2A little more than nine miles.3About 400 feet.4i.e. the Pasitigris. Plutarch (Eumenes, 14. 2) seems to place the following battle on the Pasitigris rather than on the Coprates.281