Diodorus of Sicily

τῷ υἱῷ, παραδοὺς αὐτῷ πεζοὺς δισχιλίους
καὶ πεντακοσίους, ἑξῆς δ᾿ ἔταξε τοὺς Συρακοσίους,
ὄντας τρισχιλίους πεντακοσίους, εἶτα μισθοφόρους
Ἕλληνας τρισχιλίους, τελευταίους δὲ Σαμνίτας καὶ
Τυρρηνοὺς καὶ Κελτοὺς τρισχιλίους. μετὰ δὲ τῆς
θεραπείας αὐτὸς τοῦ λαιοὖ1 κέρατος προηγωνίζετο,
χιλίοις ὁπλίταις πρὸς τὸν ἱερὸν λόχον τῶν Καρχηδονίων
ἀντιτεταγμένος· τοὺς δὲ τοξότας καὶ σφενδονήτας
πεντακοσίους ὄντας ἐπὶ τὰ κέρατα διεῖλεν.
2ὅπλα μὲν οὖν οἱ στρατιῶται μόγις εἶχον ἱκανά·
τοὺς δ᾿ ἐκ τῶν ἀφράκτων2 ὁρῶν ἀνόπλους ὄντας
τὰ τῶν ἀσπίδων ἔλυτρα ῥάβδοις διέτεινε καὶ τῇ
φαντασίᾳ τὸν τῆς ἀσπίδος κύκλον μιμησάμενος
ἀνέδωκεν αὐτοῖς πρὸς μὲν τὴν χρείαν οὐδαμῶς
ἐπιτήδεια, πρὸς δὲ τὴν πόρρωθεν ὁρωμένην ὄψιν
δυνάμενα δόξαν ὅπλων ἐμποιῆσαι τοῖς ἀγνοοῦσι
3τἀληθές. ὁρῶν δὲ τοὺς στρατιώτας καταπεπληγμένους
τὸ πλῆθος τῆς βαρβαρικῆς ἵππου καὶ πεζῆς3
δυνάμεως ἀφῆκεν εἰς τὸ στρατόπεδον κατὰ πλείονας
τόπους γλαῦκας, ἃς ἐκ χρόνου παρεσκεύαστο πρὸς
4τὰς ἀθυμίας τῶν πολλῶν· αὗται δὲ διὰ τῆς φάλαγγος
πετόμεναι καὶ προσκαθίζουσαι ταῖς ἀσπίσι καὶ τοῖς
κράνεσιν εὐθαρσεῖς ἐποίουν τοὺς στρατιώτας, ἑκάστων
οἰωνιζομένων διὰ τὸ δοκεῖν ἱερὸν εἶναι τὸ
5ζῷον τῆς Ἀθηνᾶς. τοιαῦτα4 δέ, καίπερ ἄν τισι
δόξαντα κενὴν ἔχειν ἐπίνοιαν, πολλάκις αἴτια γίνεται




1λαιοῦ Dindorf: ἡμίσους.2ἀτάκτων Madvig, cp. Book 17. 80. 7.3πεζῆς added by Dindorf and doubtfully approved by
Fischer in apparatus.4τοιαῦτα Hertlein: ταῦτα MSS., Fischer.170Book XX

Archagathus,1 giving him twenty-five hundred foot-soldiers; 310 b.c. next he drew up the Syracusans, who were thirty-five hundred in number, then three thousand Greek mercenaries, and finally three thousand Samnites,
Etruscans, and Celts. He himself with his bodyguard fought in front of the left wing, opposing with one thousand hoplites the Sacred Band of the Carthaginians. The five hundred archers and slingers he divided between the wings. There was hardly enough equipment for the soldiers; and when he saw the men of the crews2 unarmed he had the shield covers stretched with sticks, thus making them similar in appearance to the round shields, and distributed them to these men, of no use at all for real service but when seen from a distance capable of creating the impression of arms in the minds of men who did not know the truth. Seeing that his soldiers were frightened by the great numbers of barbarian cavalry and infantry, he let loose into the army in many places owls, which he had long since prepared as a means of relieving the discouragement of the common soldiers. The owls, flying through the phalanx and settling on the shields and helmets, encouraged the soldiers, each man regarding this as an omen because the bird is held sacred to Athena.3 Such things as this, although they might seem to some an inane device, have often been responsible



1He is called Agatharchus in chap. 55. 5 and in Book 21. 3. 2; also by Polybius, 7. 2. 4.2Or, reading ἀτάκτων, “the camp followers.”3For the owls that gave an omen of victory before the battle of Salamis cp. Plutarch. Themistocles, 12. 1, and Aristophanes, Wasps, 1086, together with scholia on the passage.171