Diodorus of Sicily
32. Ἐπ᾿ ἄρχοντος δ᾿ Ἀθήνησιν Θουδήμου1 Ῥωμαῖοι
κατέστησαν ὑπάτους Μάρκον Πόπλιον καὶ
Μάρκον Φάβιον.2 ἐπὶ δὲ τούτων Βοιωτοὶ νενικηκότες
τοὺς Φωκεῖς καὶ νομίσαντες τὸν αἰτιώτατον τῆς
ἱεροσυλίας Φιλόμηλον ὑπὸ θεῶν καὶ ἀνθρώπων κεκολασμένον
ἀποτρέψειν τοὺς ἄλλους ἀπὸ τῆς ὁμοίας
2κακίας ἀνέζευξαν εἰς τὴν οἰκείαν. οἱ δὲ Φωκεῖς
ἀπολυθέντες τοῦ πολέμου κατὰ τὸ παρὸν ἐπανῆλθον
εἰς Δελφοὺς καὶ συνελθόντες μετὰ τῶν συμμάχων
εἰς κοινὴν ἐκκλησίαν ἐβουλεύοντο περὶ τοῦ πολέμου.
οἱ μὲν οὖν ἐπιεικέστατοι πρὸς τὴν εἰρήνην ἔρρεπον,
οἱ δ᾿ ἀσεβεῖς καὶ τόλμῃ καὶ πλεονεξίᾳ διαφέροντες
ἐφρόνουν τὰ ἐναντία καὶ περιεβλέποντο ζητοῦντες
τὸν συνηγορήσοντα ταῖς σφετέραις παρανομίαις.
3Ὀνόμαρχος δὲ πεφροντισμένον λόγον διελθὼν ὑπὲρ
τοῦ τηρεῖν τὴν ἐξ ἀρχῆς προαίρεσιν προετρέψατο
τὰ πλήθη πρὸς τὸν πόλεμον, οὐχ οὕτω τοῦ κοινῇ
συμφέροντος προνοηθείς, ὡς τὸ ἴδιον λυσιτελὲς προκρίνας·
πολλαῖς γὰρ καὶ μεγάλαις δίκαις ὑπὸ τῶν
Ἀμφικτυόνων ἦν καταδεδικασμένος ὁμοίως τοῖς
ἄλλοις καὶ τὰ ὀφλήματα οὐκ ἐκτετικώς. διόπερ
ὁρῶν αἰρετώτερον αὑτῷ3 τὸν πόλεμον ὄντα τῆς
εἰρήνης εὐλόγως τοὺς Φωκεῖς καὶ συμμάχους παρώξυνε
4τηρεῖν τὴν ὑπόστασιν τοῦ Φιλομήλου. αἱρεθεὶς
δὲ στρατηγὸς αὐτοκράτωρ μισθοφόρων τε
πλῆθος ἤθροιζε καὶ τὰς τῶν τετελευτηκότων τάξεις
ἀναπληρώσας καὶ τῷ πλήθει τῶν ξενολογηθέντων
αὐξήσας τὴν δύναμιν μεγάλας παρασκευὰς ἐποιεῖτο



1Θουδήμου Kirchner, Pros. Att. no. 7248: Εὐδήμου.2Μάρκον Φάβιον καὶ Μάρκον Πόπλιον (cp. chap. 15. 1) RF;
all MSS. have Πόπλιον, but Popilius Livy, 7. 17. 1.3αὑτῷ Bekker: αὐτῷ.326Book XVI
32. When Thudemus was archon at Athens, the 353/2 b.c. Romans elected as consuls Marcus Poplius and Marcus Fabius. During their term of office, now that the Boeotians had won a victory over the Phocians and were of the opinion that the fate of Philomelus, who was chiefly responsible for the plundering of the temple and who had been punished by gods and men, would deter the rest from like villainy, they returned to their own country. But the Phocians, now freed from the war, for the present returned to Delphi and there meeting with their allies in a common assembly deliberated on the war. The moderate party inclined toward the peace, but the irreligious, the hot-headed and avaricious were of the opposite opinion and were looking around to find the proper spokesman to support their lawless aims. When Onomarchus arose and delivered a carefully argued speech urging them to adhere to their original purpose, he swung the sentiment of the gathering toward war, though he did so not so much with the intention of consulting the common welfare as with a view to his own interests, for he had been sentenced frequently and severely by the Amphictyons in the same manner as the rest and had not discharged the fines. Accordingly, seeing that war was more desirable for himself than peace, he quite logically urged the Phocians and their allies to adhere to the project of Philomelus. Having been chosen general with supreme command, he began to collect a large number of mercenaries, and, filling the gaps in his ranks caused by the casualties and having increased his army by the large number of foreigners enrolled, he set about making great preparations of
327