Diodorus of Sicily

ὅπλων κατασκευήν, ἅπας δ᾿ ἦν ἐνεργός, τῇ φιλοτιμίᾳ
5τοὺς ἄλλους ὑπερθέσθαι σπεύδων. διόπερ οἱ
μὲν ἐγίνοντο περὶ τοὺς ὀξυβελεῖς καὶ πετροβόλους,
οἱ δὲ περὶ τὴν τῶν ἄλλων κατασκευήν, τινὲς δὲ τὰ
πεπονηκότα τῶν τειχῶν ἐπεσκεύαζον, πλεῖστοι δὲ
λίθους πρὸς τὰ τείχη φέροντες ἐσώρευον. ἐξέπεμψαν
δὲ καὶ τῶν ἄριστα πλεουσῶν νεῶν τρεῖς
ἐπὶ τοὺς πολεμίους καὶ τοὺς παρακομίζοντας αὐτοῖς
6ἀγορὰς ἐμπόρους. αὗται δὲ παραδόξως ἐπιφανεῖσαι
πολλὰ μὲν πλοῖα τῶν ἐπὶ τὴν προνομὴν τῆς χώρας
ὠφελείας χάριν πλεόντων ἐμπόρων κατεπόντισαν,
οὐκ ὀλίγα δὲ καὶ πρὸς τὸν αἰγιαλὸν κατασπῶσαι
συνέκαυσαν, καὶ τῶν αἰχμαλώτων τὰ δυνάμενα
δοῦναι λύτρον παρεκόμιζον εἰς τὴν πόλιν· συνέθεντο
γὰρ οἱ Ῥόδιοι πρὸς τὸν Δημήτριον ὥστε ἀλλήλοις
διδόναι λύτρον ἐλευθέρου μὲν χιλίας δραχμάς, δούλου
δὲ πεντακοσίας.
85. Πρὸς τὰς θέσεις τῶν ὀργάνων δὲ ὁ Δημήτριος
ἄφθονον ἔχων ἁπάντων χορηγίαν ἤρξατο
κατασκευάζειν δύο χελώνας, τὴν μὲν πρὸς τοὺς πετροβόλους,
τὴν δὲ πρὸς τοὺς ὀξυβελεῖς, ἀμφοτέρας
δὲ ταύτας ἐπὶ δύο πλοίων φορτηγῶν διαβεβηκυίας
κατεζευγμένων,1 δύο δὲ πύργους τετραστέγους
ὑπερέχοντας τοῖς ὕψεσι τῶν ἐπὶ τοῦ λιμένος
πύργων, ἑκάτερον δὲ τούτων ἐπὶ δύο πλοίων ἴσων2
βεβηκότα καὶ κατειλημμένον ὅπως ἐν τῷ προσάγειν
ἡ στάσις ἑκατέρα τῶν πλευρῶν ἰσόρροπον
2ἔχῃ τὸ βάρος. κατεσκεύασε δὲ καὶ χάρακα πλωτὸν
1διαβεβηκυίας κατεζευγμένων Geer, διαβεβηκυίας καὶ κατεζευγμένας Fischer: διαβεβηκότων καὶ κατεζευγμένων.2ἴσον Madvig, Fischer.364Book XX

every man was active, each striving in a spirit of 305 b.c. rivalry to surpass the others. Consequently, some were busy with the catapults and ballistae, others with the preparation of other equipment, some were repairing any ruined portions of the walls, and very many were carrying stones to the walls and stacking them. They even sent out three of their swiftest ships against the enemy and the merchant ships which brought provisions to him. These ships on appearing unexpectedly sank many vessels belonging to merchants who had sailed for the purpose of plundering the land for their own profit, and even hauled not a few of the ships up on the beach and burned them. As for the prisoners, those who could pay a ransom they took into the city, for the Rhodians had made an agreement with Demetrius that each should pay the other a thousand drachmae as ransom for a free man and five hundred for a slave.
85. Demetrius, who had an ample supply of everything required for setting up his engines of war, began to prepare two penthouses, one for the ballistae, the other for the catapults, each of them firmly mounted on two cargo vessels fastened together,1 and two towers of four storeys, exceeding in height the towers of the harbour, each of them mounted upon two ships of the same size and fastened there in such a way that as the towers advanced the support on each side upheld an equal weight. He also prepared




1Or, reading καὶ κατεζευγμένας: “mounted on two cargo vessels and fastened securely.”365