Diodorus of Sicily

Θηβαῖος, μέγιστον ἔχων τῶν πολιτῶν ἀξίωμα, συναχθείσης
ἐκκλησίας διελέχθη τοῖς πολίταις, προτρεπόμενος
αὐτοὺς ἀντέχεσθαι τῆς κατὰ θάλατταν
ἡγεμονίας. διελθὼν δὲ λόγον ἐκ χρόνου πεφροντισμένον
ἐδείκνυε τὴν ἐπιβολὴν ταύτην συμφέρουσάν
τε καὶ δυνατήν, τά τε ἄλλα προφερόμενος καὶ
διότι τοῖς πεζῇ κρατοῦσι ῥᾷδιόν ἐστι περιποιήσασθαι
τὴν τῆς θαλάττης ἀρχήν· καὶ γὰρ Ἀθηναίους
ἐν τῷ πρὸς Ξέρξην πολέμῳ διακοσίας ναῦς ἰδίᾳ
πληροῦντας1 Λακεδαιμονίοις δέκα2 ναῦς παρεχομένοις
ὑποτετάχθαι. πολλὰ δὲ καὶ ἄλλα πρὸς ταύτην
τὴν ὑπόθεσιν οἰκείως διαλεχθεὶς ἔπεισε τοὺς
Θηβαίους ἀντέχεσθαι τῆς κατὰ θάλατταν ἀρχῆς.
79. Εὐθὺς οὖν ὁ δῆμος ἐψηφίσατο τριήρεις μὲν
ἑκατὸν ναυπηγεῖσθαι, νεώρια δὲ ταύταις ἴσα3 τὸν
ἀριθμόν, Ῥοδίους δὲ καὶ Χίους καὶ Βυζαντίους
προτρέπεσθαι βοηθῆσαι ταῖς ἐπιβολαῖς. αὐτὸς δὲ
μετὰ δυνάμεως ἐκπεμφθεὶς ἐπὶ4 τὰς εἰρημένας
πόλεις Λάχητα μὲν τὸν Ἀθηναίων στρατηγόν,
ἔχοντα στόλον ἀξιόλογον καὶ διακωλύειν τοὺς
Θηβαίους ἀπεσταλμένον, καταπληξάμενος καὶ ἀποπλεῦσαι
συναναγκάσας, ἰδίας τὰς πόλεις τοῖς
2Θηβαίοις ἐποίησεν. εἰ μὲν οὖν ὁ ἀνὴρ οὗτος
πλείω χρόνον ἐπέζησεν, ὡμολογημένως ἂν οἱ
Θηβαῖοι τῇ κατὰ γῆν ἡγεμονίᾳ5 καὶ τὴν τῆς
θαλάττης ἀρχὴν προσεκτήσαντο· ἐπεὶ δὲ μετ᾿





1διακοσίας ναῦς ἰδίᾳ πληροῦντας Reiske: διακόσια ναυσίδια
πληροῦντας P, διακοσίαις ναυσὶ διαπληροῦντας cet.2So L2 (see Herod. 8. 1. 2): δὲ καὶ cet.3Capps suggests ἱκανὰ.4So JKL: περὶ the other MSS.5τῇ . . . ἡγεμονίᾳ Dindorf (cp. Book 14. 100. 1): τὴν
. . . ἡγεμονίαν.168Book XV

the Theban, who enjoyed the highest standing amongst 364/3 b.c. his fellow countrymen, harangued his fellow citizens at a meeting of the assembly, urging them to strive for the supremacy on the sea. In the course of the speech, which was the result of long consideration, he pointed out that this attempt was both expedient and possible, alleging in particular that it was easy for those who possessed supremacy on land to acquire the mastery of the sea. The Athenians, for instance, in the war with Xerxes, who had two hundred ships manned by themselves, were subject to the commands of the Lacedaemonians who provided only ten ships. By this and many other arguments suited to his theme he prevailed upon the Thebans to make a bid for the mastery at sea.
79. Accordingly the people immediately voted to construct a hundred triremes and dockyards to accommodate their number,1 and to urge the peoples of Rhodes, Chios, and Byzantium to assist their schemes.2 Epameinondas himself, who had been dispatched with a force to the aforementioned cities, so overawed Laches, the Athenian general, who had a large fleet and had been sent out to circumvent the Thebans, that he forced him to sail away and made the cities friendly to Thebes. Indeed if this man had lived on longer, the Thebans admittedly would have secured the mastery at sea in addition to their supremacy on


1Demosthenes says (14. 22) that one dockyard accommodated thirty ships. Certainly the dockyards cannot be equal in number, ἴσα τὸν ἀριθμόν, as Diodorus says. Post suggests that Diodorus may be using νεώρια in the sense of νεωσοίκους (slips).2The attempt of Epameinondas to wrest naval supremacy from Athens is recounted by Cary, Cambridge Ancient History, 6. 105. See Isocrates, Philip, 53 and Plutarch, Philopoemen, 14. 1, 2.169