Diodorus of Sicily

περὶ τοῦ μέλλοντος δύναμιν προέπεμψε πολλήν.
εἰωθότες δ᾿ ἐν τοῖς ἐπικινδύνοις καιροῖς αὐτοκράτορα
τοῦ πολέμου καθιστᾶν τινὰ τῶν ἀξιολόγων
ἀνδρῶν προεχειρίσαντο τότε Κόιντον Φάβιον καὶ
7μετ᾿ αὐτοῦ Κόιντον Αὔλιον1 ἵππαρχον. οὗτοι δὲ
τὰς δυνάμεις παραλαβόντες παρετάξαντο πρὸς τοὺς
Σαμνίτας περὶ τὰς καλουμένας Λαυστόλας καὶ πολλοὺς
τῶν στρατιωτῶν ἀπέβαλον. τροπῆς δὲ γενομένης
καθ᾿ ἅπαν τὸ στρατόπεδον ὁ μὲν Αὔλιος
καταισχυνθεὶς ἐπὶ τῇ φυγῇ μόνος ὑπέστη τῷ2
πλήθει τῶν πολεμίων, οὐ κρατήσειν ἐλπίζων, ἀλλ᾿
ἀήττητον τὴν πατρίδα τὸ καθ᾿ αὑτὸν μέρος ἀποδεικνύων.
8οὗτος μὲν οὖν οὐ μετασχὼν τοῖς
πολίταις τῆς κατὰ τὴν φυγὴν αἰσχύνης ἰδίᾳ περιεποιήσατο
θάνατον ἔνδοξον· οἱ δὲ Ῥωμαῖοι
φοβηθέντες μὴ τὰ κατὰ τὴν Ἀπουλίαν πράγματα
τελέως ἀποβάλωσιν, ἀποικίαν ἐξέπεμψαν εἰς Λουκερίαν3
πόλιν ἐπιφανεστάτην τῶν ἐν τοῖς τόποις. ἐκ
ταύτης δὲ ὁρμώμενοι διεπολέμουν τοῖς Σαμνίταις,
9οὐ κακῶς τῆς ἀσφαλείας προνοησάμενοι· διὰ γὰρ
ταύτην τὴν πόλιν οὐ μόνον ἐν τούτῳ τῷ πολέμῳ
προετέρησαν, ἀλλὰ καὶ κατὰ4 τοὺς μετὰ ταῦτα
γενομένους ἕως τῶν καθ᾿ ἡμᾶς χρόνων διετέλεσαν
ὁρμητηρίῳ χρώμενοι κατὰ τῶν πλησίον ἐθνῶν.
1Αὔλιον Rhodoman, cp. Livy, 9. 22: Ὤλιον RX, Αἴλιον F.2τε after τῷ omitted by Rhodoman.3Λουκερίαν Stephanus: Λοκρίαν RX, Λουκρίαν F.4κατὰ added by Stephanus.30Book XIX

this, they became anxious about what was impending 314 b.c. and sent out a large army. As it was their custom in a dangerous crisis to appoint as military dictator one of their eminent men, they now elected Quintus Fabius and with him Quintus Aulius as master-of-horse.
These, after assuming command of the army, took the field and fought against the Samnites at Laustolae,1 as it is called, losing many of their soldiers. As panic spread through the whole army, Aulius, in shame at the flight, stood alone against the mass of the enemy, not that he hoped to prevail, but he was maintaining his fatherland undefeated as far as he was concerned. Thus he, by not sharing with his fellow citizens in the disgrace of flight, gained a glorious death for himself alone; but the Romans, fearing that they might completely lose control throughout Apulia, sent a colony to Luceria, which was the most noteworthy of the cities of that region. Using it as a base, they continued the war against the Samnites, having made no mean provision for their future security; for not only were the Romans victorious in this war because of this city, but also in the wars that have subsequently taken place down to our own time they have continued to use Luceria as a base of operations against the neighbouring peoples.2
1Called Lautulae by Livy (9. 23. 4–5), who says that this
was a drawn battle, but admits that some of his sources
called it a defeat in which Aulius lost his life. According
to Livy, Fabius a few days later won a great victory, but
this second battle is unknown to our other historians.2Livy (9. 26. 1–5) places the establishment of this colony under the next consuls, that is in 314 b.c. by the conventional Roman chronology, 313 b.c. according to Diodorus. Luceria served as a Roman base in the Second Punic War, remaining loyal in the darkest days of the conflict (Livy, 22. 9. 5; 23. 37. 13; 24. 3. 16, etc); and in the Civil War Pompey used it for a time as his headquarters (Caesar, Civil War, 1. 24). For the possible bearing of this passage on the date of Diodorus’ source for Roman history, see the Introduction to Vol. IX, page ix. The account of Italian affairs is continued in chap. 76.31