Diodorus of Sicily

μὲν αὐτοὺς ἐγκατέλιπον, Ἀθηναῖοι δὲ καί τινες
ἄλλοι σύμμαχοι παρεγένοντο τῷ Ἀλεξάνδρῳ, τὰ
δὲ σῖτα καὶ ποτὰ καὶ τἄλλα πάντα ἐπέλειπε1 τοῖς
Βοιωτοῖς, ἔγνωσαν οἱ βοιωτάρχαι τὴν εἰς οἶκον
5ἐπάνοδον ποιεῖσθαι. ἀναζευξάντων δ᾿ αὐτῶν, καὶ
τῆς πορείας οὔσης διὰ χώρας πεδιάδος, Ἀλέξανδρος
ἐπηκολούθει πολλοῖς ἱππεῦσι καὶ τοῖς ἐπὶ
τῆς οὐραγίας ἐπέθετο. τῶν δὲ Βοιωτῶν οἱ μὲν
κατακοντιζόμενοι συνεχῶς ἀπέθνησκον, οἱ δὲ
τραύμασι περιέπιπτον, τέλος δ᾿ οὔτε μένειν οὔτε
προάγειν ἐώμενοι εἰς πολλὴν ἀμηχανίαν ἐνέπιπτον,2
6ἅτε δὴ καὶ τῶν ἐπιτηδείων σπανιζόντων. ἤδη δ᾿
αὐτῶν τὴν σωτηρίαν ἀπογινωσκόντων, Ἐπαμεινώνδας
ἰδιωτεύων κατ᾿ ἐκεῖνον τὸν χρόνον ὑπὸ
τῶν στρατιωτῶν κατεστάθη στρατηγός. εὐθὺς δὲ3
διαλέξας τούς τε ψιλοὺς καὶ τοὺς ἱππεῖς, τούτους
μὲν αὐτὸς ἀνέλαβε, καὶ ταχθεὶς ἐπὶ τῆς
οὐραγίας διὰ τούτων ἀνέστελλε τοὺς ἐπακολουθοῦντας
πολεμίους καὶ πολλὴν ἀσφάλειαν παρείχετο
τοῖς προηγουμένοις ὁπλίταις, ποιούμενος δὲ μάχας
ἐξ ὑποστροφῆς καὶ τάξει φιλοτέχνῳ χρώμενος
7διέσωσε τὸ στρατόπεδον. αἰεὶ δὲ μᾶλλον διὰ τῶν
κατορθωμάτων αὔξων τὴν ἰδίαν εὐδοξίαν μεγάλης
ἀποδοχῆς ἐτύγχανε παρά τε τοῖς πολίταις καὶ τοῖς
συμμάχοις. οἱ δὲ Θηβαῖοι τοὺς τότε βοιωταρχήσαντας
καταδικάσαντες, πολλοῖς χρήμασιν
ἐζημίωσαν.
72. Ἐπιζητουμένης δὲ τῆς αἰτίας πῶς ὁ τοιοῦτος
ἀνὴρ ἰδιώτης ὢν ἐστρατεύετο μετὰ τῶν εἰς Θετταλίαν
ἀποσταλέντων, ἀποδοτέον τὸν οἰκεῖον λόγον
τῆς ἀπολογίας. τῇ μάχῃ τῇ περὶ Κόρινθον Ἐπαμεινώνδας
διακόψας τὴν ἐπὶ τοῦ προτειχίσματος
1So Schäfer: ὑπελείπετο.2So Hertlein: ἐξέπιπτον.3So Vogel: τε.150Book XV

left them in the lurch and the Athenians and some 368/7 b.c. other allies joined Alexander, and they found their provisions of food and drink and all their other supplies giving out, the boeotarchs decided to return home. When they had broken camp and were proceeding through level country, Alexander trailed them with a large body of cavalry and attacked their rear. A number of Boeotians perished under the continuous rain of darts, others fell wounded, until finally, being permitted neither to halt nor to proceed, they were reduced to utter helplessness, as was natural when they were also running short of provisions. When they had now abandoned hope, Epameinondas, who was at that time serving as a private soldier, was appointed general by the men. Quickly selecting the light-armed men and cavalry, he took them with him, and, posting himself in the rear, with their aid checked the enemy pursuers and provided complete security for the heavy-armed men in the front ranks; and by wheeling about and offering battle and using masterly formations he saved the army. By these repeated successes he more and more enhanced his own reputation and won the warm approbation of both his fellow citizens and allies. But the Thebans brought judgement against the boeotarchs of the day and punished them with a heavy fine.
72. When the reason is asked why a man of such parts was serving as a private soldier in the expedition that was sent to Thessaly, we must give his own plea in defence. In the battle at Corinth Epameinondas, having cut through the guard of the Lacedaemonians




151