Diodorus of Sicily

Αὖλον Μάλλιον.1 ἐπὶ δὲ τούτων Καρχηδόνιοι στρατεύσαντες
εἰς τὴν Ἰταλίαν τοῖς μὲν Ἱππωνιάταις
ἐκπεπτωκόσιν ἐκ τῆς πατρίδος ἀποκατέστησαν τὴν
πόλιν, καὶ πάντας τοὺς πεφευγότας συναγαγόντες
2πολλὴν ἐπιμέλειαν αὐτῶν ἐποιήσαντο. μετὰ δὲ
ταῦτα λοιμικῆς νόσου τοῖς κατοικοῦσι τὴν Καρχηδόνα
γενομένης, καὶ τῆς νόσου πολλὴν ἐπίτασιν
ἐχούσης, πολλοὶ τῶν Καρχηδονίων διεφθάρησαν,
καὶ τὴν ἡγεμονίαν ἐκινδύνευσαν ἀποβαλεῖν· οἵ τε
γὰρ Λίβυες καταφρονήσαντες αὐτῶν ἀπέστησαν,
οἵ τε τὴν Σαρδόνα κατοικοῦντες, νομίσαντες ἔχειν
καιρὸν κατὰ τῶν Καρχηδονίων, ἀπέστησαν ἀπ᾿
αὐτῶν καὶ συμφρονήσαντες ἐπέθεντο τοῖς Καρχηδονίοις.
3ἐγένετο δὲ περὶ τὸν αὐτὸν καιρὸν θεόπεμπτός
τις ἀτυχία κατὰ τὴν Καρχηδόνα· ταραχαὶ
γὰρ καὶ φόβοι καὶ πανικοὶ θόρυβοι συνεχεῖς ἐγίνοντο
κατὰ τὴν πόλιν παράδοξοι, καὶ πολλοὶ μὲν μετὰ
τῶν ὅπλων ἐξεπήδων ἐκ τῶν οἰκιῶν, ὡς πολεμίων
εἰσπεπτωκότων εἰς τὴν πόλιν, καὶ πρὸς ἀλλήλους
ὡς πολεμίους διαπολεμοῦντες, οὓς μὲν ἀνῄρουν,
οὓς δὲ κατετραυμάτιζον. τέλος δὲ θυσίαις τὸ
θεῖον ἐξιλασάμενοι καὶ μόγις τῶν2 κακῶν ἀπαλλαγέντες,
ταχὺ καὶ τοὺς Λίβυας κατεπολέμησαν καὶ
τὴν νῆσον ἀνεκτήσαντο.
25. Ἐπ᾿ ἄρχοντος δ᾿ Ἀθήνησι Ναυσινίκου
Ῥωμαῖοι χιλιάρχους τέσσαρας ἀντὶ τῶν ὑπάτων
κατέστησαν, Μάρκον Κορνήλιον καὶ Κόιντον Σερουίλιον,3
Μάρκον Φούριον καὶ Λεύκιον Κοΐνκτιον.4
1Κοΐνκτιον . . . Μάλλιον P] Μάλλιον A, Μάλλιον Γάιον Σερουίλιον
Οὐαλέριον Αὖλον καὶ Κόιντον Φάβιον cet.2μόγις τῶν Dindorf: μεγίστων.3Κόιντον Σερουίλιον P] Σερούιον Κοίντιον A, Σερουίλιον Κοίντιον
cet.4Κοΐντιον Vogel (cp. Livy, 6. 6): κοΐκτιον P, Κόικτον F, Κοίντον cet. (except A which omits).12Book XV

During their term of office the Carthaginians invaded 379/8 B.C. Italy and restored their city to the Hipponiatae1 who had been exiled from it, and, having gathered together all the refugees, they showed themselves very solicitous of their welfare. After this a plague broke out among the inhabitants of Carthage which was so violent and took off so many of the Carthaginians that they risked losing their commanding position. For the Libyans, undervaluing them, seceded, and the Sardinians, thinking they now had an opportunity to oppose the Carthaginians, revolted, and, making common cause, attacked the Carthaginians. And about the same time a supernatural disaster befell Carthage; for turmoils and fears and panicky disturbances constantly occurred throughout the city defying explanation; and many men rushed from their houses in arms, having the impression that enemies had burst into the city, and they fought constantly with one another as if with enemies, killing some and wounding others. Finally, after having propitiated the deity by sacrifices and with difficulty rid themselves of their misfortunes, they quickly subdued the Libyans and recovered the island of Sardinia.
25. When Nausinicus was archon at Athens, the 378/7 Romans elected four military tribunes with consular power, Marcus Cornelius Quintus Servilius, Marcus Furius, and Lucius Quinctius. During their term of



1The city of Hipponium on the west coast of Bruttium in Italy had been captured by Dionysius, its citizens transferred to Syracuse, and its land to the Locrians (see Book 14. 107. 2). Apparently the Carthaginians were trying to cultivate the exiles as allies in Italy against Dionysius.13