Diodorus of Sicily

στόλος ἐκτεταγμένος ἑωρᾶτο, καὶ αὐτὸς τὰ πρὸς
6τὴν ναυμαχίαν παρεσκευάζετο. τὰ μὲν οὖν πόρια
πόρρωθεν ἐπακολουθεῖν παρήγγειλεν, τῶν δὲ ἄλλων
νεῶν τὴν ἁρμόζουσαν τάξιν ποιησάμενος αὐτὸς τὸ
λαιὸν κέρας διακατεῖχε, συναγωνιζομένων αὐτῷ
τῶν μεγίστων σκαφῶν. τοιαύτης δὲ τῆς διατάξεως
γενομένης εὐχὰς ἑκάτεροι τοῖς θεοῖς ἐποιοῦντο,
καθάπερ ἦν ἔθος, διὰ τῶν κελευστῶν, συνεπιλαβομένου
καὶ τοῦ πλήθους τῇ φωνῇ.
51. Οἱ δὲ δυνάσται, ὡς ἂν περὶ τοῦ βίου καὶ τῶν
ὅλων μέλλοντες διακινδυνεύειν, ἐν ἀγωνίᾳ πολλῇ
καθειστήκεισαν. Δημήτριος μὲν οὖν τῶν ἐναντίων
ἀποσχὼν ὡς ἂν τρεῖς σταδίους ἦρεν τὸ συγκείμενον
πρὸς μάχην σύσσημον, ἀσπίδα κεχρυσωμένην, φανερὰν
2πᾶσιν ἐκ διαδοχῆς· τὸ παραπλήσιον δὲ καὶ
τῶν περὶ Πτολεμαῖον ποιησάντων ταχὺ τὸ διεῖργον
διάστημα συνῃρέθη. ὡς δ᾿ αἵ τε σάλπιγγες τὸ
πολεμικὸν ἐσήμαινον καὶ συνηλάλαξαν αἱ δυνάμεις
ἀμφότεραι, φερομένων ἁπασῶν τῶν νεῶν εἰς ἐμβολὴν
καταπληκτικῶς τὸ μὲν πρῶτον τοῖς τόξοις
καὶ τοῖς πετροβόλοις, ἔτι δὲ τοῖς ἀκοντίσμασι πυκνοῖς
χρώμενοι κατετραυμάτιζον τοὺς ὑποπίπτοντας·
εἶτα συνεγγισάντων τῶν σκαφῶν καὶ μελλούσης
γίνεσθαι τῆς ἐμβολῆς βιαίου οἱ μὲν ἐπὶ τῶν καταστρωμάτων
συγκαθῆκαν, οἱ δ᾿ ἐρέται παρακληθέντες
ὑπὸ τῶν κελευστῶν ἐκθυμότερον ἐνέκειντο.
3ἀπὸ κράτους δὲ καὶ βίας ἐλαθεισῶν τῶν νεῶν αἱ
μὲν παρέσυρον ἀλλήλων τοὺς ταρσούς, ὥστε πρὸς
φυγὴν καὶ διωγμὸν ἀχρήστους γίνεσθαι καὶ τοὺς
ἐπιβεβηκότας ἄνδρας ὡρμηκότας πρὸς ἀλκὴν κωλύεσθαι
τῆς πρὸς τὸν κίνδυνον ὁρμῆς· αἱ δὲ κατὰ
πρῷραν τοῖς ἐμβόλοις συρράττουσαι πρύμναν ἀνεκρούοντο
282Book XX

visible at no great distance, and Ptolemy also prepared 307 b.c. for the battle. Ordering the supply ships to follow at a distance and effecting a suitable formation of the other ships, he himself took command of the left wing with the largest of his warships fighting under him. After the fleet had been disposed in this way, both sides prayed to the gods as was the custom, the signalmen1 leading and the crews joining in the response.
51. The princes, since they were about to fight for their lives and their all, were in much anxiety. When Demetrius was about three stades2 distant from the enemy, he raised the battle signal that had been agreed upon, a gilded shield, and this sign was made known to all by being repeated in relays. Since Ptolemy also gave a similar signal, the distance between the fleets was rapidly reduced. When the trumpets gave the signal for battle and both forces raised the battle cry, all the ships rushed to the encounter in a terrifying manner; using their bows and their ballistae at first, then their javelins in a shower, the men wounded those who were within range; then when the ships had come close together and the encounter was about to take place with violence, the soldiers on the decks crouched down and the oarsmen, spurred on by the signalmen, bent more desperately to their oars. As the ships drove together with force and violence, in some cases they swept off each other’s oars so that the ships became useless for flight or pursuit, and the men who were on board, though eager for a fight, were prevented from joining in the battle; but where the ships had met prow to


1The men who kept time for the oarsmen.2About ½ mile.283