Diodorus of Sicily

πλοίοις πολλὰς ἐμβολὰς δόντες καὶ θαλάττης αὐτὰ
πληρώσαντες δύο μὲν τῶν μηχανῶν κατέβαλον,
τῆς δὲ τρίτης ὑπὸ τῶν περὶ τὸν Δημήτριον εἰς
τοὐπίσω τοῖς ῥύμασιν ἑλκομένης οἱ μὲν Ῥόδιοι
θαρρήσαντες τοῖς κατωρθωμένοις θρασύτερον τοῦ
6καθήκοντος προέπιπτον εἰς τὸν κίνδυνον. διὸ πολλῶν
αὐτοῖς καὶ μεγάλων νεῶν περιχυθεισῶν καὶ τοῖς
ἐμβόλοις πολλὰ μέρη τῶν τοίχων ἀναρρηττουσῶν1
ὁ μὲν ναύαρχος Ἐξήκεστος καὶ ὁ τριήραρχος καί
τινες ἄλλοι κατατραυματισθέντες ἥλωσαν, τοῦ δ᾿
ἄλλου πλήθους ἐκκολυμβήσαντος καὶ διανηξαμένου
πρὸς τοὺς ἰδίους μία μὲν τῶν νεῶν ὑποχείριος
ἐγένετο τοῖς περὶ τὸν Δημήτριον, αἱ δ᾿ ἄλλαι διέφυγον
7τὸν κίνδυνον. τοιαύτης οὖν γενομένης τῆς
ναυμαχίας ὁ μὲν Δημήτριος ἄλλην μηχανὴν κατεσκεύασε
τριπλασίαν τῷ ὕψει καὶ πλάτει τῆς πρότερον,
προσάγοντος δ᾿ αὐτὴν πρὸς τὸν λιμένα νότος
ἐκνεφίας ἐπιγενόμενος τὰ μὲν ὁρμοῦντα τῶν πλοίων
συνέκλυσε, τὴν δὲ μηχανὴν κατέβαλε. καθ᾿ ὃν δὴ
χρόνον οἱ Ῥόδιοι τῷ καιρῷ δεξιῶς χρησάμενοι
πύλην ἀνοίξαντες ἐπέθεντο τοῖς τὸ χῶμα κατειληφόσι.
8γενομένης δὲ μάχης ἐπὶ πολὺν χρόνον ἰσχυρᾶς
καὶ τοῦ μὲν Δημητρίου διὰ τὸν χειμῶνα μὴ
δυναμένου βοηθῆσαι, τῶν δὲ Ῥοδίων ἐκ διαδοχῆς
ἀγωνιζομένων ἠναγκάσθησαν οἱ τοῦ βασιλέως ἀποθέμενοι
τὰ ὅπλα παραδοῦναι σφᾶς αὐτούς, ὄντες
9σχεδὸν τετρακόσιοι. τούτων δὲ τῶν προτερημάτων
γενομένων τοῖς Ῥοδίοις κατέπλευσαν τῇ πόλει
σύμμαχοι παρὰ μὲν Κνωσσίων ἑκατὸν πεντήκοντα,
παρὰ δὲ Πτολεμαίου πλείους τῶν πεντακοσίων,

1ἀναρρηττουσῶν Dindorf: ἀναρρηττόντων RX, ἀνορυττόντων
F.374Book XX

their rams upon the ships and filling them with 305 b.c. water, they overthrew two of the engines; but when the third was drawn back with ropes by the men of Demetrius, the Rhodians, encouraged by their successes, pressed on into the battle more boldly than was prudent. And so, when many large ships crowded around them and the sides of their own ships had been shattered in many places by the rams, the admiral Execestus, the trierarch, and some others were disabled by wounds and captured; and as the rest of its crew jumped into the sea and swam to their own fellows, one of the ships came into the possession of Demetrius; but the other ships escaped from the battle. When the naval battle had turned out in this way, Demetrius constructed another machine three times the size of the former in height and width; but while he was bringing this up to the harbour, a violent storm from the south sprang up, which swept over the ships that were anchored and overthrew the engine. And at this very time the Rhodians, shrewdly availing themselves of the situation, opened a gate and sallied out upon those who had occupied the mole. A severe battle ensued lasting for a long time; and since Demetrius could not send reinforcements because of the storm, and the Rhodians, on the other hand, were fighting in relays, the king’s men were forced to lay down their arms and surrender, in number about four hundred. After the Rhodians had gained these advantages there sailed in as allies for the city one hundred and fifty soldiers from the Cnossians and more than five hundred from Ptolemy,
375