Diodorus of Sicily
4τὸν Διώξιππον. ὁ δὲ θεωρῶν τὴν ἐπ᾿ αὐτὸν συνδρομὴν
τῶν Μακεδόνων τότε μὲν ἐξῆλθεν ἐκ τοῦ
πότου, μετ᾿ ὀλίγον δὲ ἐπὶ τὴν ἰδίαν κατάλυσιν
παραγενόμενος καὶ γράψας πρὸς τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον
ἐπιστολὴν περὶ τῶν κατ᾿ αὐτοῦ μεμηχανημένων
ταύτην μὲν ἐνετείλατο τοῖς ἰδίοις δοῦναι τῷ βασιλεῖ,
αὑτὸν δ᾿ ἐκ τοῦ ζῆν μετέστησεν, ἀβούλως μὲν εἰς
τὴν μονομαχίαν συγκαταβάς, πολὺ δ᾿ ἀφρονεστέραν
5τὴν τοῦ βίου καταστροφὴν ποιησάμενος. διὸ καὶ
πολλοὶ τῶν καταμεμφομένων αὐτοῦ τὴν ἄνοιαν
ἐπιπλήττοντες ἔφασαν χαλεπὸν εἶναι δύναμιν μὲν
σώματος ἔχειν μεγάλην, νοῦν δὲ μικρόν.
6Ὁ δὲ βασιλεὺς ἀναγνοὺς τὴν ἐπιστολὴν χαλεπῶς
μὲν ἤνεγκεν ἐπὶ τῇ τἀνδρὸς τελευτῇ καὶ πολλάκις
ἐπεζήτησε τὴν ἀρετὴν αὐτοῦ καὶ παρόντι μὲν οὐ
χρησάμενος, ἀπόντα δὲ ἐπιποθήσας ὅτε οὐδὲν ὄφελος
ἔγνω τὴν καλοκἀγαθίαν τἀνδρὸς ἐκ τῆς τῶν διαβαλόντων
κακίας.
102. Ὁ δ᾿ οὖν Ἀλέξανδρος τὴν μὲν στρατιὰν
προσέταξεν παρὰ1 τὸν ποταμὸν ἀντιπαράγειν ταῖς
ναυσίν, αὐτὸς δὲ τὸν διὰ τοῦ ποταμοῦ κατὰ τὸν
Ὠκεανὸν πλοῦν ποιούμενος κατῆρεν εἰς τὴν χώραν
2τῶν ὀνομαζομένων Σαμβαστῶν. οὗτοι δὲ τῷ τε
πλήθει τῶν ἀνδρῶν καὶ ταῖς ἀρεταῖς οὐδενὸς τῶν
Ἰνδικῶν ἐθνῶν λείπονται· οἰκοῦντες δὲ πόλεις δημοκρατουμένας
καὶ τὴν ἔφοδον τῶν Μακεδόνων
πυνθανόμενοι στρατιώτας ἤθροισαν πεζοὺς μὲν ἑξακισμυρίους,
ἱππεῖς δὲ ἑξακισχιλίους, ἅρματα δὲ
πεντακόσια.
3Τοῦ δὲ στόλου προσπλέοντος2 τῷ ξένῳ καὶ παραδόξῳ
1ἐπὶ codd.; corrected by Hertlein.2πλέοντος codd.; corrected by Dindorf.410Book XVII

embarrassing position. He saw that the Macedonians 326/5 b.c. were in league against him and left the banquet. After a little he came to his own quarters, wrote Alexander a letter about the trick that had been played on him, gave this to his servants to take to the king, and then took his own life. He had been ill-advised to undertake the single combat, but he was much more foolish to make an end of himself in this way. Hence many of those who reviled him, mocking his folly, said that it was a hard fate to have great strength of body but little sense.
The king read the letter and was very angry at the man’s death. He often mourned his good qualities, and the man whom he had neglected when he was alive, he regretted when he was dead. After it was no longer of use, he discovered the excellence of Dioxippus by contrast with the vileness of his accusers.
102. Alexander gave orders to the army to march beside the river and escort the ships, while he resumed his river voyage in the direction of the ocean and sailed down to the country of the people called Sambastae.1 These, in numbers of men and in good qualities, were inferior to none of the Indian peoples. They lived in cities governed in a democratic manner, and learning of the coming of the Macedonians assembled sixty thousand infantry, six thousand cavalry, and five hundred armoured chariots.
When the fleet put in to them, they were amazed




1They are called Sabarcae in the manuscripts of Curtius. For the story cp. Curtius, 9. 8. 4–7. Arrian (6. 15. 1–4) gives completely different names and events, and it is impossible to reconcile the two accounts.411