Diodorus of Sicily

τῶν ὀργάνων καὶ σῖτον κατὰ θάλατταν
ἐκόμισεν ἐπὶ τὴν Ἁλικαρνασσόν, αὐτὸς δὲ μετὰ
πάσης τῆς δυνάμεως προῆγεν ἐπὶ Καρίας καὶ τὰς
ἐν τῇ παρόδῳ πόλεις προσήγετο ταῖς φιλανθρωπίαις·
μάλιστα δ᾿ εὐεργέτει τὰς Ἑλληνίδας πόλεις,
ποιῶν αὐτὰς αὐτονόμους καὶ ἀφορολογήτους, προσεπιλέγων
ὅτι τῆς τῶν Ἑλλήνων ἐλευθερώσεως
2ἕνεκα τὸν πρὸς Πέρσας πόλεμον ἐπανῄρηται. ὄντι
δ᾿ αὐτῷ κατὰ τὴν ὁδοιπορίαν ἀπήντησέν τι
γύναιον, ὄνομα μὲν Ἄδα, γένει δὲ προσήκουσα τῇ
Καρῶν ἀρχῇ. ἐντυχούσης δ᾿ αὐτῆς περὶ τῆς προγονικῆς
δυναστείας καὶ δεηθείσης βοηθῆσαι ταύτην
μὲν ἐκέλευσε παραλαβεῖν τὴν τῆς Καρίας ἀρχήν,
τοὺς δὲ Κᾶρας ἰδίους ἐποιήσατο ταῖς εὐνοίαις διὰ
3τὴν τῆς γυναικὸς ταύτης εὐεργεσίαν· εὐθὺς γὰρ αἱ
πόλεις ἅπασαι πρεσβείας ἀποστέλλουσαι χρυσοῖς
στεφάνοις ἐτίμησαν τὸν βασιλέα καὶ πάντα συμπράττειν
ἐπηγγείλαντο.
Ὁ δὲ Ἀλέξανδρος πλησίον τῆς πόλεως στρατοπεδεύσας
συνεστήσατο πολιορκίαν ἐνεργὸν καὶ
4καταπληκτικήν. τὸ μὲν γὰρ πρῶτον τοῖς τείχεσι
προσβολὰς συνεχεῖς ἐκ διαδοχῆς ἐποιεῖτο καὶ διημέρευεν
ἐν τοῖς κινδύνοις· μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα παντοδαπὰς
μηχανὰς ἐπιστήσας καὶ τὰς πρὸ τῆς πόλεως τάφρους
χωστρίσι1 χελώναις ἀναπληρώσας διὰ τῶν
κριῶν ἐσάλευε τοὺς πύργους καὶ τὰ μεταξὺ μεσοπύργια.
καταβαλὼν δὲ μέρος τι τοῦ τείχους τὸ
λοιπὸν ἤδη διὰ τῆς ἐκ χειρὸς μάχης ἐβιάζετο διὰ



1So Fischer (cp. Book 2. 27. 1): τρισὶ.184Book XVII

conveyed by sea to Halicarnassus while he 334/3 b.c. himself with all his army marched into Caria, winning over the cities that lay on his route by kind treatment. He was particularly generous to the Greek cities, granting them independence and exemption from taxation, adding the assurance that the freedom of the Greeks was the object for which he had taken upon himself the war against the Persians. On his journey he was met by a woman named Ada, who belonged by blood to the ruling house of Caria.1 When she presented a petition to recover the position of her ancestors and requested his assistance, he gave orders that she should become the ruler of Caria. Thus he won the loyal support of the Carians by the favour that he bestowed on this woman. For straightway all the cities sent missions and presented the king with golden crowns and promised to co-operate with him in everything.
Alexander encamped near the city and set in motion an active and formidable siege.2 At first he made continued assaults on the walls with relays of attackers and spent whole days in active fighting. Later he brought up all sorts of engines of war, filled in the trenches in front of the city with the aid of sheds to protect the workers, and rocked the towers and the curtains between them with his battering rams. Whenever he overthrew a portion of the wall, he attempted by hand-to-hand fighting to force an


1Arrian, 1. 23. 7–8. Ada had been “dynast” of Caria
previously on the death of her elder brother and husband, Idrieus (Book 16. 69. 2) but had been ousted by her younger brother Pixodarus (Book 16. 74. 2; cp. Strabo, 14. 2. 17. 657).2Arrian, 1. 20. 5–23. 6. Diodorus omits Alexander’s abortive attack on Myndus (Arrian, 1. 20. 5–7), and his narrative is told rather from the Persian than from the Macedonian side (W. W. Tarn, Alexander the Great, 2 (1948), 73 f.)185