Diodorus of Sicily

ἄκρατον ἐμφορηθεὶς ἐπὶ τελευτῆς Ἡρακλέους μέγα
2ποτήριον πληρώσας ἐξέπιεν. ἄφνω δὲ ὥσπερ ὑπό
τινος πληγῆς ἰσχυρᾶς πεπληγμένος ἀνεστέναξε
μέγα βοήσας καὶ ὑπὸ τῶν φίλων ἀπηλλάττετο
χειραγωγούμενος. εὐθὺς δ᾿ οἱ μὲν περὶ τὴν θεραπείαν
ἐκδεξάμενοι κατέκλιναν αὐτὸν καὶ προσήδρευον
3ἐπιμελῶς, τοῦ δὲ πάθους ἐπιτείνοντος καὶ
τῶν ἰατρῶν συγκληθέντων βοηθῆσαι μὲν οὐδεὶς
ἐδυνήθη, πολλοῖς δὲ πόνοις καὶ δειναῖς ἀλγηδόσι
συσχεθείς, ἐπειδὴ τὸ ζῆν ἀπέγνω, περιελόμενος τὸν
4δακτύλιον ἔδωκε Περδίκκᾳ. τῶν δὲ φίλων ἐπερωτώντων,
Τίνι τὴν βασιλείαν ἀπολείπεις; εἶπεν, Τῷ
κρατίστῳ, καὶ προσεφθέγξατο, ταύτην τελευταίαν
φωνὴν προέμενος, ὅτι μέγαν ἀγῶνα αὐτῷ ἐπιτάφιον
συστήσονται πάντες οἱ πρωτεύοντες τῶν φίλων.
5οὗτος μὲν οὖν τὸν προειρημένον τρόπον ἐτελεύτησε
βασιλεύσας ἔτη δώδεκα καὶ μῆνας ἑπτά, πράξεις
δὲ μεγίστας κατεργασάμενος οὐ μόνον τῶν πρὸ
αὐτοῦ βασιλευσάντων, ἀλλὰ τῶν ὕστερον ἐσομένων
μέχρι τοῦ καθ᾿ ἡμᾶς βίου.
466Book XVII

wine in commemoration of the death of Heracles, and 824/3 b.c. finally, filling a huge beaker, downed it at a gulp. Instantly he shrieked aloud as if smitten by a violent blow and was conducted by his Friends, who led him by the hand back to his apartments.1 His chamberlains put him to bed and attended him closely, but the pain increased and the physicians were summoned. No one was able to do anything helpful and Alexander continued in great discomfort and acute suffering. When he, at length, despaired of life, he took off his ring and handed it to Perdiccas.2 His Friends asked: “To whom do you leave the kingdom?” and he replied: “To the strongest.”3 He added, and these were his last words, that all of his leading Friends would stage a vast contest in honour of his funeral.4 This was how he died after a reign of twelve years and seven months.5 He accomplished greater deeds than any, not only of the kings who had lived before him but also of those who were to come later down to our time.
1Justin, 12. 13. 8–9 Arrian (7. 27. 2) gives this story of
the sudden stab of pain as a variant version, and Plutarch
(Alexander, 75. 3–4) specifically denies it. Diodorus here
explains the “cup of Heacles”mentioned by plutarch.
There was an annual festival of the death of Heracles on Mt.
Oeta, with which Medius, as a Thessalian, was familiar. Its
date has been unknown (M. P. Nilsson, Geschichte der
griechischen Religion, 1, 1941, p. 120), but this anecdote may
indicate that it occurred in the Macedonian month of Daesius.2Curtius, 10. 5. 4; Justin, 12. 15. 12. Curtius’s narrative
resumes at this point.3So also in Arrian, 7. 26. 3. In Book 18. 1. 4, Diodorus
says “To the best,” agreeing with the “optimus” of Curtius,
10. 5. 5, and the “dignissimus” of Justin. 12. 15. 8. It is true, of course, that κράτιστος may mean “best” as well as “most powerful.”4Curtius, 10. 5. 5; Arrian, 7. 26. 3.5Alexander died on the 28th of Daesius (Plutarch, Alexander,
76. 4, so also the Babylonian records, but Aristobulus (Plutarch, Alexander, 75. 4) said the 30th; it was a hollow month, without any 29th, and Alexander died about sundown; this was the 10th of June), and it has been argued above that the assassination of Philip and the accession of Alexander must have taken place in the same month (p. 100, note 1). This would give Alexander thirteen years of reign, and this figure is actually given by the Oxyrhynchus Chronologer (P. Oxy. 1. 12. v. 31–32). Since Daesius was the eighth Macedonian month, the “seven months” of Diodorus and the “eight months” of Arrian (7. 28. 1) represent exclusive and inclusive counting from the first new year after Alexander’s accession. Cp. Beloch, Griechische Geschichte, 3. 2. 59.467