Diodorus of Sicily

Τιμολέοντι κατὰ τὸν πλοῦν, τοῦ δαιμονίου συνεπιλαβομένου
τῆς ἐπιβολῆς καὶ προσημαίνοντος τὴν
ἐσομένην περὶ αὐτὸν εὐδοξίαν καὶ λαμπρότητα τῶν
πράξεων· δι᾿ ὅλης γὰρ τῆς νυκτὸς προηγεῖτο λαμπὰς
καιομένη κατὰ τὸν οὐρανὸν μέχρι οὗ συνέβη
4τὸν στόλον εἰς τὴν Ἰταλίαν καταπλεῦσαι· ὁ δὲ
Τιμολέων προακηκοὼς ἦν ἐν Κορίνθῳ τῶν τῆς
Δήμητρος καὶ Κόρης ἱερειῶν ὅτι κατὰ τὸν ὕπνον
αὐταῖς αἱ θεαὶ προήγγειλαν1 συμπλεύσεσθαι τοῖς
περὶ τὸν Τιμολέοντα κατὰ τὸν πλοῦν τὸν εἰς τὴν
5ἱερὰν αὐτῶν νῆσον. διόπερ ὁ Τιμολέων καὶ οἱ
συμπλέοντες περιχαρεῖς ἦσαν, ὡς τῶν θεῶν συ νεργουσῶν
αὐτοῖς. τὴν δ᾿ ἀρίστην τῶν νεῶν καθιερώσας
ταῖς θεαῖς ὁ Τιμολέων ὠνόμασεν αὐτὴν
Δήμητρος καὶ Κόρης ἱεράν.
Καταπλεύσαντος δὲ τοῦ στόλου χωρὶς κινδύνων
εἰς Μεταπόντιον τῆς Ἰταλίας ἐπικατέπλευσε Καρχηδονία
τριήρης ἔχουσα πρεσβευτὰς Καρχηδονίους.
6οὗτοι δ᾿ ἐντυχόντες τῷ Τιμολέοντι διεμαρτύραντο
μὴ κατάρχειν πολέμου μηδ᾿ ἐπιβαίνειν τῇ Σικελίᾳ.
ὁ δὲ Τὶμολέων, ἐπικαλουμένων αὐτὸν τῶν Ῥηγίνων
καὶ συμμαχήσειν ἐπαγγελλομένων, ἐξέπλευσεν
εὐθέως ἐκ τοῦ Μεταποντίου σπεύδων φθάσαι
7τὴν περὶ αὐτὸν φήμην· σφόδρα γὰρ εὐλαβεῖτο μήποτε
Καρχηδόνιοι θαλασσοκρατοῦντες κωλύσωσιν
αὐτὸν εἰς Σικελίαν διαλεῦσαι. οὗτος μὲν οὖν
κατὰ σπουδὴν ἐτέλει τὸν εἰς Ῥήγιον πλοῦν.
67. Καρχηδόνιοι δὲ βραχὺ πρὸ τούτων τῶν καιρῶν
πυθόμενοι τὸ μέγεθος τοῦ κατὰ Σικελιαν
ἐσομένου πολέμου ταῖς μὲν κατὰ Σικελίαν συμμαχίσι
πόλεσι φιλανθρώπως προσεφέροντο καὶ πρὸς

1So MSS. except PX προσήγγειλαν.24Book XVI

happened to Timoleon. Heaven came to the support 345/4 b.c. of his venture and foretold his coming fame and the glory of his achievements, for all through the night he was preceded by a torch blazing in the sky up to the moment when the squadron made harbour in Italy. Now Timoleon had heard already in Corinth from the priestesses of Demeter and Persephonê1 that, while they slept, the goddesses had told them that they would accompany Timoleon on his voyage to their sacred island. He and his companions were, in consequence, delighted, recognizing that the goddesses were in fact giving them their support. He dedicated his best ship to them, calling it “The Sacred Ship of Demeter and Persephone.”2
Encountering no hazards, the squadron put in at Metapontum in Italy, and so, shortly after, did a Carthaginian trireme also bringing Carthaginian ambassadors. Accosting Timoleon, they warned him solemnly not to start a war or even to set foot in Sicily. But the people of Rhegium were calling him and promised to join him as allies, and so Timoleon quickly put out from Metapontum hoping to outstrip the report of his coming. Since the Carthaginians controlled the seas, he was afraid that they would prevent his crossing over to Sicily. He was, then, hastily completing his passage to Rhegium.
67. Shortly before this, the Carthaginians on their part had come to see that there would be a serious war in Sicily and began making friendly representations to the cities in the island which were their allies. Renouncing their opposition to the tyrants


1Plutarch, Timoleon, 8. 1.2Plutarch, Timoleon, 8. 1, states that this dedication was made by the Corinthians before the departure of the flotilla.25