Diodorus of Sicily

πόλεσι φιλανθρώπως προσεφέροντο. τοιαύταις1 δ᾿
ὁμιλίαις καὶ εὐεργεσίαις χρησάμενοι εὐνουστέρους
ἅπαντας τοὺς συμμάχους κατεσκεύασαν.
ὁρῶντες δὲ τὸν πόλεμον αὐξόμενον καὶ πολλῆς
ἐπιμελείας ἐπιδεόμενον,2 τάς τε ἄλλας παρασκευὰς
ἐποιοῦντο φιλοτίμως καὶ τὴν διάταξιν καὶ τὴν
διαίρεσιν τῶν στρατιωτῶν καὶ λειτουργιῶν περιττότερον
2ἐξειργάσαντο. τάς τε γὰρ πόλεις καὶ τοὺς
καταλεγομένους στρατιώτας εἰς τὸν πόλεμον διεῖλαν
εἰς δέκα μέρη· τούτων δὲ πρώτην ἐπεῖχον μερίδα
Λακεδαιμόνιοι, δευτέραν δὲ καὶ τρίτην Ἀρκάδες,
τετάρτην δ᾿ Ἠλεῖοι, πέμπτην δ᾿ Ἀχαιοί· καὶ τὴν
μὲν ἕκτην ἐπλήρουν Κορίνθιοι καὶ Μεγαρεῖς,
τὴν δ᾿ ἑβδόμην Σικυώνιοι καὶ Φλιάσιοι καὶ οἱ τὴν
Ἀκτὴν καλουμένην οἰκοῦντες, τὴν δ᾿ ὀγδόην Ἀκαρνᾶνες,
ἐνάτην δὲ Φωκεῖς καὶ Λοκροί, τὴν δ᾿ ἐπὶ
πᾶσιν Ὀλύνθιοι καὶ οἱ ἐπὶ Θρᾴκης κατοικοῦντες
σύμμαχοι. ἦν δ᾿ αὐτοῖς ὁ μὲν ὁπλίτης πρὸς δύο
ψιλοὺς τεταγμένος, ὁ δ᾿ ἱππεὺς πρὸς τέτταρας
3ὁπλίτας ἰσαζόμενος. τοιαύτης δὲ τῆς συντάξεως
οὔσης, ἡγεῖτο τῆς στρατιᾶς Ἀγησίλαος ὁ βασιλεύς·
περιβόητος δ᾿ ἦν ἐπ᾿3 ἀνδρείᾳ καὶ στρατηγικῇ
συνέσει καὶ σχεδὸν ἀνίκητος γεγονὼς ἐν τοῖς
ἐπάνω χρόνοις. ἔν τε γὰρ τοῖς λοιποῖς πολέμοις
ἐθαυμάσθη, καὶ καθ᾿ ὃν καιρὸν Λακεδαιμόνιοι ἐπολέμουν4
τοῖς Πέρσαις, παραταξάμενος καὶ πολλαπλασίονα
δύναμιν νικήσας, πολλὴν τῆς Ἀσίας




1τοιαύταις Dindorf: τοσαύταις.2ἐπιδεόμενον Bekker: δεόμενον F.3ἐπ᾿ Rhodoman: ἐν.4ἐπολέμουν Stephanus: πολεμοῦντες.32Book XV

cities humanely. By this sort of treatment and by 377/6 b.c. benefactions they rendered all their allies more loyal. And now that they saw that the war was becoming more serious and required strict attention, they set ambitiously to work on their various preparations for it, and in particular brought to greater perfection the organization and distribution of their soldiers and the services. In fact they divided the cities and the soldiers that were levied for the war into ten parts.1 The first part included the Lacedaemonians, the second and third the Arcadians, the fourth the Eleians, the fifth the Achaeans. Corinthians and Megarians supplied the sixth, the seventh the Sicyonians and Phliasians and the inhabitants of the promontory called Actê,2 the eighth the Acarnanians, the ninth the Phocians and Locrians, and the last of all the Olynthians and the allies who lived in Thrace. They reckoned one hoplite to two light-armed, and one horseman as equivalent to four hoplites.3 Such was the organization, and King Agesilaüs was put in command of the campaign. He was renowned for courage and shrewdness in the art of war and had been all but invincible in the former periods. For in all his wars he won admiration and especially when the Lacedaemonians were fighting the Persians. For he gave battle and won the victory over a force of many times his own number; then he overran a large part



1For other members of the league see Beloch, Griechische Geschichte2, 3. 1. 108 and note 1.2On the Argolid peninsula, inhabited by people of Epidaurus,
Methonê, and Troezên.3This reckoning (see Xenophon, Hell. 5. 2. 21 and 6. 2. 16) gives a commutation rate payable by a state that does not send its normal contingent to the league force. Three Aeginetan obols (or 4½ Athenian) per day was the rate for one hoplite.33