Diodorus of Sicily

αὐτοὶ δὲ προσελθόντες τῇ πόλει προεκαλοῦντο
τοὺς Σπαρτιάτας εἰς παράταξιν, ἢ
ξυνομολογεῖσθαι προσέταττον ἥττους εἶναι τῶν
5πολεμίων. ἀποκριναμένων δὲ τῶν Σπαρτιατῶν,
ὅτι καιρὸν λαβόντες εὔθετον διαγωνιοῦνται περὶ
τῶν ὅλων, ἀπηλλάγησαν ἀπὸ τῆς πόλεως. πᾶσαν
δὲ τὴν Λακωνικὴν δῃώσαντες, καὶ λαφύρων ἀναρίθμητον
πλῆθος ἀθροίσαντες, ἀπεχώρησαν εἰς τὴν
Ἀρκαδίαν.
6Μετὰ δὲ ταῦτ᾿ Ἀθηναῖοι μέν, ὑστερηκότες τῶν
καιρῶν, ἐπανῆλθον εἰς τὴν Ἀττικὴν οὐδὲν πράξαντες
μνήμης ἄξιον, τοῖς δὲ Λακεδαιμονίοις
παρὰ τῶν συμμάχων ἧκον βοηθήσοντες στρατιῶται
τετρακισχίλιοι. πρὸς δὲ τούτοις προσθέντες τοὺς
Εἵλωτας ἠλευθερωμένους προσφάτως χιλίους καὶ
τῶν Βοιωτῶν φυγάδων διακοσίους, ἔτι δ᾿ ἐκ1 τῶν
σύνεγγυς πόλεων οὐκ ὀλίγους μεταπεμψάμενοι,
κατεσκεύαζον δύναμιν ἀντίπαλον τοῖς πολεμίοις.
ταύτην δ᾿ ἀθρόαν συνέχοντες καὶ γυμνάζοντες αἰεὶ
μᾶλλον ἐθάρρουν καὶ παρεσκευάζοντο πρὸς τὸν
ὑπὲρ τῶν ὅλων ἀγῶνα.
66. Ἐπαμεινώνδας δὲ φύσει μεγαλεπίβολος ὢν
καὶ δόξης ὀρεγόμενος αἰωνίου, συνεβούλευε τοῖς
τε Ἀρκάσι καὶ τοῖς ἄλλοις συμμάχοις οἰκίσαι τὴν
Μεσσήνην, πολλὰ μὲν ἔτη γεγενημένην ἀνάστατον
ὑπὸ Λακεδαιμονίων, τόπον δ᾿ εὔθετον ἔχουσαν κατὰ
τῆς Σπάρτης. συγκατατιθεμένων δὲ πάντων ἀνεζήτησε
τοὺς ἀπολελειμμένους2 τῶν Μεσσηνίων, καὶ
τῶν ἄλλων τοὺς βουλομένους καταλέξας εἰς τὴν
πολιτείαν ἀνέκτισε3 τὴν Μεσσήνην, πολλοὺς ποιήσας
αὐτῆς οἰκήτορας. τούτοις δὲ κατακληρουχήσας


1δ᾿ ἐκ Dindorf: δὲ.2ὑπολελειμμένους FK, Dindorf.3ἀνέκτισε Capps: ἔκτισε.132Book XV

own accord would approach the city, and would challenge 369/8 b.c. the Spartans to a pitched battle, bidding them otherwise admit their inferiority to the enemy. When the Spartans replied to the effect that when they found a suitable occasion they would stake everything on one battle, they departed from the city. And when they had devastated all Laconia and amassed countless spoils, they withdrew to Arcadia.
Thereupon the Athenians,1 who had arrived on the scene too late for action, returned to Attica without accomplishing anything of note; but others of their allies, to the number of four thousand men, came to reinforce the Lacedaemonians. Besides these they attached to their numbers the Helots who had been newly emancipated, a thousand, and two hundred of the Boeotian fugitives, and summoned no small number from the neighbouring cities, so that they created an army comparable to that of the enemy. As they maintained these in one body and trained them, they gained more and more confidence and made themselves ready for the decisive contest.
66. Now Epameinondas, whose nature it was to aim at great enterprises and to crave everlasting fame, counselled the Arcadians and his other allies to resettle Messenê, which for many years had remained stripped of its inhabitants by the Lacedaemonians, for it occupied a position well suited for operations against Sparta. When they all concurred, he sought out the remnants of the Messenians, and registering as citizens any others who so wished he founded Messenê again, making it a populous city. Among them



1See chap. 63. 2, Xenophon places the request for help from Athens after the attack on Sparta (Hell. 6, 5. 33–52).133