Diodorus of Sicily

τοῦ Ἐπαμεινώνδου διὰ τῆς ἰδίας ἀρετῆς ἐμποιοῦντος
φρόνημα τοῖς πολίταις, ἐθάρρησαν τοῖς
4ἁπάντων δόγμασιν ἀντιβαίνειν. Λακεδαιμόνιοι μὲν
γὰρ καὶ Ἀθηναῖοι, διὰ πάντων1 περὶ τῆς ἡγεμονίας
διαφιλοτιμούμενοι, παρεχώρουν ἀλλήλοις, οἱ μὲν
τῆς2 κατὰ γῆν, οἱ δὲ τῆς κατὰ θάλατταν ἀρχῆς
ἄξιοι κρινόμενοι. διόπερ τὴν ἐκ τρίτου προσώπου
ἀναφερομένην ἡγεμονίαν χαλεπῶς ἔφερον, καὶ τὰς
κατὰ Βοιωτίαν πόλεις ἀπέσπων τῆς τῶν Θηβαίων
συντελείας.
39. Οἱ δὲ Θηβαῖοι, τῇ τε ῥώμῃ τῶν σωμάτων
καὶ ταῖς ἀλκαῖς διαφέροντες καὶ πολλαῖς μάχαις
προνενικηκότες τοὺς Λακεδαιμονίους, μετέωροι
τοῖς φρονήμασιν ὑπῆρχον καὶ τῆς κατὰ γῆν ἡγεμονίας
ἠμφισβήτουν. οὐ διεψεύσθησαν δὲ τῆς
ἐλπίδος διὰ τὰς εἰρημένας αἰτίας καὶ διὰ τὸ πλείονας
ἔχειν ἀγαθοὺς ἡγεμόνας καὶ στρατηγοὺς κατὰ
2τοὺς ὑποκειμένους χρόνους. ἐπιφανέστατοι δ᾿ ἦσαν
Πελοπίδας καὶ Γοργίδας3 καὶ Ἐπαμεινώνδας· οὗτος





1πάντων P: παντὸς.2τῆς added by Reiske.3Γοργίδας Casaubon (cp. Plutarch, Pelopidas, 12, 14, 18,
19): Γοργίας (cp. chap. 50. 6).54Book XV

them1; and, through the influence of Epameinondas, 375/4 b.c. who by his own personal merits inspired his fellow citizens with patriotic spirit, they were emboldened to make a stand against the decision of all the rest. For the Lacedaemonians and Athenians, who had constantly been rivals for the hegemony, now yielded one to the other, the one being judged worthy to rule on land, the other on the sea. They were consequently annoyed by the claims to leadership advanced by a third contender and sought to sever the Boeotian cities from the Theban confederation.2
39. The Thebans, who excelled in bodily strength and prowess and had already conquered the Lacedaemonians in numerous battles, were elated in spirit and eager to dispute the supremacy on land. Nor were they cheated of their hope, both for the aforesaid reasons and because they had more good commanders and generals during the period under consideration. Most famous were Pelopidas, Gorgidas,1
1Beloch (l.c. note 1) thinks that Diodorus has confused
this peace with the peace concluded three years later before
Leuctra from which Epameinondas withdrew. Judeich (op.
cit. pp. 182–183) accepts Diodorus’ account of this peace of
374 and believes that Epameinondas may well have addressed
the league synhedrion at Athens, to which he thinks Diodorus
refers. In any case Thebes remained in the Athenian confederacy,
as is shown in Isocrates, Plataïcus, 21; Demosthenes,
In Timotheüm, 14, 21, 40 ff. If Diodorus means by synhedrion an assembly of the members of the second Athenian confederacy, as Judeich seems to think, and not a general peace conference, the question arises how it happens that Callistratus addresses the assembly in which Athens by the terms of the league has no voice. Possibly we are to interpret the κοινόν as a joint meeting of the league assembly and the Athenians. But Diodorus, chap. 28. 3, uses the term κοινὸν συνέδριον of the common council of the league which seems to mean the council of the allies. Callistratus may have spoken in the Athenian assembly only, while Epameinondas addressed the allies in their council.2The ethnic league of the Boeotians was reorganized under Thebes in 394 b.c. but was under an eclipse from 387 to this time. In 371, the Theban envoys claim the right of Thebes (cp. chap. 50. 4; Xenophon, Hell. 6. 3. 19) to sign for the rest of Boeotia as Sparta did for Laconia. Thebes, like Prussia in the German Bund, held the predominance by being able to command the majority of the votes.55