Diodorus of Sicily

εἰρεσίαις πυκναῖς χρωμένων καὶ τῶν Μακεδόνων
ἤδη πλησιαζόντων τοῖς λιμέσιν οἱ Φοίνικες παρ᾿
ὀλίγον μὲν ἦλθον τοῦ πάντες ἀπολέσθαι, παρεισπεσόντες
δ᾿ ὅμως τῇ βίᾳ καὶ τὰς τελευταίας ναῦς
ἀποβαλόντες διεσώθησαν εἰς τὴν πόλιν.
5Ὁ δὲ βασιλεὺς μεγάλης ἐπιβολῆς ἀποτυχὼν
πάλιν προσεκαρτέρει τῷ χώματι καὶ τῷ πλήθει τῶν
νεῶν παρείχετο τοῖς ἐργαζομένοις τὴν ἀσφάλειαν.
τῶν δ᾿ ἔργων πλησιαζόντων τῇ πόλει καὶ τῆς
ἁλώσεως προσδοκωμένης ἀργέστης ἄνεμος μέγας
ἐπεγένετο καὶ τοῦ χώματος πολὺ μέρος ἐλυμήνατο.
6ὁ δ᾿ Ἀλέξανδρος εἰς ἀμηχανίαν ἐμπίπτων διὰ τὴν
αὐτόματον τῶν ἔργων φθορὰν μετεμέλετο μὲν ἐπὶ
τῇ τῆς πολιορκίας ἐπιβολῇ, ὅμως δὲ τῇ φιλοτιμίᾳ
προαγόμενος ἐκ τῆς ὀρεινῆς ἐκκόπτων ὑπερμεγέθη
δένδρα παρεκόμιζε καὶ σὺν αὐτοῖς τοῖς κλάδοις
7ἐγχώσας ἐνέφραξε τὴν βίαν τοῦ κλύδωνος. ταχὺ δ᾿
ἀποκαταστήσας τὰ πεπονηκότα τοῦ χώματος καὶ
τῇ πολυχειρίᾳ προκόψας εἰς βέλους ἄφεσιν ἐπέστησε
τὰς μηχανὰς ἐπ᾿ ἄκρον τὸ χῶμα καὶ τοῖς μὲν πετροβόλοις
κατέβαλλε τὰ τείχη, τοῖς δ᾿ ὀξυβελέσιν
ἀνεῖργε τοὺς ἐπὶ τῶν ἐπάλξεων ἐφεστῶτας· συνηγωνίζοντο δὲ τούτοις οἵ τε τοξόται καὶ σφενδονῆται
καὶ πολλοὺς τῶν ἐν τῇ πόλει παραβοηθοῦντας
κατετίτρωσκον.
43. Οἱ δὲ Τύριοι χαλκεῖς1 ἔχοντες τεχνίτας καὶ
μηχανοποιοὺς κατεσκεύασαν φιλότεχνα βοηθήματα.





1χαλκεῖς Fischer; ἁλιεῖς codd.238Book XVII

the Macedonians were already nearing the entrance, 332/1 b.c. but the Phoenicians, by a narrow margin, escaped losing their whole force and, thrusting their way in, got safely to the city with the loss only of the ships at the tail of the column.
So the king failed of this important objective, but nevertheless pushed on with the mole, protecting his workers with a thick screen of ships. As his engines drew close to the city and its capture seemed imminent, a powerful north-west gale blew up and damaged a large part of the mole.1 Alexander was at a loss to deal with the harm done to his project by the forces of nature and thought of giving up the siege attempt, but driven by ambition he sent to the mountain and felling huge trees, he brought them branches and all and, placing them beside the mole, broke the force of the waves.2 It was not long before he had restored the collapsed parts of the mole, and pushing on with an ample labour force until he came within missiles’ range, he moved his engines out to the end of the causeway, and attacked the walls with his stone throwers, while he employed his light catapults against the men stationed along the battlements. The archers and slingers joined in the barrage, and wounded many in the city who rushed to the defence.
43. The Tyrians had bronze workers and machinists, and contrived ingenious counter-measures.3
1Curtius, 4. 3. 6–7.2Curtius, 4. 3. 9.3These “counter-measures” do not appear elsewhere in
the sources, and Tarn (Alexander the Great, 2. 120 f.) may giving them observation through the spokes but protecting be right in tracing them ultimately to a technical military manual. It is not impossible that they may be insertions of Diodorus himself and were lacking in his source; Diodorus was interested in curiosities. The wheels appear again below (chap. 45. 3) in somewhat different form. They are otherwise unknown in antiquity (Tarn, p. 191). Apparently they were made to whirl in front of the men on the walls, them from missiles. The translation here offers difficulties; “wheels divided by thick diaphragms” or “with many barriers at close intervals.” Possibly the diaphragms were screens between the wheels.239