Diodorus of Sicily

ναῦς καὶ βέλη παντοδαπὰ καὶ μηχανάς, διανοούμενος
πολιορκεῖν τοὺς μετ᾿ Ὀλυμπιάδος καὶ κατὰ
2γῆν καὶ κατὰ θάλασσαν. πυθόμενος δ᾿ Αἰακίδην
τὸν Ἠπειρωτῶν βασιλέα μετὰ δυνάμεως μέλλειν
βοηθήσειν Ὀλυμπιάδι, στρατηγὸν ἐξέπεμψεν Ἀταρρίαν,
δοὺς στρατόπεδον καὶ συντάξας ἀπαντᾶν τοῖς
3Ἠπειρώταις. οὗ ταχὺ τὸ προσταχθὲν ποιήσαντος
καὶ τὰς ἐξ Ἠπείρου παρόδους προκαταλαβομένου
συνέβη τὸν Αἰακίδην ἄπρακτον γενέσθαι. καὶ γὰρ
τὸ πλῆθος τῶν Ἠπειρωτῶν ἀκουσίως ἐστράτευσεν
ἐπὶ Μακεδονίας καὶ στάσιν ἐποίει κατὰ τὴν παρεμβολήν.
ὁ δὲ Αἰακίδης ἐκ παντὸς τρόπου βουλόμενος
βοηθεῖν Ὀλυμπιάδι τοὺς μὲν ἀλλοτρίως
διακειμένους ἀπέλυσε τῆς στρατείας, τοὺς δὲ συγκινδυνεύειν
βουλομένους ἀναλαβὼν προθυμίαν μὲν
εἶχε τοῦ διακινδυνεύειν, οὐκ ἀξιόμαχος δ᾿ ἦν
ὡς ἂν ὀλίγου καταλελειμμένου τοῦ περὶ αὐτὸν
4συστήματος. οἱ δὲ χωρισθέντες τῶν Ἠπειρωτῶν
εἰς τὰς πατρίδας κατεστασίασαν ἀπόντα τὸν βασιλέα
καὶ κοινῷ δόγματι φυγὴν αὐτοῦ καταγνόντες
πρὸς Κάσανδρον ἐποιήσαντο συμμαχίαν. ὅπερ
οὐδέποτε γενέσθαι συνέβη κατὰ τὴν Ἤπειρον ἀφ᾿
οὗ Νεοπτόλεμος ὁ Ἀχιλλέως ἐβασίλευσε τῆς χώρας·
ἀεὶ γὰρ παῖς παρὰ πατρὸς διαδεχόμενος τὴν
δυναστείαν ἐναπέθνησκε ταῖς βασιλείαις μέχρι τῶνδε
5τῶν καιρῶν. Κασάνδρου δὲ παραλαβόντος τὴν
Ἤπειρον τῇ συμμαχίᾳ καὶ πέμψαντος εἰς αὐτὴν
ἐπιμελητὴν ἅμα καὶ στρατηγὸν Λυκίσκον οἱ
πρότερον κατὰ Μακεδονίαν διστάζοντες περὶ τῆς
συμμαχίας ἀπήλπισαν μὲν τὰ κατ᾿ Ὀλυμπιάδα
πράγματα, τῷ δὲ Κασάνδρῳ προσέθεντο. μιᾶς δ᾿
οὔσης αὐτῇ βοηθείας τῆς παρὰ Πολυπέρχοντος
328Book XIX

ships, missile weapons of all sorts, and engines of war 317 b.c. from those who wished to become his allies, with the intention of laying siege to Olympias by land and sea.1 Being informed that Aeacides king of the Epirotes was about to come to the aid of Olympias with an army, he sent out Atarrhias as general, giving him an army and ordering him to meet the Epirotes. Atarrhias carried out his orders quickly and by occupying the passes from Epirus succeeded in holding Aeacides inactive. Indeed, most of the Epirotes set out for Macedonia against their will and were mutinying in the camp; and Aeacides, who wished at all costs to aid Olympias, by releasing from the army those who were disaffected and taking those who wished to share the fortunes of war with him, although he showed his zeal for a fight to a finish, was not a match for his opponents because few of his army remained. Those of the Epirotes who went back to their native land rebelled against their absent king, condemned him to exile by a public decree, and made an alliance with Cassander. This was something that had never happened in Epirus from the time when Neoptolemus the son of Achilles was king of the land; for sons had always succeeded to their fathers’ authority and had died on the throne up to this time. Cassander received Epirus in his alliance and sent Lyciscus to it as regent and general, at which the people throughout Macedonia who had previously held apart from the alliance abandoned the fortunes of Olympias in despair and joined themselves to Cassander. Her only hope of aid was from Polyperchon, and this was also

1The siege began in the early part of the winter of 317/16.329