Diodorus of Sicily

ὑποπτεύσας ἀλλοτρίως ἔχειν συνέλαβε, καὶ
Στασίοικον τὸν τῶν Μαριέων1· καὶ τὴν μὲν πόλιν
κατέσκαψε, τοὺς δ᾿ ἐνοικοῦντας2 μετήγαγεν εἰς
5Πάφον. ταῦτα δὲ διαπραξάμενος τῆς μὲν Κύπρου
κατέστησε στρατηγὸν Νικοκρέοντα, παραδοὺς τάς
τε πόλεις καὶ τὰς προσόδους τῶν ἐκπεπτωκότων
6βασιλέων, αὐτὸς δὲ μετὰ τῆς δυνάμεως ἐκπλεύσας
ἐπὶ Συρίας τῆς ἄνω καλουμένης Ποσείδιον καὶ
Ποταμοὺς Καρῶν ἐκπολιορκήσας διήρπασεν. ἑτοίμως
δὲ πλεύσας ἐπὶ Κιλικίας Μάλον εἷλε καὶ τοὺς
ἐγκαταληφθέντας ἐλαφυροπώλησεν. ἐπόρθησε δὲ
καὶ τὴν ἐγγὺς χώραν καὶ τὸ στρατόπεδον ὠφελείας
7ἐμπλήσας ἀπέπλευσεν εἰς τὴν Κύπρον. ἐπολιτεύετο
δὲ πρὸς τοὺς στρατιώτας οὕτως, ἐκκαλούμενος
αὐτῶν τὰς προθυμίας εἰς τοὺς ἐπιφερομένους
κινδύνους.
80. Δημήτριος δὲ ὁ Ἀντιγόνου διέτριβεν ἀεὶ
περὶ Κοίλην Συρίαν, ἐφεδρεύων ταῖς τῶν Αἰγυπτίων
δυνάμεσιν. ὡς δ᾿ ἤκουσε τὰς τῶν πόλεων
ἁλώσεις Πίθωνα μὲν ἐπὶ τῶν τόπων κατέλιπε
στρατηγόν, δοὺς αὐτῷ τοὺς ἐλέφαντας καὶ τὰ βαρέα
τῶν ταγμάτων, αὐτὸς δ᾿ ἀναλαβὼν τούς τε ἱππεῖς
καὶ τὰ ψιλικὰ τάγματα προῆγεν ἐπὶ Κιλικίας συντόμως,
2βοηθήσων τοῖς κινδυνεύουσιν. ὑστερήσας
δὲ τῶν καιρῶν καὶ καταλαβὼν ἀποπεπλευκότας
τοὺς πολεμίους ἐπανῆλθε συντόμως ἐπὶ τὸ στρατόπεδον,




1καὶ Στασίοικον τὸν τῶν Μαριέων Rhodoman, cp. chap.
62. 6: Στασιοίκου τοῦ Μαλιέως RX, καὶ Στασίοικον τὸν τοῦ
Μαλιέως F.2ἐνοικοῦντας Dindorf: οἰκοῦντες.52Book XIX

being ill disposed toward himself, and also Stasioecus,1 313 b.c. ruler of Marion, destroying the city and transporting the inhabitants to Paphos.2 After accomplishing these things, he appointed Nicocreon3 as general of Cyprus, giving him both the cities and the revenues of the kings who had been driven out; but he himself with his army, sailing toward Upper Syria, as it is called, captured and sacked Poseidium and Potami Caron.4 Sailing without delay to Cilicia, he took Malus and sold as booty those who were captured there. He also plundered the neighbouring territory and, after sating his army with spoil, sailed back to Cyprus. His playing up to the soldiers in this way was designed to evoke enthusiasm in face of the encounters that were approaching.
80. Now Antigonus’ son Demetrius was staying on in Coelê Syria lying in wait for the Egyptian armies.5 But when he heard of the capture of the cities, he left Pithon as general in charge of the region, giving him the elephants and the heavy-armed
units of the army; and he himself, taking the cavalry and the light-armed units, moved rapidly toward Cilicia to give aid to those who were in danger. Arriving after the opportunity had passed and finding that the enemy had sailed away, he went rapidly




1Stasioecus, king of Marion on the west coast of Cyprus,
had first supported Antigonus and then Ptolemy (chap. 62. 6.),
and now seems to have turned against Ptolemy.2The text of this sentence is unsatisfactory, and a lacuna is suspected. Paphos is on the south-west coast of Cyprus.3Nicocreon, king of Salamis on the south coast of Cyprus, had been with Alexander at Tyre in 332/31 b.c. (Arrian, Anabasis, 2. 22. 2; Plutarch, Alexander, 29. 2). After Alexander’s death he supported Ptolemy (chap. 59. 1). For his treachery and death in 310 b.c. cp. Book 20. 21.4See Leonard Woolley, A Forgotten Kingdom, Penguin Books 1953, for Poseidium at the mouth of the Orontes. Potami Caron is unidentified.5Cp. chap. 69.53