Diodorus of Sicily

τι παθεῖν ἄτοπον ἕνεκα τοῦ φιλοψυχεῖν. καὶ τούτου
μάρτυρας ἐκείνους ὑπάρχειν ἀποφαινόμενος
ἐγύμνωσε τὸ ξίφος ὡς σφάξων ἑαυτόν. μέλλοντος
δ᾿ ἐπιφέρειν πληγὴν ἀνεβόησε τὸ στρατόπεδον διακωλῦον
καὶ πανταχόθεν ἐγίνοντο φωναὶ τῶν ἐγκλημάτων
5ἀπολύουσαι. προστάττοντος δὲ τοῦ πλήθους
ἀναλαβεῖν τὴν βασιλικὴν ἐσθῆτα δακρύων καὶ τοῖς
ὄχλοις εὐχαριστῶν ἐνεδύετο τὸν προσήκοντα κόσμον,
τοῦ πλήθους τὴν ἀποκατάστασιν κρότῳ παραμυθησαμένου.
τῶν δὲ Καρχηδονίων καραδοκούντων
ὡς αὐτίκα μάλα τῶν Ἑλλήνων πρὸς αὐτοὺς μεταθησομένων,1
Ἀγαθοκλῆς οὐ παρεὶς τὸν καιρὸν ἐξήγαγεν
6ἐπ᾿ αὐτοὺς τὴν δύναμιν. οἱ μὲν οὖν βάρβαροι
νομίζοντες τοὺς ἐναντίους ἀποχωρεῖν πρὸς αὑτούς,
οὐδεμίαν τῶν πρὸς ἀλήθειαν πεπραγμένων ἔννοιαν
ἐλάμβανον· ὁ δ᾿ Ἀγαθοκλῆς ὡς ἐπλησίασε τοῖς
πολεμίοις, ἄφνω τὸ πολεμικὸν προσέταξε σημαίνειν
καὶ προσπεσὼν πολὺν ἐποίει φόνον. οἱ δὲ Καρχηδόνιοι
παραδόξῳ συμπτώματι περιπεσόντες καὶ
πολλοὺς τῶν στρατιωτῶν ἀποβαλόντες συνέφυγον
7εἰς τὴν παρεμβολήν. Ἀγαθοκλῆς μὲν οὖν διὰ τὸν
υἱὸν εἰς τοὺς ἐσχάτους ἐλθὼν κινδύνους διὰ τῆς
ἰδίας ἀρετῆς οὐ μόνον λύσιν εὗρε τῶν κακῶν, ἀλλὰ
καὶ τοὺς πολεμίους ἠλάττωσεν· οἱ δὲ τῆς στάσεως
μάλιστ᾿ αἴτιοι γενόμενοι καὶ τῶν ἄλλων ὅσοι πρὸς
τὸν δυνάστην ἀλλοτρίως διέκειντο, ὑπὲρ τοὺς
διακοσίους ὄντες, ἐτόλμησαν πρὸς τοὺς Καρχηδονίους
αὐτομολῆσαι.
Ἡμεῖς δὲ τὰ περὶ Λιβύην καὶ Σικελίαν διεληλυθότε
μνησθησόμεθα καὶ τῶν ἐν Ἰταλίᾳ
πραχθέντων.
1μεταθησομένων Dindorf: μετατεθησομένων RX, μεταβησομένων F.232Book XX

cowardice, consented to endure any indignity through 309 b.c. love of life. And declaring that they themselves were witnesses of this, he bared his sword as if to slay himself. When he was on the point of striking the blow, the army shouted bidding him stop, and from every side came voices clearing him from the charges. And when the crowd kept pressing him to resume his royal garb, he put on the dress of his rank, weeping and thanking the people, the crowd meanwhile acclaiming his restoration with a clash of arms. While the Carthaginians were waiting intently, expecting that the Greeks would very soon come over to them, Agathocles, not missing the opportunity, led his army against them. The barbarians, believing that their opponents were deserting to them, had no idea at all of what had actually taken place; and when Agathocles had drawn near the enemy, he suddenly ordered the signal for battle to be given, fell upon them, and created great havoc. The Carthaginians, stunned by the sudden reversal, lost many of their soldiers and fled into their camp. Thus Agathocles, after having fallen into the most extreme danger on account of his son, through his own excellence not only found a way out of his difficulties, but even defeated the enemy. Those, however, who were chiefly responsible for the sedition and any of the others who were hostile to the prince, more than two hundred in number, found the courage to desert to the Carthaginians.
Now that we have completed the account of events in Libya and in Sicily,1 we shall relate what took place in Italy.
1Continued in chap. 38. 1.233