Diodorus of Sicily
2καὶ τῶν ὑποζυγίων ἀφήρπασαν. ἐπὶ δὲ τούτοις ὁ
βασιλεὺς παροξυνθεὶς συνεστήσατο πολιορκίαν καὶ
πᾶσαν εἰσεφέρετο σπουδὴν βίᾳ κρατῆσαι τοῦ
χωρίου. οἱ δὲ Μαρμαρεῖς ἀνδρείᾳ διαφέροντες καὶ
τῇ τῶν τόπων ἐρυμνότητι πιστεύοντες ὑπέμενον
εὐρώστως τὴν πολιορκίαν. ἐπὶ μὲν οὖν ἡμέρας δύο
συνεχεῖς ἐγίνοντο προσβολαὶ καὶ φανερὸς ἦν ὁ βασιλεὺς
οὐκ ἀποστησόμενος ἕως ἂν ἕλῃ τὴν πέτραν.
3Οἱ δὲ πρεσβύτεροι τῶν Μαρμαρέων τὸ μὲν πρῶτον
συνεβούλευον τοῖς νέοις παυσαμένοις τῆς βίας
ἐφ᾿ οἷς ἦν δυνατὸν συλλυθῆναι πρὸς τὸν βασιλέα·
οὐ πειθομένων δ᾿ αὐτῶν, ἀλλὰ πάντων φιλοτιμουμένων
συναποθανεῖν τῇ τῆς πατρίδος ἐλευθερίᾳ
παρεκάλεσαν αὐτοὺς τέκνα μὲν καὶ γυναῖκας καὶ
τοὺς γεγηρακότας ἀνελεῖν, αὐτοὺς δὲ τοὺς δυναμένους
διὰ τῆς ἀλκῆς σώζεσθαι νυκτὸς διὰ μέσων
τῶν πολεμίων διεκπεσεῖν καὶ καταφυγεῖν εἰς τὴν
4πλησίον ὀρεινήν. συγκαταθεμένων δὲ τῶν νέων
καὶ προσταξάντων κατ᾿ οἰκίαν ἑκάστους μετὰ τῆς
συγγενείας ἀπολαύσαντας τῶν προσηνεστάτων βρωτῶν
τε καὶ ποτῶν ὑπομεῖναι τὸ δεινὸν1 ἔδοξε τοῖς
νέοις, οὖσιν ὡς ἑξακοσίοις, τοῦ μὲν φονεύειν τοὺς
προσήκοντας ἀποσχέσθαι, τὰς δ᾿ οἰκίας ἐμπρῆσαι
καὶ διὰ τῶν πυλῶν ἐκχυθέντας εἰς τὴν ὀρεινὴν
5ἀποχωρῆσαι. οὗτοι μὲν οὖν τὰ δεδογμένα συντελέσαντες
ταῖς ἰδίαις ἑστίαις ἑκάστους ἐποίησαν
ἐνταφῆναι, αὐτοὶ δὲ διὰ μέσων τῶν περιεστρατοπεδευκότων
ἔτι νυκτὸς οὔσης διεκπεσόντες ἔφυγον
εἰς τὴν πλησίον ὀρεινήν.
Ταῦτα μὲν οὖν ἐπράχθη κατὰ τοῦτον τὸν ἐνιαυτόν.
1Diodorus may have confused his narrative in compressing
it, or some words may have been lost here.196Book XVII

and pack animals. The king was enraged at this, 334/3 b.c. established a siege, and exerted every effort to take the place by force. The Marmares were very brave and had confidence in the strength of their fortifications, and manfully withstood the attack. For two whole days there were constant assaults and it was clear that the king would not leave until he had captured the “rock.”
First, then, the older men of the Marmares advised their younger countrymen to end their resistance and make peace with the king on whatever terms were possible. They would have none of this, however, but all were eager to die together simultaneously with the end of the freedom of their state, so next the elders urged upon them that they should kill with their own hands their children and wives and aged relatives, and those who were strong enough to save themselves should break out through the midst of the enemy at night and take refuge in the neighbouring mountain. The young men agreed, and consequently gave orders to go each to his own house and there, enjoying the best of food and drink with their families, await the dread event. Some of them, however (these were about six hundred), decided not to kill their relatives with their own hands, but to burn them in the houses, and so issuing forth from the gates to make their way to the mountain. These carried out their decision and so caused each family to be entombed at its own hearth, while they themselves slipped through the midst of the enemy encamped about them and made their way to the near-by hills under cover of darkness.
This is what happened in this year.
197