Diodorus of Sicily

μετεπέμψατο πρὸς τὴν τῶν ὅλων κοινοπραγίαν·
3ἀεὶ γὰρ εἰώθει τοῦτον κατὰ τοὺς μεγίστους φόβους
εἰς τὴν βοήθειαν προσλαμβάνεσθαι διά τε τὴν
τἀνδρὸς ἀρετὴν καὶ διὰ τὸ τὴν βασιλείαν αὐτοῦ
ὅμορον εἶναι τῇ Μακεδονίᾳ. συνεδρεύσαντες οὖν
οἱ βασιλεῖς οὗτοι περὶ τοῦ κοινοῦ συμφέροντος
ἐξέπεμψαν πρεσβευτὰς πρός τε Πτολεμαῖον τὸν
Αἰγύπτου βασιλέα καὶ πρὸς Σέλευκον τὸν τῶν ἄνω
σατραπειῶν κυριεύοντα, περί τε τῆς ὑπερηφανίας
τῆς ἐν ταῖς ἀποκρίσεσιν ἐμφανίζοντες καὶ τὸν ἐκ
τοῦ πολέμου κίνδυνον κοινὸν εἶναι πάντων διδάσκοντες.
4τῆς γὰρ Μακεδονίας κρατήσαντα τὸν
Ἀντίγονον εὐθὺς ἀφελεῖσθαι καὶ τῶν ἄλλων τὰς
βασιλείας· δεδωκέναι γὰρ αὐτὸν πεῖραν πλεονάκις
ὅτι πλεονέκτης ἐστὶ καὶ πᾶσαν ἀρχὴν ἀκοινώνητον
ποιεῖ. συμφέρειν οὖν ἅπαντας συμφρονῆσαι καὶ
5κοινῇ πρὸς Ἀντίγονον ἐπανελέσθαι πόλεμον. οἱ
μὲν οὖν περὶ Πτολεμαῖον καὶ Σέλευκον δόξαντες
ἀληθῆ λέγειν1 προθύμως ὑπήκουσαν καὶ συνετάξαντο
πρὸς ἀλλήλους2 βοηθεῖν ἁδραῖς δυνάμεσι.
107. Τοῖς δὲ περὶ Κάσανδρον ἔδοξε μὴ περιμένειν
τὴν τῶν πολεμίων ἔφοδον, ἀλλὰ καὶ αὐτοὺς
φθάσαντας ἐπιστρατεύειν καὶ προλαμβάνειν τὸ
χρήσιμον. διόπερ ὁ Κάσανδρος Λυσιμάχῳ μὲν
παρέδωκε μέρος τοῦ στρατοπέδου καὶ στρατηγὸν
Πρεπέλαον3 συνεξέπεμψεν, αὐτὸς δὲ ἀνέζευξε μετὰ
τῆς λοιπῆς δυνάμεως εἰς Θετταλίαν, διαπολεμήσων
2Δημητρίῳ καὶ τοῖς Ἕλλησι. Λυσίμαχος δὲ μετὰ



1πρὸς ἀλλήλους after λέγειν omitted by Bekker.2πρὸς ἀλλήλους added by Bekker.3Πρεπέλαον added by Beloch (Griechische Geschichte2, 4.
1. 162, note 3).424Book XX

action in regard to their highest interests; 302 b.c. for it was his invariable custom when facing the most alarming situations to call on Lysimachus for assistance, both because of his personal character and because his kingdom lay next to Macedonia. When these kings had taken counsel together about their common interest, they sent envoys to Ptolemy, the king of Egypt, and to Seleucus, who was ruler of the upper satrapies, revealing the arrogance of Antigonus’ answer and showing that the danger arising from the war was common to all. For they said, if Antigonus should gain control of Macedonia, he would at once take their kingdoms from the others also; indeed he had given proof many times that he was grasping and regarded any command as a possession not to be shared. It would therefore, they said, be advantageous for all to make plans in common and jointly undertake a war against Antigonus. Now Ptolemy and Seleucus, believing that the statements were true, eagerly agreed and arranged with Cassander to assist one another with strong forces.
107. Cassander, however, thought it best not to await the attack of his enemies but to get the start of them by opening the campaign himself and seizing what he could use to advantage. Therefore Cassander gave to Lysimachus a part of his army and sent with it Prepelaüs as general,1 while he himself moved with the rest of the army into Thessaly to carry on the war with Demetrius and the Greeks.

1But cp. critical note.425