Diodorus of Sicily
Περὶ τῆς ἐν Λιβύῃ γενομένης στάσεως καὶ τοῦ
κινδύνου τοῦ περὶ τὸν Ἀγαθοκλέα.
Περὶ τῶν πραχθέντων Ἀππίῳ Κλαυδίῳ κατὰ τὴν
τιμητικὴν ἀρχήν.
Παράδοσις Κορίνθου καὶ Σικυῶνος Πτολεμαίῳ.
Κλεοπάτρας ἐν Σάρδεσιν ἀναίρεσις.
Ὡς Ἀγαθοκλῆς Καρχηδονίους μὲν ἐνίκησεν μάχῃ, τὸν
δὲ δυνάστην τῆς Κυρήνης Ὀφέλλαν μεταπεμψάμενος ἐπὶ
κοινοπραγίαν κατέσφαξεν, καὶ τὴν μετὰ τούτου δύναμιν
παρέλαβεν.
Ὡς Καρχηδόνιοι Βορμίλκαν ἐπιθέμενον τυραννίδι
κατέλυσαν.
Ὡς Ἀγαθοκλέους ἀποπέμψαντος εἰς Σικελίαν τὰ
λάφυρα τινὰ τῶν πλοίων ἐναυάγησεν.
Ὡς Ῥωμαῖοι Μαρσοῖς μὲν πολεμουμένοις ὑπὸ Σαμνιτῶν
ἐβοήθησαν, ἐν δὲ τῇ Τυρρηνίᾳ Κάπριον ἐξεπολιόρκησαν.
Δημητρίου τοῦ πολιορκητοῦ κατάπλους εἰς τὸν Πειραιᾶ
καὶ τῆς Μουνυχίας ἅλωσις.
Ἐλευθέρωσις Ἀθηναίων καὶ Μεγαρέων.
Πλοῦς ἐπὶ Κύπρον Δημητρίου καὶ μάχη πρὸς Μενέλαον
τὸν στρατηγὸν καὶ Σαλαμῖνος πολιορκία.
Ναυμαχία Δημητρίου πρὸς Πτολεμαῖον καὶ νίκη
Δημητρίου.
Παράληψις Κύπρου τε πάσης καὶ τῆς Πτολεμαίου
δυνάμεως.
Ὡς μετὰ τὴν νίκην ταύτην Ἀντιγόνου καὶ Δημητρίου
περιθεμένων διάδημα ζηλοτυπήσαντες οἱ λοιποὶ δυνάσται
βασιλεῖς ἑαυτοὺς ἀνηγόρευσαν.
138Book XX
About the revolt that took place in Libya, and the peril of Agathocles (chaps. 33–34).1
About the acts of Appius Claudius during his censorship (chap. 36).
Delivery of Corinth and Sicyon to Ptolemy (chap. 37).
Assassination of Cleopatra in Sardis (chap. 37).
How Agathocles defeated the Carthaginians in battle; and how, after summoning Ophellas, the tyrant of Cyrenê, to co-operate with him, he assassinated him and took over the army that was with him (chaps. 38–42).
How the Carthaginians put down Bormilcar, who had attempted to become tyrant (chaps. 43–44).
How, when Agathocles sent the booty to Sicily, some of the ships were wrecked (chap. 44).
How the Romans went to the aid of the Marsi, who were being attacked by the Samnites; and how they took Caprium2 in Etruria after a siege (chap. 44).
The naval expedition of Demetrius Poliorcetes into the Peiraeus, and his capture of Munychia (chap. 45).
Liberation of the Athenians and the Megarians (chap. 46).
Voyage of Demetrius to Cyprus, his battle against the general Menelaüs, and the siege of Salamis (chaps. 47–48).
Demetrius’ naval battle against Ptolemy and victory of Demetrius (chaps. 49–52).
Capture of all Cyprus and of the army of Ptolemy (chap. 53).
How, because Antigonus and Demetrius assumed the diadem after this victory, the other dynasts, jealous of them, proclaimed themselves kings (chap. 53).
1Chap. 35 is omitted: campaigns of the Romans in Etruria
and Samnium.2Called Caerium in chap. 44. 9.139