Diodorus of Sicily
3τῆς εἰς τοὔμπροσθεν πορείας. προέταξαν δὲ
τοῦ κέρατος τούτου καὶ τὰ ψιλικὰ τάγματα, παραγγείλαντες
τοῖς τε ἀκοντισταῖς καὶ τοξόταις
συνεχῶς κατατιτρώσκειν τὰ θηρία καὶ τοὺς ἐπ᾿
αὐτοῖς ἀναβεβηκότας. τοῦτον δὲ τὸν τρόπον
ὀχυρωσάμενοι τὸ δεξιὸν κέρας καὶ τὴν ἄλλην δύναμιν
ἐκτάξαντες ἐνδεχομένως ἐπῆγον τοῖς πολεμίοις
μετὰ πολλῆς κραυγῆς.
Ἀντεπαγόντων δὲ καὶ τῶν ἐναντίων τὸ μὲν
πρῶτον ἐπ᾿ ἄκρων τῶν κεράτων ἱππομαχία συνέστη
τῶν προτεταγμένων ἱππέων, ἐν οἷς πολὺ προετέρουν
4οἱ περὶ τὸν Δημήτριον. μετ᾿ ὀλίγον δὲ τῶν
περὶ Πτολεμαῖον καὶ Σέλευκον περιιππευσάντων
τὸ κέρας καὶ βιαιότερον ἐπενεχθέντων ὀρθίαις1 ταῖς
εἴλαις συνέστη καρτερὰ μάχη διὰ τὰς ἑκατέρων
5προθυμίας. κατὰ μὲν οὖν τὴν πρώτην ἔφοδον τοῖς
ξυστοῖς ἀγωνισάμενοι τούτων τε τὰ πλεῖστα συνέτριψαν
καὶ τῶν ἀγωνιζομένων οὐκ ὀλίγους
κατετραυμάτισαν· κατὰ δὲ τὴν δευτέραν ἀναστροφὴν2
εἰς τὴν ἀπὸ τοῦ ξίφους μάχην ὥρμησαν καὶ
συμπλεκόμενοι πολλοὺς ἀλλήλων ἀνῄρουν, οἵ τε
ἡγεμόνες αὐτοὶ πρὸ πάντων κινδυνεύοντες προετρέποντο
τοὺς ὑποτεταγμένους εὐρώστως ὑπομένειν
τὸ δεινόν, οἵ τ᾿ ἐπὶ τῶν κεράτων ἱππεῖς,
ἅπαντες ἐπιλελεγμένοι κατ᾿ ἀρετήν, ἡμιλλῶντο
πρὸς ἀλλήλους, θεατὰς ἔχοντες τῆς ἀνδρείας τοὺς
συναγωνιζομένους στρατηγούς.
84. Ἐπὶ πολὺν δὲ χρόνον τῆς ἱππομαχίας οὔσης
ἐφαμίλλου τὰ θηρία διὰ τῶν Ἰνδῶν εἰς τὸν ἀγῶνα
παρορμηθέντα μέχρι μέν τινος προῆγεν καταπληκτικῶς,
ὡς οὐδενὸς ὑποστησομένου· ὡς δ᾿ ἐπὶ τὸν

1ὀρθίαις Kromayer (cp. Suidas s.v.ὀρθία): ὀρθαῖς.2ἐπιστροφὴν editors except Fischer.62Book XIX

from moving forward. In front of this wing they 312 b.c. also stationed their light-armed units, ordering the javelin-men and archers to shoot without ceasing at the elephants and at those who were mounted upon them. When they had made their right wing strong in this manner and had drawn up the rest of their army as circumstances permitted, they advanced upon the enemy with a great shout.
Their opponents also advanced; and first there was a cavalry action on the extreme wings between the troops of the advance guards in which the men of Demetrius had much the better of it. But after a little, when Ptolemy and Seleucus had ridden around the wing and charged upon them more heavily with cavalry drawn up in depth, there was severe fighting because of the zeal of both sides. In the first charge, indeed, the fighting was with spears, most of which were shattered, and many of the antagonists were wounded; then, rallying again, the men rushed into battle at sword’s point, and, as they were locked in close combat, many were slain on each side. The very commanders, endangering themselves in front of all, encouraged those under their command to withstand the danger stoutly; and the horsemen upon the wings, all of whom had been selected for bravery, vied with each other since as witnesses of their valour they had their generals, who were sharing the struggle with them.
84. After the cavalry battle had continued for a long time on equal terms, the elephants, urged on into the combat by their Indian mahouts, advanced for a certain distance in a way to inspire terror, just as if no one were going to withstand them. When,


63