Diodorus of Sicily

ταύτην Κρατερὸς ἡγεῖτο. τῶν δὲ προειρημένων
ἱππέων τὴν συνεχῆ τάξιν ἀπεπλήρουν οἱ ἀπὸ
Πελοποννήσου καὶ Ἀχαΐας συστρατεύσαντες ἱππεῖς
καὶ Φθιῶται καὶ Μαλιεῖς, ἔτι δὲ Λοκροὶ καὶ
4Φωκεῖς, ὧν ἡγεῖτο Ἐρίγυιος1 ὁ Μιτυληναῖος. ἑξῆς
δ᾿ εἱστήκεισαν Θετταλοί, Φίλιππον μὲν ἔχοντες
ἡγεμόνα, ἀνδρείᾳ δὲ καὶ τῇ τῶν εἰλῶν ἱππασίᾳ
πολὺ προέχοντες τῶν ἄλλων. ἐχομένους δὲ τούτων
τοὺς ἐκ Κρήτης τοξότας ἔταξε καὶ τοὺς ἐκ τῆς
Ἀχαΐας μισθοφόρους.
5Ἐφ᾿ ἑκατέρου δὲ τοῦ κέρατος ἐπικάμπιον ἐποίησε
τὴν2 τάξιν, ὅπως μὴ δύνωνται κυκλοῦν οἱ πολέμιοι
τῷ πλήθει τῶν στρατιωτῶν τὴν ὀλιγότητα τῶν
6Μακεδόνων. πρὸς δὲ τὰς τῶν δρεπανηφόρων ἁρμάτων
ἐπιφορὰς μηχανώμενος ὁ βασιλεὺς παρήγγειλε
τοῖς ἐν τῇ φάλαγγι πεζοῖς, ὅταν πλησιάζῃ τὰ
τέθριππα, συνασπίσαι καὶ ταῖς σαρίσαις τὰς ἀσπίδας
τύπτειν, ὅπως διὰ τὸν ψόφον πτυρόμενα τὴν εἰς
τοὐπίσω ποιήσηται φοράν, τοῖς δὲ βιαζομένοις διδόναι
διαστήματα, δι᾿ ὧν ποιήσονται τὴν διέξοδον
ἀκίνδυνον τοῖς Μακεδόσιν. αὐτὸς δὲ τοῦ δεξιοῦ
μέρους ἡγούμενος καὶ λοξὴν τὴν τάξιν ποιούμενος
δι᾿ ἑαυτοῦ τὴν ὅλην κρίσιν τοῦ κινδύνου ποιεῖσθαι
διεγνώκει.
58. Ὁ δὲ Δαρεῖος κατὰ τὰς τῶν ἐθνῶν περιοχὰς
τὴν ἔκταξιν πεποιημένος κατά τε τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον
τεταγμένος προῆγεν ἐπὶ τοὺς πολεμίους. ὡς δ᾿
ἐπλησίαζον ἀλλήλαις αἱ δυνάμεις, οἱ μὲν σαλπικταὶ




1Ἐρίγυος RX.2τὴν added by Dindorf.282Book XVII

Craterus. As for the cavalry, the line of the squadrons 331/0 b.c. which I have mentioned was continued with the combined Peloponnesian and Achaean horse, then cavalry from Phthiotis and Malis, then Locrians and Phocians, all under the command of Erigyius of Mitylenê. Next were posted the Thessalians who had Philip as commander; they were far superior to the rest in their fighting qualities and in their horsemanship. And next to these he stationed the Cretan archers and the mercenaries from Achaia.
On both flanks he kept his wings back so that the enemy with their superior numbers could not envelop the shorter line of the Macedonians. Against the threat of the scythed chariots, he ordered the infantry of the phalanx to join shields as soon as these went into action against them and to beat the shields with their spears, creating such a din as to frighten the horses into bolting to the rear, or, if they persevered, to open gaps in the ranks such that they might ride through harmlessly. He himself took personal command of the right wing and advancing obliquely planned to settle the issue of the battle by his own actions.1
58. Dareius based his formation for battle on the characteristics of his national contingents,2 and posting himself opposite Alexander gave the command to advance on the Macedonians. As the lines approached


1Diodorus’s account of Alexander’s dispositions agrees
generally with those of Curtius (4. 13. 26–35) and Arrian (3. 11. 8–12. 5), with the exceptions that Arrian gives only six squadrons of the Companions in addition to that of Cleitus, and names Simmias as battalion commander instead of Philip (who is named also by Curtius, 4. 13. 28; a Philip appears in 327 as a battalion commander with Alexander in operations north of the Kabul River, Arrian, 4. 24. 10).2The Persian dispositions are given by Curtius (4. 12. 5–13) and Arrian (3. 11. 3–7) from captured records.283