Diodorus of Sicily

ναός, ὃν ἱδρύσαντο Θηβαῖοι, ᾑματωμένην ἔχων τὴν
ὀροφὴν ὁρᾶται.
Οἱ δὲ ἐπὶ1 τὴν τῶν σημείων διάκρισιν ἀσχολούμενοι
σημαίνειν ἔφασαν τὸ μὲν ὕφασμα θεῶν ἀπὸ
τῆς πόλεως χωρισμόν, τὸ δὲ τῆς ἴριδος χρῶμα
πραγμάτων ποικίλων χειμῶνα, τὸν δὲ τῶν ἀνδριάντων
ἱδρῶτα ὑπερβάλλουσαν κακοπάθειαν, τὸ δ᾿
ἐν πλείοσι τόποις φαινόμενον αἷμα φόνον πολὺν
6κατὰ τὴν πόλιν ἐσόμενον. συνεβούλευον οὖν τῶν
θεῶν φανερῶς σημαινόντων τὴν ἐσομένην τῇ πόλει
συμφορὰν μὴ συγκαταβαίνειν εἰς τὸ διὰ μάχης
κρίνειν τὸν πόλεμον, ἑτέραν δὲ διάλυσιν ζητεῖν διὰ
λόγων ἀσφαλεστέραν.
Οὐ μὴν οἱ Θηβαῖοί γε ταῖς ψυχαῖς ἐμαλακύνοντο,
τοὐναντίον δὲ τοῖς θυμοῖς προαχθέντες ἀνεμίμνησκον
ἀλλήλους τὴν ἐν Λεύκτροις εὐημερίαν καὶ τῶν
ἄλλων παρατάξεων ἐν αἷς θαυμαστῶς ταῖς ἰδίαις
ἀνδραγαθίαις ἀνελπίστους νίκας περιεποιήσαντο.
οἱ μὲν οὖν Θηβαῖοι τοῖς παραστήμασιν ἀνδρειότερον
μᾶλλον ἢ φρονιμώτερον χρησάμενοι προέπεσον εἰς
πάνδημον τῆς πατρίδος ὄλεθρον.
11. Ὁ δὲ βασιλεὺς ἐν τρισὶ ταῖς πάσαις ἡμέραις
ἑτοιμασάμενος2 τὰ πρὸς τὴν πολιορκίαν τὰς δυνάμεις




1The manuscripts are unanimous in reading ἐπὶ here and
in chap. 94. 4, where we should rather expect περὶ (Books
2. 40. 4; 17. 99. 5), and editors have tended to correct accordingly.2So Dindorf: ἑτοιμασάμενος τὰ πρὸς τὴν πολιορκίαν καὶ
τὰς δυνάμεις διείλετο τὴν στρατιάν RX; ἑτοιμασάμενος πρὸς τὴν
πολιορκίαν τὰς δυνάμεις διείλετο τὴν στρατιάν F.146Book XVII

from the Phocian spoils was observed to have blood-stains 335 4 b.c. on its roof.1
Those who made a business of interpreting such portents stated that the spider web signified the departure of the gods from the city, its iridescence meant a storm of mixed troubles, the sweating of the statues was the sign of an overwhelming catastrophe, and the appearance of blood in many places foretold a vast slaughter throughout the city. They pointed out that the gods were clearly predicting disaster for the city and recommended that the outcome of the war should not be risked upon the battlefield, but that a safer solution should be sought for in conversations.
Still the Thebans’ spirits were not daunted. On the contrary they were so carried away with enthusiasm that they reminded one another of the victory at Leuctra and of the other battles where their own fighting qualities had won unhoped for victories to the astonishment of the Greek world. They indulged their nobility of spirit bravely rather than wisely, and plunged headlong into the total destruction of their country.
11. Now the king in the course of only three days made everything ready for the assault. He divided

1The naos at Delphi was the great temple of Apollo which
was under construction in the period 360–330 b.c. The epigraphical record is assembled by E. Bourguet in the Fouilles de Delphes, 3. 5 (1932). Much was done in 346 in the archonship of Damoxenus, “when peace was established,” and there were Theban naopoionaopoioi in that year, along with many others. The Thebans had taken a hand in plundering the Phocians after Philip’s victory, and the Phocians were obligated to make annual payments to restore what they had borrowed from the sanctuary (Book 16. 60. 2). But there is otherwise no suggestion that Phocian funds were applied to the temple construction, and it is quite certain that the Thebans themselves did not build or rebuild or dedicate the temple of Apollo.147