Diodorus of Sicily

ἐν Δίῳ μὲν τοῦ Διός, ἐν Ἀμφιπόλει δὲ
τῆς Ταυροπόλου, ἐν Κύρνῳ1 δὲ τῆς Ἀθηνᾶς·
ὁμοίως δὲ καὶ ἐν Ἰλίῳ ταύτης τῆς θεᾶς κατασκευασθῆναι
ναὸν ὑπερβολὴν ἑτέρῳ μὴ καταλείποντα.
τοῦ δὲ πατρὸς Φιλίππου τάφον πυραμίδι
παραπλήσιον μιᾷ τῇ μεγίστῃ τῶν2 κατὰ τὴν Αἴγυπτον,
ἃς ἐν τοῖς ἑπτά τινες μεγίστοις ἔργοις καταριθμοῦσιν.
6ἀναγνωσθέντων δὲ τῶν ὑπομνημάτων
οἱ Μακεδόνες, καίπερ ἀποδεδεγμένοι καλῶς τὸν
Ἀλέξανδρον, ὅμως ὑπερόγκους καὶ δυσεφίκτους
τὰς ἐπιβολὰς ὁρῶντες ἔκριναν μηδὲν τῶν εἰρημένων
συντελεῖν.
7Περδίκκας δὲ τὸ μὲν πρῶτον τοὺς ταραχώδεις
τῶν στρατιωτῶν καὶ μάλιστα ἀλλοτρίως ἔχοντας
τὰ πρὸς αὐτὸν ἀπέκτεινεν, ὄντας τριάκοντα. μετὰ
δὲ ταῦτα καὶ Μελέαγρον ἐν τῇ στάσει καὶ πρεσβείᾳ
προδότην γεγενημένον, ἐπιλαβόμενος οἰκείας διαβολῆς3
καὶ κατηγορίας, ὡς ἐπιβουλὴν κατ᾿ αὐτοῦ
8πεποιημένον ἐκόλασε. μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα ἐν ταῖς ἄνω
σατραπείαις τῶν κατοικισθέντων Ἑλλήνων ἀποστάντων
καὶ δύναμιν ἀξιόλογον συστησαμένων ἕνα
τῶν ἐπιφανῶν ἀνδρῶν ἐξέπεμψε Πίθωνα διαπολεμήσοντα
πρὸς αὐτούς.
5. Ἡμεῖς δὲ πρὸς τὰς μελλούσας ἱστορεῖσθαι





1For Κύρνῳ Gronovius and Wesseling suggest Κύρρῳ.2τῶν added by Schaefer.3ἐπιλαβόμενος . . . διαβολῆς Stephanus, ἐπιβαλόμενος . . .
διαβολὰς Wesseling, Fischer: ἐπιβαλόμενος . . . διαβολῆς.22Book XVIII

a temple to Zeus at Dium, to Artemis Tauropolus 323 b.c. at Amphipolis, and to Athena at Cyrnus.1 Likewise at Ilium in honour of this goddess there was to be built a temple that could never be surpassed by any other.2 A tomb for his father Philip was to be constructed to match the greatest of the pyramids of Egypt, buildings which some persons count among the seven greatest works of man.3 When these memoranda had been read, the Macedonians, although they applauded the name of Alexander, nevertheless saw that the projects were extravagant and impracticable and decided to carry out none of those that have been mentioned.
Perdiccas first put to death those soldiers who were fomenters of discord and most at enmity with himself, thirty in number.4 After that he also punished Meleager, who had been a traitor on the occasion of the contention and his mission,5 using as a pretext a private quarrel and a charge that Meleager was plotting against him. Then, since the Greeks who had been settled in the upper satrapies6 had revolted and raised an army of considerable size, he sent one of the nobles, Pithon, to fight it out with them.
5. Considering the events that are to be narrated,





1Cyrnus in Macedon is otherwise unknown, but the name
is found elsewhere in Greece (Herodotus, 9. 105; Pliny,
Natural History, 4. 53), and the change to Cyrrhus, although
easy, seems unnecessary.2Cp. Strabo, 13. 1. 26.3Cp. Book 1. 63. 2–9. Antipater of Sidon (Pal. Anthol. 9. 58), an epigrammatist of the second century b.c., gives the following as the seven wonders of the world: The walls of Babylon, the statue of Zeus by Pheidias, the hanging gardens of Babylon, the Colossus of Rhodes, the pyramids of Egypt, the Mausoleum at Halicarnassus, and the Temple of Artemis at Ephesus. Other lists combine the walls and the hanging gardens of Babylon, and add the Pharos at Alexandria.4Curtius (10. 9. 18) says three hundred. Cp. Arrian, FGrH, 156. 1. 4.5Cp. chap. 2. 3.6i.e. those of the far eastern part of the empire.23