Diodorus of Sicily
6συνέβη καὶ ταύτην συντριβῆναι παραδόξως· ὁ
γὰρ ὑπὸ Κασάνδρου πεμφθεὶς στρατηγὸς Κάλλας
ἐπειδὴ πλησίον γενόμενος τοῦ Πολυπέρχοντος κατεστρατοπέδευσεν
ἐν τῇ Περραιβίᾳ, διέφθειρε τῶν
μετ᾿ αὐτοῦ στρατιωτῶν τοὺς πλείστους χρήμασιν,
ὥστε ὀλίγους τοὺς μάλιστα πιστοὺς ἀπολειφθῆναι.
αἱ μὲν οὖν Ὀλυμπιάδος ἐλπίδες ἐν
ὀλίγῳ χρόνῳ τοῦτον τὸν τρόπον ἐταπεινώθησαν.
37. Κατὰ δὲ τὴν Ἀσίαν Ἀντίγονος μὲν χειμάζων
ἐν Γαδαμάλοις τῆς Μηδίας καὶ θεωρῶν τὴν
ἑαυτοῦ δύναμιν ἀσθενεστέραν οὖσαν τῆς τῶν πολεμίων
ἔσπευδεν ἀνελπίστως αὐτοῖς ἐπιθέσθαι καὶ
καταστρατηγῆσαι. ἐτύγχανον δ᾿ οὗτοι τὴν χειμασίαν
ἔχοντες ἐν πολλοῖς μέρεσι διεζευγμένην,
ὥστ᾿ ἐνίους ἀπ᾿ ἀλλήλων ἀπέχειν ὁδὸν ἡμερῶν ἕξ.
2τὸ μὲν οὖν διὰ τῆς οἰκουμένης χώρας ὁδοιπορεῖν
ἀπεδοκίμασε διὰ τὸ καὶ μακρὰν εἶναι καὶ τοῖς
πολεμίοις εὐθεώρητον, τὸ δὲ τολμῆσαι διὰ τῆς
ἐρήμου καὶ ἀνύδρου προάγειν ἐπίπονον μὲν ἔκρινεν,
εἰς δὲ τὴν βεβουλευμένην ἐπιβολὴν χρησιμώτατον·
οὐ μόνον γὰρ διὰ ταύτης συντόμως ἦν ἐλθεῖν, ἀλλὰ
καὶ ῥᾳδίως λαθεῖν ἀπροσδοκήτως ἐπιπεσόντα τοῖς
διὰ τὴν ἄγνοιαν διερριμμένοις κατὰ κώμας καὶ
3ῥᾳθυμοῦσι. ταῦτα δὲ διανοηθεὶς τοῖς μὲν στρατιώταις
παρήγγειλεν ἑτοίμους εἶναι πρὸς ἀνάζευξιν καὶ
παρασκευάσασθαι δέχ᾿ ἡμερῶν ἄπυρα σιτία, αὐτὸς
δὲ διαδοὺς1 λόγον ἐπ᾿ Ἀρμενίας προάξειν ἄφνω
παρὰ τὴν πάντων ὑπόληψιν ὥρμησε διὰ τῆς ἐρήμου,





1διαδοὺς Dindorf: δοὺς.330Book XIX

unexpectedly crushed; for when Callas, who had been 317 b.c. sent by Cassander as general, drew near Polyperchon in Perrhaebia and camped there, he corrupted most of Polyperchon’s soldiers by bribes so that there remained only a few and these the most faithful. Thus Olympias’ hopes were humbled in a brief time.1
37. In Asia2 Antigonus, who was wintering in Gadamala3 in Media, seeing that his force was weaker than that of the enemy, was anxious to get the better of them by attacking them without warning. It happened that the enemy4 were occupying winter quarters which were divided in many parts, so that some of the detachments were six days’ march distant from others. So Antigonus disapproved of the idea of marching through the inhabited country5 because the route was long and easily observed by the enemy, and decided that to venture the journey through the waterless desert although difficult, would be most suitable for the attack that he had planned; for not only was it possible to go quickly by that route, but it was also easy to escape attention and fall unexpectedly upon an army that, because ignorant of his movements, would be scattered among villages and at its ease. Having formed this plan he ordered the soldiers to be ready to break camp and to prepare ten days’ supply of food that would not require cooking. He himself, after spreading the report that he was going to lead the army against Armenia, suddenly and contrary to the assumption of all set out across the



1Continued in chap. 49.2Continued from chap. 34. 8.3Gadamala is probably identical with Gamarga (chap. 32. 2). Neither the exact location nor the correct form of the name is certain. The winter is that of 817/16.4i.e. the army of Eumenes.5Cp. chap. 34. 8. For the following campaign cp. Plutarch, Eumenes, 15.331