Diodorus of Sicily

διείλετο εἰς τρία μέρη καὶ τὸ μὲν τοῖς χαρακώμασι
τοῖς πρὸ τῆς πόλεως κατεσκευασμένοις
προσβάλλειν ἔταξε, τὸ δὲ τοῖς Θηβαίοις ἀντιτάττεσθαι,
τὸ δὲ τρίτον ἐφεδρεύειν τῷ πονοῦντι μέρει
2τῆς δυνάμεως καὶ διαδέχεσθαι τὴν μάχην. οἱ δὲ
Θηβαῖοι τοὺς μὲν ἱππεῖς ἐντὸς τοῦ χαρακώματος
ἔταξαν, τοὺς δ᾿ ἐλευθερωθέντας οἰκέτας καὶ τοὺς
φυγάδας καὶ τοὺς μετοίκους τοῖς πρὸς τὰ τείχη
βιαζομένοις ἀντέταξαν, αὐτοὶ δὲ τοῖς μετὰ τοῦ
βασιλέως Μακεδόσι πολλαπλασίοις οὖσι συνάπτειν
3μάχην πρὸ τῆς πόλεως ἡτοιμάζοντο. τέκνα δὲ καὶ
γυναῖκες1 συνέτρεχον εἰς τὰ ἱερὰ καὶ τοὺς θεοὺς
ἱκέτευον σῶσαι τὴν πόλιν ἐκ τῶν κινδύνων.
Ὡς δ᾿ ἤγγισαν οἱ Μακεδόνες καὶ τοῖς τεταγμένοις
μέρεσιν ἕκαστοι προσέπεσον, αἱ μὲν σάλπιγγες
ἐσήμαινον τὸ πολεμικόν, αἱ δὲ παρ᾿ ἀμφοτέροις
δυνάμεις ὑφ᾿ ἕνα καιρὸν συνηλάλαξαν καὶ τὰ
κοῦφα τῶν βελῶν ἐπὶ τοὺς πολεμίους ἔβαλον.
4ταχὺ δὲ τούτων ἐξαναλωθέντων καὶ πάντων εἰς τὴν
ἀπὸ τοῦ ξίφους μάχην συμπεσόντων μέγας ἀγὼν
συνίστατο. οἱ μὲν γὰρ Μακεδόνες διὰ τὸ πλῆθος
τῶν ἀνδρῶν καὶ τὸ βάρος τῆς φάλαγγος δυσυπόστατον
εἶχον τὴν βίαν, οἱ δὲ Θηβαῖοι ταῖς τῶν
σωμάτων ῥώμαις ὑπερέχοντες καὶ τοῖς ἐν τοῖς
γυμνασίοις συνεχέσιν ἀθλήμασιν, ἔτι δὲ τῷ παραστήματι
τῆς ψυχῆς πλεονεκτοῦντες ἐνεκαρτέρουν
5τοῖς δεινοῖς. διὸ καὶ παρ᾿ ἀμφοτέροις πολλοὶ μὲν
κατετιτρώσκοντο, οὐκ ὀλίγοι δ᾿ ἔπιπτον ἐναντίας
λαμβάνοντες πληγάς. ὁμοῦ δ᾿ ἦν κατὰ τὰς ἐν τοῖς
ἀγῶσι συμπλοκὰς μυγμὸς καὶ βοὴ καὶ παρακελευσμός,
παρὰ μὲν τοῖς Μακεδόσι μὴ καταισχῦναι τὰς
προγεγενημένας ἀνδραγαθίας, παρὰ δὲ τοῖς Θηβαίοις
1Fischer suggests καὶ γονεῖς after γυναῖκες (cp. chap. 13. 6 and Book 18. 22. 4, 24. 2).148Book XVII

his forces into three parts and ordered one to attack 335/4 b.c. the palisades which had been erected before the city, the second to face the Theban battle line, and the third as a reserve to support any hard pressed unit of his forces and to enter the battle in its turn. For their part, the Thebans stationed the cavalry within the palisades, assigned their enfranchised slaves, along with refugees and resident aliens, to face those who drove at the walls, and themselves made ready to fight before the city with the Macedonian force about the king which was many times their number. Their children and wives flocked to the temples and implored the gods to rescue the city from its dangers.
When the Macedonians approached and each division encountered the opposing force of Thebans, the trumpets blew the call to arms and the troops on both sides raised the battle cry in unison and hurled their missiles at the enemy. These were soon expended and all turned to the use of the sword at close quarters, and a mighty struggle ensued. The Macedonians exerted a force that could hardly be withstood because of the numbers of their men and the weight of the phalanx, but the Thebans were superior in bodily strength and in their constant training in the gymnasium. Still more, in exaltation of spirit they were lifted out of themselves and became indifferent to personal danger. Many were wounded in both armies and not a few fell facing the blows of the enemy. The air was filled with the roar of fighters locked in the struggle, moans and shouts and exhortations: on the Macedonian side, not to be unworthy of their previous exploits,


149