Diodorus of Sicily

τετάρτοις δὲ τοῖς περὶ τῶν ἰδιωτικῶν ἥκουσι, πέμπτοις
δὲ τοῖς ἀντιλέγουσι περὶ τῆς καθόδου τῶν
4φυγάδων. τοῖς μὲν οὖν Ἠλείοις πρώτοις ἐχρημάτισεν,
εἶτα Ἀμμωνιεῦσι καὶ Δελφοῖς καὶ Κορινθίοις,
ἔτι δὲ Ἐπιδαυρίοις καὶ τοῖς ἄλλοις, κατὰ
τὴν δόξαν τῶν ἱερῶν προκρίνων τὰς ἐντεύξεις.
πάσαις δὲ ταῖς πρεσβείαις φιλοτιμηθεὶς κεχαρισμένας
δοῦναι τὰς ἀποκρίσεις εὐαρεστουμένας ἀπέλυσε
κατὰ τὸ δυνατόν.
114. Ἀπολύσας δὲ τὰς πρεσβείας περὶ τὴν ταφὴν
ἐγίνετο τοῦ Ἡφαιστίωνος. τοσαύτην δὲ
σπουδὴν ἐποιήσατο πρὸς τὴν τῆς ἐκφορᾶς ἐπιμέλειαν
ὥστε μὴ μόνον τὰς προγεγενημένας παρ᾿
ἀνθρώποις ταφὰς ὑπερβαλέσθαι, ἀλλὰ καὶ τοῖς ἐσομένοις
μηδεμίαν ὑπέρθεσιν καταλιπεῖν. καὶ γὰρ
ἠγάπησεν αὐτὸν μάλιστα1 τῶν ἐν στοργῇ φίλων
δοξαζομένων καὶ μετὰ τὴν τελευτὴν ἐτίμησεν αὐτὸν
ἀνυπερβλήτως. ζῶντα μὲν γὰρ προετίμησε πάντων
τῶν φίλων, καίπερ Κρατεροῦ φιλίαν ἔχοντος ἐνάμιλλον.
2ἐπεὶ γάρ τις τῶν ἑταίρων εἶπεν μηδὲν
καταδεέστερον Ἡφαιστίωνος τὸν Κρατερὸν στέργεσθαι,
ἐπεφθέγξατο Κρατερὸν μὲν γὰρ εἶναι φιλοβασιλέα,
Ἡφαιστίωνα δὲ φιλαλέξανδρον. τῆς δὲ
Δαρείου μητρὸς κατὰ τὴν πρώτην ἔντευξιν διὰ τὴν
ἄγνοιαν προσκυνούσης τὸν Ἡφαιστίωνα ὡς ὄντα
βασιλέα καὶ μετὰ τὴν ἐπίγνωσιν διατρεπομένης
εἶπεν, Μηδὲν φροντίσῃς, ὦ μῆτερ· καὶ γὰρ οὗτος
Ἀλέξανδρος.
3Καθόλου γὰρ ὁ Ἡφαιστίων τοσαύτης ἐξουσίας

1μάλιστα Reiske; αὐτὸν ταῖς τῶν R; αὐτὸν τῶν XF.454Book XVII

those who had problems concerning themselves alone; 324/3 b.c. and fifth, those who wished to present arguments against receiving back their exiles. He dealt with the Eleians first, then with the Ammonians and the Delphians and the Corinthians, as well as with the Epidaurians and the rest, receiving their petitions in the order of importance of the sanctuaries. In all cases he made every effort to deliver replies which would be gratifying, and sent everyone away content so far as he was able.
114. When the embassies had been dismissed, Alexander threw himself into preparations for the burial of Hephaestion. He showed such zeal about the funeral that it not only surpassed all those previously celebrated on earth but also left no possibility for anything greater in later ages. He had loved Hephaestion most of the group of Friends who were thought to have been high in his affections, and after his death showed him superlative honour. In his lifetime, he had preferred him to all, although Craterus had a rival claim to his love; so, for example, that when one of the companions said that Craterus was loved no less than Hephaestion, Alexander had answered that Craterus was king-loving, but Hephaestion was Alexander-loving.1 At their first meeting with Dareius’s mother, when she from ignorance had bowed to Hephaestion supposing him to be the king and was distressed when this was called to her attention, Alexander had said: “Never mind, mother. For actually he too is Alexander.”2
As a matter of fact, Hephaestion enjoyed so much


1That is, Craterus loved Alexander as the king, Hephaestion loved Alexander for himself. On the relations between Craterus and Hephaestion cp. Plutarch, Alexander, 47. 5–7.2Cp. chap. 37. 5–6,455