Diodorus of Sicily

συνεχῶν ὑδάτων. αὐτοὶ δὲ χρῶνται
τροφῇ κρέασι καὶ γάλακτι καὶ τῶν ἐκ τῆς γῆς
10φυομένων τοῖς ἐπιτηδείοις· φύεται γὰρ παρ᾿ αὐτοῖς
τὸ πέπερι καὶ ἀπὸ τῶν δένδρων1 μέλι πολὺ τὸ
καλούμενον ἄγριον, ᾧ χρῶνται ποτῷ μεθ᾿ ὕδατος.
ἔστι δὲ καὶ ἄλλα γένη τῶν Ἀράβων, ὧν ἔνια καὶ
γεωργεῖ μιγνύμενα τοῖς φορολογουμένοις καὶ μετέχει
τῶν αὐτῶν τοῖς Σύροις πλὴν τοῦ κατασκηνοῦν
ἐν οἰκίαις.
95. Τὰ μὲν οὖν νόμιμα τῶν Ἀράβων τοιαῦτ᾿
εἶναι συμβέβηκεν. ὑπογύου δ᾿ αὐτοῖς οὔσης πανηγύρεως,
εἰς ἣν εἰώθασιν οἱ περίοικοι καταντᾶν οἱ
μὲν ἀποδωσόμενοι τῶν φορτίων, οἱ δ᾿ ἀγοράσοντές
τι τῶν αὐτοῖς χρησίμων, εἰς ταύτην ἐπορεύθησαν,
ἀπολιπόντες ἐπί τινος πέτρας τὰς κτήσεις καὶ τοὺς
2πρεσβυτάτους, ἔτι δὲ τέκνα καὶ γυναῖκας. τὸ δὲ
χωρίον ὑπῆρχεν ὀχυρὸν μὲν καθ᾿ ὑπερβολὴν ἀτείχιστον
δέ, καὶ τῆς οἰκουμένης ἀπέχον δυεῖν
ἡμερῶν ὁδόν.
Οἱ δὲ περὶ τὸν Ἀθήναιον παρατηρήσαντες τοῦτον
τὸν καιρὸν ὥρμησαν ἐπὶ τὴν πέτραν εὔζωνον
ἔχοντες τὴν δύναμιν· διανύσαντες δ᾿ ἀπὸ τῆς Ἰδουμαίας
ἐπαρχίας ἐν ἡμέραις τρισὶ καὶ νυξὶ ταῖς ἴσαις
σταδίους δισχιλίους καὶ διακοσίους ἔλαθον τοὺς
Ἄραβας περὶ μέσας νύκτας καταλαβόμενοι τὴν
3πέτραν. εὐθὺς δὲ τῶν ἐγκατειλημμένων οὓς μὲν
ἀνήρουν, οὓς δ᾿ ἐζώγρουν, ἐνίους δὲ τραυματίας



1καὶ ἀπὸ τῶν δένδρων Wesseling: ἀπὸ τῶν δένδρων καὶ.90Book XIX

supply of water. They themselves use as food flesh 312 b.c. and milk and those of the plants that grow from the ground which are suitable for this purpose; for among them there grow the pepper and plenty of the so-called wild honey from trees,1 which they drink mixed with water. There are also other tribes of Arabs, some of whom even till the soil, mingling with the tribute-paying peoples, and have the same customs as the Syrians, except that they do not dwell in houses.
95. It appears that such are the customs of the Arabs. But when the time draws near for the national gathering at which those who dwell round about are accustomed to meet, some to sell goods and others to purchase things that are needful to them, they travel to this meeting, leaving on a certain rock2 their possessions and their old men, also their women and their children. This place is exceedingly strong but unwalled, and it is distant two days’ journey from the settled country.
After waiting for this season, Athenaeus set out for the rock with his army in light marching order. Covering the twenty-two hundred stades3 from the district of Idumaea in three days and the same number of nights, he escaped the attention of the Arabs and seized the rock at about midnight. Of those that were caught there, some he slew at once, some he took as prisoners, and others who were



1Perhaps the so-called tamarisk-manna, a sweet gum
which exudes from the slender branches of Tamarix gallica
when these have been punctured by a certain insect. This is thought by some to be the manna of Exodus 16. Cp. Herodotus, 7. 31.2This natural stronghold may be the later Petra.3About 250 miles; but the number must be corrupt. In chap. 98. 1 the distance from the rock to the Dead Sea, “which lies along the middle of Idumaea,” is given as 300 stades, about 34 miles.91