Diodorus of Sicily

ἐπανισταμένων διὰ τὴν κοινὴν ἀναρχίαν, τοῖς μὲν
τὰς ὀλιγαρχίας κατασκευάζουσιν ἐβοήθουν οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι,
τοῖς δὲ τῆς δημοκρατίας ἀντεχομένοις
2συνεμάχουν οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι. ἀμφότεραι γὰρ αἱ πόλεις
αὗται χρόνον ὀλίγον διετήρησαν τὰς σπονδάς, μετὰ
δὲ ταῦτα συμπράττουσαι ταῖς οἰκείαις πόλεσιν ἐπολέμουν,
οὐδὲν ἔτι φροντίζοντες τῆς κοινῆς συντεθείσης
εἰρήνης. διόπερ ἐν Ζακύνθῳ τοῖς ἐπὶ τῆς
Λακεδαιμονίων ἐπιστασίας κυρίοις γεγονόσι τοῦ
πολιτεύματος ὁ δῆμος χαλεπῶς ἔχων καὶ μνησικακῶν
ἐφυγάδευσε πάντας.1 . . . οὗτοι δὲ πρὸς
Τιμόθεον τὸν Ἀθηναίων ἡγούμενον τοῦ ναυτικοῦ
καταφυγόντες συνέπλεον αὐτῷ καὶ συνεμάχουν.
3τοῦτον οὖν παραστησάμενοι συνεργόν, καὶ διαβιβασθέντες
εἰς τὴν νῆσον ὑπ᾿ αὐτοῦ, κατελάβοντο
χωρίον ὀχυρὸν παρὰ θάλατταν ὃ προσηγόρευον
Ἀρκαδίαν. ἐκ τούτου δ᾿ ὁρμώμενοι καὶ βοηθὸν
ἔχοντες τὸν Τιμόθεον, ἐκακοποίουν τοὺς ἐν τῇ
4πόλει. τῶν δὲ Ζακυνθίων τοὺς Λακεδαιμονίους
ἀξιούντων βοηθῆσαι, τὸ μὲν πρῶτον εἰς τὰς Ἀθήνας
ἀποστείλαντες πρέσβεις κατηγόρουν τοῦ Τιμοθέου·
ὡς δ᾿ ἐθεώρουν τὸν δῆμον ἀποκλίνοντα πρὸς τοὺς
φυγάδας, συνεστήσαντο ναυτικόν, καὶ πληρώσαντες





1Lacuna noted by Palmer, since οὗτοι cannot refer to
Lacedaemonian sympathizers (πάντας).72Book XV

government, and many uprisings were occurring in 374/3 b.c. the midst of the general anarchy, the Lacedaemonians gave assistance to such as were trying to establish oligarchies, while the Athenians supported those groups which clung to democracy. For both these states did maintain the truce1 for a short time, but then, acting in co-operation with their affiliated cities renewed the war, no longer respecting the general peace that had been agreed upon. So it came about that in Zacynthos the popular party, being angry and resentful toward those who had held control of the government during the domination of the Lacedaemonians, drove them all into exile. . . .2 These Zacynthians, having taken refuge with Timotheüs the Athenian in charge of the fleet, joined his naval force and fought with him. Accordingly they made him their confederate, were transported by him to the island, and seized a stronghold by the sea which they called Arcadia.3 With this as their base and having the support of Timotheüs they inflicted damage upon those in the city.4 And when the Zacynthians asked the Lacedaemonians to help them, these latter at first sent envoys to Athens to denounce Timotheüs; but then, seeing that the Athenian people favoured the exiles,5 they organized a fleet, and manning



1See chap. 38. 1.2The sense seems to be: “Restored by the Lacedaemonians,
these exiles banished their enemies in their turn.”3Arcadia may have been the name of the fortress and Nellus, IG2, 43. 133–134, the name of the mountain on which it was constructed (see Dittenberger3, 1. 147, note 48).4See account in Xenophon, Hell. 6. 2. 2–3. Beloch, Griechische Geschichte2, 3. 1. 156, places the attack after the formation of the peace in the late autumn of 375. Cary, Cambridge Ancient History, 6. 77, gives 374.5They even went so far as to make the Zacynthian democrats members of the league (Cambridge Ancient History, ibid.). See inscription list, IG2, 43. 131 ff., where the Zacynthians appear as the last addition to the list. Dittenberger3, 1. 147, note 42, gives the date 374.73