Diodorus of Sicily

καὶ διδασκάλους ἐσχηκότες τῶν πολεμικῶν ἔργων,
πάντες δὲ Μακεδονικαῖς πανοπλίαις πολυτελῶς
κεκοσμημένοι, παρεμβολὴν μὲν ἐποιήσαντο πρὸ
τῆς πόλεως, ἐπιδειξάμενοι δὲ τῷ βασιλεῖ τὴν ἐν
τοῖς ὅπλοις ἄσκησιν καὶ μελέτην ἐτιμήθησαν διαφερόντως.
3τῶν γὰρ Μακεδόνων πρὸς τὴν τοῦ
Γάγγου ποταμοῦ διάβασιν ἀντειπόντων καὶ πολλάκις
ἐν ταῖς ἐκκλησίαις καταβοώντων καὶ τὴν ἐξ
Ἄμμωνος γένεσιν διασυρόντων τοῦτο1 τὸ σύστημα
κατεσκεύασεν ἐκ μιᾶς μὲν ἡλικίας τῶν Περσῶν καὶ
ὁμοίας συνεστηκός, δυνάμενον δὲ ἀντίταγμα γενέσθαι
τῇ Μακεδονικῇ φάλαγγι.
Καὶ τὰ μὲν περὶ Ἀλέξανδρον ἐν τούτοις ἦν.
4Ἅρπαλος δὲ τῶν ἐν Βαβυλῶνι θησαυρῶν καὶ τῶν
προσόδων τὴν φυλακὴν πεπιστευμένος, ἐπειδὴ
τάχιστα ὁ βασιλεὺς εἰς τὴν Ἰνδικὴν ἐστράτευσεν,
ἀπέγνω τὴν ἐπάνοδον αὐτοῦ, δοὺς δ᾿ ἑαυτὸν εἰς
τρυφὴν καὶ πολλῆς χώρας ἀποδεδειγμένος σατράπης
τὸ μὲν πρῶτον εἰς ὕβρεις γυναικῶν καὶ παρανόμους
ἔρωτας βαρβάρων ἐξετράπη καὶ πολλὰ τῆς γάζης
ἀκρατεστάταις ἡδοναῖς κατανάλωσεν,2 ἀπὸ δὲ τῆς
Ἐρυθρᾶς θαλάσσης πολὺ διάστημα κομίζων ἰχθύων
πλῆθος καὶ δίαιταν πολυδάπανον ἐνιστάμενος






1τούτων F.2κατηνάλωσεν F.434Book XVII

orders and had been under supervisors and teachers 326/5 b.c. of the arts of war for as long as necessary. They were splendidly equipped with the full Macedonian armament and encamped before the city, where they were warmly commended by the king after demonstrating their skill and discipline in the use of their weapons. The Macedonians had not only mutinied when ordered to cross the Ganges River but were frequently unruly when called into an assembly1 and ridiculed Alexander’s pretence that Ammon was his father.2 For these reasons Alexander had formed this unit from a single age-group of the Persians which was capable of serving as a counter-balance to the Macedonian phalanx.
These were the concerns of Alexander.
Harpalus had been given the custody of the treasury in Babylon and of the revenues which accrued to it, but as soon as the king had carried his campaign into India, he assumed that Alexander would never come back, and gave himself up to comfortable living.3 Although he had been charged as satrap4 with the administration of a great country, he first occupied himself with the abuse of women and illegitimate amours with the natives and squandered much of the treasure under his control on incontinent pleasure. He fetched all the long way from the Red Sea a great quantity of fish and introduced an extravagant way of life, so that he came under general criticism.


1The account of the mutiny at Opis is broken by Diodorus
into two sections; cp. chap. 109. 1 below. The full accounts
are Curtius, 10. 2. 8–4. 3; Justin, 12. 11. 5–12. 7; Plutarch,
Alexander, 71. 1–5; Arrian, 7. 8–11. “Ganges” is a slip
(chap. 94).2Justin, 12. 11. 6; Arrian, 7. 8. 3.3The Harpalus story was well known (Plutarch, Alexander,
41. 4; Phocion, 21–22; Justin, 13. 5. 9), but was told here, in addition to Diodorus, only by Curtius. In the loss of parts of that text, only the end of the story remains (10. 2. 1–3), told in a similar way to that here. The account of these events in Plutarch, Demosthenes, 25–26, may plausibly be ascribed to Theopompus, at least in part.4Harpalus was not actually a satrap, but director general of the royal treasury.435