Diodorus of Sicily

ἀναζητοῦντες Δημοσθένην καὶ ἄλλους τινὰς τῶν
ῥητόρων κατεδίκασαν ὡς εἰληφότας τῶν Ἁρπάλου
χρημάτων.
109. Ὁ δὲ Ἀλέξανδρος τῶν Ὀλυμπίων ὄντων
ἐκήρυξεν ἐν Ὀλυμπίᾳ τοὺς φυγάδας πάντας εἰς τὰς
πατρίδας κατιέναι πλὴν τῶν ἱεροσύλων καὶ φονέων.
αὐτὸς δ᾿ ἐπιλέξας τοὺς πρεσβυτάτους τῶν πολιτῶν
2ἀπέλυσε τῆς στρατείας, ὄντας ὡς μυρίους. πυνθανόμενος
δὲ πολλοὺς αὐτῶν εἶναι καταδανείους ἐν
ἡμέρᾳ μιᾷ τὰ δάνεια βραχὺ λείποντα τῶν μυρίων
ταλάντων διέλυσεν.
Τῶν δ᾿ ἀπολειπομένων Μακεδόνων ἀπειθούντων
καὶ κατὰ τὴν ἐκκλησίαν καταβοώντων παροξυνθεὶς
κατηγόρησεν αὐτῶν τεθαρρηκότως. καταπληξάμενος
δὲ τὸ πλῆθος ἐτόλμησεν αὐτὸς καταβὰς ἀπὸ
τοῦ βήματος τοὺς αἰτιωτάτους1 τῆς ταραχῆς ταῖς
ἰδίαις χερσὶ παραδοῦναι τοῖς ὑπηρέταις πρὸς τὴν
3τιμωρίαν. ἐπὶ πολὺ δὲ τῆς διαφορᾶς αὐξανομένης
ὁ μὲν βασιλεὺς ἐκ τῶν ἐκλελεγμένων Περσῶν
ἡγεμόνας κατέστησε καὶ τούτους προῆγεν ἐπὶ τὸ
πρωτεῖον· οἱ δὲ Μακεδόνες μετανοήσαντες καὶ





1αἰτίους RX.438Book XVII

and Demosthenes and certain other statesmen 326/5 b.c. were convicted of having accepted money from this source.1
109. While the Olympic Games were being celebrated, Alexander had it proclaimed in Olympia that all exiles should return to their cities, except those who had been charged with sacrilege or murder.2 He selected the oldest of his soldiers who were Macedonians and released them from service; there were ten thousand of these. He learned that many of them were in debt, and in a single day he paid their obligations which were little short of ten thousand talents.3
The Macedonians who remained with him were becoming insubordinate, and when he called them to an assembly, they interrupted him by shouting.4 In a fury, he denounced them without regard to his own personal risk; then, having cowed the throng, he leaped down from the platform, seized the ringleaders of the tumult with his own hands, and handed them over to his attendants for punishment.5 This made the soldiers’ hostility even more acute, so that the king appointed generals from specially selected Persians and advanced them into positions of responsibility. At this, the Macedonians were repentant. 



1Justin, 13. 5. 9.2Curtius, 10. 2. 4–7; Justin, 13. 5. 2–5. Diodorus refers
to this later with greater detail as one of the causes of the
Lamian War (Book 18. 8. 2–7). The time was midsummer
of 324 b.c.3This story appears in differing versions. Curtius (10.
2. 9–11) tells only of the payment of the debts, without specifying
either the number or the identity of the beneficiaries;
10,000 talents were made available, and 130 were left over.
Justin (12. 11. 2–3) says that 20,000 talents were distributed, an act equally welcome to debtors and creditors. Plutarch (Alexander, 70. 2) uses the same total as Curtius (9870), but says that these were the debts of the guests at the mass marriage in Susa. Curtius expresses astonishment that the soldiers were so in debt. (From whom, as a matter of fact, would ten thousand soldiers borrow a talent each?) At all events, Arrian (7. 12. 1) states specifically that the soldiers were Macedonian and each received a gift of a talent.4The mutiny at Opis, continued from chap. 108. 3.5Curtius, 10. 2. 30; Justin, 12. 11. 8. Arrian (7. 8. 3) says that he merely pointed out the ringleaders.439