Diodorus of Sicily

Περσῶν δύναμιν ῥᾳδίως διαβήσεσθαι τὸν ποταμόν.
7ὑπολαβὼν δὲ τοὺς πολεμίους μετὰ πάσης τῆς δυνάμεως
ἐπ᾿ αὐτὴν ἥξειν τὴν Μέμφιν ἔκρινε ταύτης
μάλιστα προνοήσασθαι. οὗτος μὲν οὖν μετὰ τῆς
περὶ αὐτὸν στρατιᾶς ἐπανελθὼν εἰς Μέμφιν τὰ
πρὸς τὴν πολιορκίαν παρεσκευάζετο.
49. Ὁ δὲ τῆς πρώτης1 μερίδος ἀφηγούμενος
Λακράτης ὁ Θηβαῖος ἐπὶ τὴν τοῦ Πηλουσίου πολιορκίαν
ὥρμησεν· ἀποστρέψας δὲ τῆς διώρυγος
τὸ ῥεῦμα πρὸς ἕτερα μέρη καὶ τὸν ἀναξηρανθέντα
τόπον χώσας μηχανὰς προσήγαγε τῇ πόλει. ἐπὶ
πολὺ δὲ μέρος πεσόντων τῶν τειχῶν οἱ τὸ Πηλούσιον
φρουροῦντες ὀξέως ἀντῳκοδόμησαν ἕτερα καὶ
2πύργους ξυλίνους ἀξιολόγους ἀνέστησαν. ἐπὶ δέ
τινας ἡμέρας συνεχοῦς γινομένης τῆς τειχομαχίας
τὸ μὲν πρῶτον οἱ κατὰ τὸ Πηλούσιον Ἕλληνες
ἐρρωμένως ἠμύνοντο τοὺς πολιορκοῦντας· ὡς δ᾿
ἐπύθοντο τὴν τοῦ βασιλέως ἀναχώρησιν εἰς Μέμφιν
3καταπλαγέντες περὶ διαλύσεων ἐπρεσβεύοντο. τοῦ
δὲ Λακράτους δόντος αὐτοῖς διὰ τῶν ὅρκων πίστεις
ὅτι παραδόντων αὐτῶν τὸ Πηλούσιον ἀποκομισθήσονται
πάντες εἰς τὴν Ἑλλάδα μεθ᾿ ὧν ἂν ἐξενέγκωσι,
4παρέδωκαν τὸ φρούριον. μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα
ὁ μὲν Ἀρταξέρξης ἀπέστειλε Βαγώαν μετὰ στρατιωτῶν
βαρβάρων παραληψόμενον τὸ Πηλούσιον,
οἱ δὲ στρατιῶται παριόντες εἰς τὸ χωρίον τῶν
ἐξιόντων Ἑλλήνων ἀφῃροῦντο πολλὰ τῶν ὑπ᾿ αὐτῶν
5ἐκκομιζομένων. ἀγανακτούντων δὲ τῶν ἀδικουμένων
καὶ θεοὺς τοὺς ἐπόπτας τῶν ὅρκων
ἐπιβοωμένων παροξυνθεὶς ὁ Λακράτης τροπὴν
ἐποίησε τῶν βαρβάρων καί τινας καταβαλὼν ἐπεκούρησε

1So most MSS., supported by chap. 47. 2: δευτέρας PX.374Book XVI

also would easily cross the river. Assuming that the 350/49 b.c. enemy with their entire army would come to the very gates of Memphis, he decided first and foremost to take precautionary measures to protect the city. Accordingly he returned to Memphis with the army he had retained and began to prepare for the siege.
49. Lacrates the Theban, who was in command of the first contingent, hastened to begin the siege of Pelusium. First he diverted the stream of the canal to other directions, then when the channel had become dry he filled it with earth and brought siege engines against the city. When a large portion of the walls fell, the garrison in Pelusium quickly built others to oppose the advance and reared huge towers of wood. The battle for the walls continued for several days running and at first the Greeks in Pelusium vigorously warded off the besiegers; but when they learned of the king’s withdrawal to Memphis they were so terror-stricken that they sent envoys to arrange for a settlement. Since Lacrates gave them pledges backed by oaths to the effect that if they surrendered Pelusium they would all be conveyed back to Greece with whatever they could carry on their backs, they delivered over the citadel. After this Artaxerxes dispatched Bagoas with barbarian soldiers to take over Pelusium, and the soldiers, arriving at the place as the Greeks were issuing forth, seized upon many of the articles they were carrying out. The victims of this injustice in their anger called loudly upon the gods who were guardians of their oaths, whereupon Lacrates became incensed, put the barbarians to flight, slaying a number of them, thus
375