Diodorus of Sicily

τοῦ σώματος· εἰ δὲ καί ποτε χρεία γένοιτο τὴν
κεφαλὴν ἀποκείρασθαι, περιέκαε τὰς τρίχας, μίαν
ἀσφάλειαν τυραννίδος ἀποφαινόμενος τὴν ἀπιστίαν.
4ὁ δ᾿ οὖν Ἀγαθοκλῆς παρὰ τὸν πότον λαβὼν ῥυτὸν
μέγαν χρυσοῦν εἶπεν ὡς οὐ πρότερον ἀπέστη τῆς
κεραμευτικῆς τέχνης ἕως τοιαῦτα ἐκπωμάτων
πλάσματα φιλοτεχνῶν ἐκεραμεύσατο. οὐ γὰρ
ἀπηρνεῖτο τὴν ἐπιστήμην, ἀλλὰ καὶ τοὐναντίον
ἐκαυχᾶτο, διὰ τῆς ἰδίας ἀρετῆς ἀποφαινόμενος ἀντὶ
τοῦ ταπεινοτάτου βίου τὸν ἐπιφανέστατον μετειληφέναι.
5καί ποτε πολιορκοῦντος αὐτοῦ τινα τῶν
οὐκ ἀδόξων πόλεων καὶ τῶν ἀπὸ τοῦ τείχους βοώντων
“Κεραμεῦ καὶ καμινεῦ, πότε τοὺς μισθοὺς
ἀποδώσεις τοῖς στρατιώταις;” ὑπολαβὼν εἶπεν
6“Ὅταν ταύτην ἐξέλω.” οὐ μὴν ἀλλὰ διὰ τὴν ἐν
τοῖς πότοις εὐτραπελίαν κατανοήσας τῶν μεθυόντων
τοὺς ἀλλοτρίως τὰ πρὸς τὴν δυναστείαν ἔχοντας
παρέλαβεν αὐτούς ποτε κατ᾿ ἰδίαν πάλιν ἐπὶ τὴν
ἑστίασιν καὶ τῶν ἄλλων Συρακοσίων τοὺς μάλιστα
πεφρονηματισμένους, τὸν ἀριθμὸν πεντακοσίους
ὄντας· οἷς περιστήσας τῶν μισθοφόρων τοὺς εὐθέτους
7ἅπαντας ἀπέσφαξεν. σφόδρα γὰρ εὐλαβεῖτο
μὴ χωρισθέντος αὐτοῦ εἰς Λιβύην καταλύσωσι
τὴν δυναστείαν, ἐπικαλεσάμενοι τοὺς μετὰ Δεινοκράτους
φυγάδας. τοῦτον δὲ τὸν τρόπον ἀσφαλισάμενος
τὰ κατὰ τὴν ἀρχὴν ἐξέπλευσεν ἐκ τῶν
Συρακουσσῶν.
64. Καὶ κομισθεὶς εἰς Λιβύην κατέλαβε τὸ στρατόπεδον
ἐν ἀθυμίᾳ καὶ σπάνει πολλῇ· διόπερ κρίνων
316Book XX

steel of the barber; and if ever it became necessary 307 b.c. for him to have his head trimmed, he singed off the locks, declaring that the only safety of a tyrant was distrust.1 Now Agathocles at the drinking bout, taking a great golden cup, said that he had not given up the potters’ craft2 until in his pursuit of art he had produced in pottery beakers of such workmanship as this. For he did not deny his trade but on the contrary used to boast of it, claiming that it was by his own ability that in place of the most lowly position in life he had secured the most exalted one. Once when he was besieging a certain not inglorious city and people from the wall shouted, “Potter and furnace-man, when will you pay your soldiers?” he said in answer, “When I have taken this city.”3 None the less, however, when through the jesting at drinking bouts he had discovered which of those who were flushed with wine were hostile to his tyranny he invited them individually on another occasion to a banquet, and also those of the other Syracusans who had become particularly presumptuous, in number about five hundred; and surrounding them with suitable men from his mercenaries he slaughtered them all. For he was taking very careful precautions lest, while he was absent in Libya, they should overthrow the tyranny and recall Deinocrates and the exiles. After he had made his rule secure in this way, he sailed from Syracuse.
64. When he arrived in Libya4 he found the army discouraged and in great want: deciding, therefore,




1Cp. Cicero, Tusculan Disputations, 5. 20. 58.2Cp. Book 19. 2. 7.3Cp. Plutarch, Apophthegmata, p. 176. For the character of Agathocles cp. Book 19. 9; Polybius, 9. 23. 2; 15. 35.4For this second Libyan campaign cp. Justin, 22. 8. 4–15.317