Diodorus of Sicily

ταχέως ἐξῆγον τὸν Ἀγαθοκλέα διειλημμένον δεσμοῖς.
3τὸ δὲ πλῆθος ὡς ἴδεν, εἰς ἔλεον ἐτράπη
καὶ πάντες ἐπεβόων ἀφεῖναι. ὁ δὲ λυθεὶς καὶ μετ᾿
ὀλίγων ἐμβὰς εἰς τὸ πορθμεῖον ἔλαθεν ἐκπλεύσας
κατὰ τὴν δύσιν τῆς Πλειάδος χειμῶνος ὄντος.
οὗτος μὲν οὖν τῆς ἰδίας σωτηρίας φροντίσας ἐγκατέλιπε
τοὺς υἱούς, οὓς οἱ στρατιῶται τὸν δρασμὸν
ἀκούσαντες εὐθὺς ἀπέσφαξαν, καὶ στρατηγοὺς ἐξ
ἑαυτῶν ἑλόμενοι διελύθησαν πρὸς Καρχηδονίους,
ὥστε τὰς πόλεις ἃς εἶχον παραδοῦναι καὶ λαβεῖν
τάλαντα τριακόσια καὶ τοὺς μὲν αἱρουμένους μετὰ
Καρχηδονίων στρατεύειν κομίζεσθαι τοὺς ἀεὶ διδομένους
μισθούς, τοὺς δ᾿ ἄλλους εἰς Σικελίαν
4διακομισθέντας λαβεῖν οἰκητήριον Σολοῦντα. τῶν
μὲν οὖν στρατιωτῶν οἱ πλείους ἐμμείναντες ταῖς
συνθήκαις ἔτυχον τῶν ὁμολογηθέντων· ὅσοι δὲ τὰς
πόλεις διακατέχοντες ἀντεῖχον ταῖς παρ᾿ Ἀγαθοκλέους
5ἐλπίσιν, ἐξεπολιορκήθησαν κατὰ κράτος. ὧν
οἱ Καρχηδόνιοι τοὺς μὲν ἡγεμόνας ἀνεσταύρωσαν,
τοὺς δ᾿ ἄλλους δήσαντες πέδαις, ἣν διὰ τὸν πόλεμον
ἐξηγρίωσαν χώραν, ἐξηνάγκαζον τοῖς ἰδίοις
πόνοις πάλιν ἐξημεροῦν.
Καρχηδόνιοι μὲν οὖν ἔτος τέταρτον πολεμούμενοι
τοῦτον τὸν τρόπον ἐκομίσαντο τὴν ἐλευθερίαν.
70. Τῆς δ᾿ Ἀγαθοκλέους στρατείας εἰς Λιβύην
ἐπισημήναιτ᾿ ἄν τις τό τε παράδοξον καὶ τὴν εἰς
τὰ τέκνα γενομένην τιμωρίαν οἷον τῇ θείᾳ προνοίᾳ.
ἐπὶ μὲν γὰρ τῆς Σικελίας ἡττηθεὶς καὶ τὴν πλείστην



328Book XX

brought out Agathocles bound with chains. When 307 b.c. the common soldiers saw him they were moved to pity and all shouted to let him go. When released, he embarked on the transport with a few followers and secretly sailed away, although this was in the winter at the season of the setting of the Pleiades.1 This man, then, concerned about his own safety, abandoned his sons, whom the soldiers at once slew when they learned of his escape2; and the soldiers selected generals from their own number and made peace with the Carthaginians on these terms: they were to give back the cities which they held and to receive three hundred talents, and those who chose to serve with the Carthaginians were to receive pay at the regular rates, and the others, when transported to Sicily, were to receive Solus3 as a dwelling-place. Now, most of the soldiers abided by the terms and received what had been agreed upon; but all those who continued to occupy the cities because they still clung to hopes of Agathocles were attacked and taken by storm. Their leaders the Carthaginians crucified; the others they bound with fetters and forced them by their own labour to bring back again into cultivation the country they had laid waste during the war.
In this way, then, the Carthaginians recovered their liberty in the fourth year of the war.
70. One might well draw attention both to the almost incredible elements in Agathocles’ expedition to Libya and to the punishment that befell his children as if by divine providence. For although in Sicily he had been defeated and had lost the largest

1About November 1, 307 b.c.2Cp. Polybius, 7. 2. 4.3A Carthaginian city on the north coast of Sicily about 12 miles east of Panormus.329