Diodorus of Sicily
4παρουσίαν. τῶν δὲ περὶ Λυκίσκον ἐπικειμένων καὶ
πολὺ τοῖς πλήθεσιν ὑπερεχόντων οἱ μὲν Ἠπειρῶται
καταπλαγέντες προσεχώρησαν τοῖς πολεμίοις, ὁ δ᾿
Ἀλκέτας καταλειφθεὶς κατέφυγεν εἰς Εὐρυμενὰς
5πόλιν Ἠπειρωτικήν. ἐνταῦθα δ᾿ αὐτοῦ πολιορκουμένου
παρεγενήθησαν οἱ περὶ τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον βοήθειαν
φέροντες τῷ πατρί. γενομένης οὖν μάχης
ἰσχυρᾶς ἀνῃρέθησαν πολλοὶ τῶν στρατιωτῶν, ἐν οἷς
ἦσαν ἄλλοι τέ τινες τῶν1 ἀνδρῶν καὶ Μίκυθος ὁ
στρατηγὸς καὶ Λύσανδρος Ἀθηναῖος ὁ κατασταθεὶς
6ἐπὶ τῆς Λευκάδος ὑπὸ Κασάνδρου. μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα
Δεινίου βοηθήσαντος τοῖς ἐλαττουμένοις ἐγένετο
δευτέρα μάχη, καθ᾿ ἣν οἱ μὲν περὶ Ἀλέξανδρον καὶ
Τεῦκρον ἡττηθέντες ἔφυγον εἴς τι χωρίον ἐρυμνὸν
μετὰ τοῦ πατρός, ὁ δὲ Λυκίσκος Εὐρυμενὰς ἐκπολιορκήσας
καὶ διαρπάσας κατέσκαψε.
89. Καθ᾿ ὃν δὴ χρόνον Κάσανδρος ἀκηκοὼς μὲν
τὴν τῶν ἰδίων ἧτταν, ἀγνοῶν δὲ τὸ μετὰ ταῦτα
γεγονὸς εὐτύχημα κατὰ σπουδὴν ἧκεν εἰς τὴν
Ἤπειρον βοηθήσων τοῖς περὶ Λυκίσκον. καταλαβὼν
δ᾿ αὐτοὺς ἐπὶ τοῦ προτερήματος γεγονότας
πρὸς μὲν Ἀλκέταν διαλυσάμενος φιλίαν συνέθετο,
τῆς δὲ δυνάμεως μέρος ἀναλαβὼν ἀνέζευξεν εἰς τὸν
Ἀδρίαν πολιορκήσων Ἀπολλωνιάτας, ὅτι τὴν
φρουρὰν ἐκβαλόντες τὴν αὐτοῦ προσέθεντο τοῖς Ἰλλυριοῖς.
2οὐ μὴν οἵ γε ἐν τῇ πόλει κατεπλάγησαν,
ἀλλὰ βοήθειαν μεταπεμψάμενοι παρὰ τῶν ἄλλων
συμμάχων πρὸ τῶν τειχῶν παρετάξαντο. γενομένης
δὲ καρτερᾶς μάχης ἐπὶ πολὺν χρόνον οἱ μὲν
Ἀπολλωνιᾶται τοῖς πλήθεσιν ὑπερέχοντες τοὺς

1Fischer adds ἀξιολόγωι after τῶν, cp. chap. 47. 4.74Book XIX

the forces of Lyciscus were at hand and were far 312 b.c. superior in number, the Epirotes were frightened and went over to the enemy1; and Alcetas, deserted, fled for refuge to Eurymenae, a city of Epirus. While he was being besieged there, Alexander came up bringing reinforcements to his father. A violent battle took place in which many of the soldiers were slain, among whom were certain others of the followers of Lyciscus and in particular the general Micythus and Lysander, an Athenian who had been put in charge of Leucas by Cassander. But afterwards, when Deinias2 brought reinforcements to the defeated army, there was another battle, in which Alexander and Teucer were defeated and fled with their father to a certain stronghold, while Lyciscus took Eurymenae, plundered it, and destroyed it.
89. At this time Cassander, who had heard of the defeat of his forces but did not know of the victory that had followed, moved into Epirus in haste to assist Lyciscus. On finding that the latter had gained the upper hand, he made terms and established friendship with Alcetas; and then, taking a part of his army, he moved to the Adriatic to lay siege to Apollonia because the people of that city had driven out his garrison and gone over to the Illyrians. Those in the city, however, were not frightened, but summoned aid from their other allies and drew up their army before the walls. In a battle, which was hard fought and long, the people of Apollonia, who were superior in number, forced their opponents


1According to Pausanias (1. 11. 5), Alcetas so angered the Epirotes by his cruelty that, immediately after his return, they rose against him and slew him.2Deinias, a general of Cassander, had taken Tempê in 317 b.c. (chap. 35. 3).75