Diodorus of Sicily

ἀπολιπών, ἀλλὰ Δικαιόπολιν μετονομάσας ἔδωκεν
οἰκητήριον τοῖς αὐτομόλοις.
72. Ἀκούσας γὰρ τὴν τῶν υἱῶν ἀναίρεσιν καὶ
δι᾿ ὀργῆς ἔχων ἅπαντας τοὺς ἀπολελειμμένους κατὰ
Λιβύην ἔπεμψε τῶν φίλων τινὰς εἰς Συρακούσσας
πρὸς Ἄντανδρον τὸν ἀδελφόν, διακελευσάμενος
τοὺς τῶν συστρατευσάντων ἐπὶ Καρχηδόνα συγγενεῖς
2ἅπαντας ἀποσφάξαι. ταχὺ δὲ τούτου τὸ
προσταχθὲν ποιήσαντος ποικιλώτατον γενέσθαι
συνέβη φόνον τῶν προγεγονότων· οὐ γὰρ μόνον
τοὺς ἀκμάζοντας ταῖς ἡλικίαις ἀδελφοὺς ἢ πατέρας
ἢ παῖδας ἐξῆγεν ἐπὶ τὸν θάνατον, ἀλλὰ καὶ
πάππους καὶ τούτων, εἰ τύχοι, καὶ πατέρας περιόντας
ἐσχατογήρους καὶ ταῖς ὅλαις αἰσθήσεσι διὰ
τὸν χρόνον ἤδη παραλελυμένους, ἔτι δὲ νηπίους παῖδας
ἐν ἀγκάλαις φερομένους καὶ τῆς ἐπιφερομένης
αὐτοῖς συμφορᾶς οὐδεμίαν αἴσθησιν λαμβάνοντας.
ἤγοντο1 δὲ καὶ γυναῖκες ὅσαι μετεῖχον οἰκειότητος ἢ
συγγενείας καὶ καθόλου πᾶς ὁ μέλλων τῇ καθ᾿
αὑτὸν τιμωρίᾳ λύπην ἐμποιῆσαι τοῖς ἐπὶ τῆς Λιβύης
3ἀπολειφθεῖσι. πολλοῦ δὲ πλήθους καὶ παντοίου
πρὸς τὴν θάλατταν ἀχθέντος ἐπὶ τὴν τιμωρίαν καὶ
τῶν σφαγέων ἐφεστώτων δάκρυα καὶ δεήσεις καὶ
θρῆνος ἐγίνετο συμφορητός, ὧν μὲν ἀνηλεῶς
φονευομένων, ὧν δὲ ἐπὶ ταῖς τῶν πλησίον συμφοραῖς
ἐκπληττομένων καὶ διὰ τὸ προσδοκώμενον
οὐδὲν διαφερόντων ταῖς ψυχαῖς τῶν προαποθνησκόντων.



1ἤγοντο Dindorf: ἦγον.334Book XX

of the city; but he changed the name to Dicaeopolis 307 b.c. and gave it as dwelling to the deserters.1
72. On hearing of the murder of his sons Agathocles became enraged at all those who had been left behind in Libya, and sent some of his friends into Syracuse to Antander his brother, ordering him to put to death all the relatives of those who had taken part in the campaign against Carthage.2 As Antander promptly carried out the order, there occurred the most elaborately devised massacre that had taken place up to this time; for not only did they drag out to death the brothers, fathers, and sons who were in the prime of manhood, but also the grandfathers, and even the fathers of these if such survived, men who lingered on in extreme old age and were already bereft of all their senses by lapse of time, as well as infant children borne in arms who had no consciousness whatever of the fate that was bearing down upon them. They also led away any women who were related by marriage or kinship, and in sum, every person whose punishment would bring grief to those who had been left in Libya. When a crowd, large and composed of all kinds of people, had been driven to the sea for punishment and when the executioners had taken their places beside them, weeping and prayers and wailing arose mingled together, as some of them were mercilessly slaughtered and others were stunned by the misfortunes of their neighbours and because of their own imminent fate were no better in spirit than those who were being


1The name (lit. “Just City”) is not found elsewhere. Segesta certainly recovered its name and became again a Carthaginian ally (Book 22. 10. 2), probably in 306 b.c., when all cities formerly belonging to Carthage were restored by Agathocles (chap. 79. 5).2Cp. chap. 4. 3.335