Diodorus of Sicily

ἀποκρίσεως γενομένης συναγαγὼν τοὺς ἡγεμόνας
ἐβουλεύετο πῶς χρὴ τοὺς Συρακοσίους ἀμύνασθαι.
3πάντων δ᾿ εὐπορῶν πλὴν σίτου καὶ θαλαττοκρατῶν
ἐλῄστευε τὴν χώραν καὶ τὰς τροφὰς ἐκ τῶν
προνομῶν κακῶς ποριζόμενος ἐξαπέστειλε ναῦς
φορτίδας καὶ χρήματα πρὸς τὸν τοῦ σίτου καταγορασμόν.
οἱ δὲ Συρακόσιοι ναῦς μακρὰς πολλὰς
ἔχοντες καὶ κατὰ τοὺς εὐκαίρους τόπους ἐπιφαινόμενοι
πολλὴν τῆς ὑπὸ τῶν ἐμπόρων κομιζομένης
ἀγορᾶς παρῃροῦντο.
Καὶ τὰ μὲν περὶ τὰς Συρακούσσας ἐν τούτοις ἦν.
14. Κατὰ δὲ τὴν Ἑλλάδα Ἀλέξανδρος ὁ Φερῶν
τύραννος ὑπὸ τῆς ἰδίας γυναικὸς Θήβης καὶ τῶν
ταύτης ἀδελφῶν Λυκόφρονος καὶ Τισιφόνου ἐδολοφονήθη.
οὗτοι δὲ τὸ μὲν πρῶτον ὡς τυραννοκτόνοι
μεγάλης ἐτύγχανον ἀποδοχῆς, ὕστερον δὲ
μετανοήσαντες καὶ τοὺς μισθοφόρους χρήμασι πείσαντες
ἀνέδειξαν ἑαυτοὺς τυράννους καὶ πολλοὺς
μὲν τῶν ἀντιπραττομένων ἀνεῖλον, κατασκευασάμενοι
δὲ τὴν δύναμιν ἀξιόλογον βίᾳ κατεῖχον τὴν
2ἀρχήν. οἱ δ᾿ Ἀλευάδαι καλούμενοι παρὰ τοῖς
Θετταλοῖς, δι᾿ εὐγένειαν δὲ ἀξίωμα ἔχοντες περιβόητον
ἀντεπράττοντο τοῖς τυράννοις. οὐκ ὄντες
δὲ καθ᾿ ἑαυτοὺς ἀξιόμαχοι προσελάβοντο Φίλιππον
σύμμαχον τὸν Μακεδόνων βασιλέα. οὗτος δὲ
παρελθὼν1 εἰς τὴν Θετταλίαν κατεπολέμησε τοὺς
τυράννους καὶ ταῖς πόλεσιν ἀνακτησάμενος τὴν
ἐλευθερίαν μεγάλην εὔνοιαν εἰς τοὺς Θετταλοὺς

1So Hertlein: δ᾿ ἐπανελθὼν.276Book XVI

since Dion’s reply had been arrogant, assembled his 357/6 b.c. commanders and began to deliberate on the best means of defending himself against the Syracusans. Having plenty of everything but grain and being in control of the sea, he began to pillage the countryside and, finding it difficult to provide subsistence from his foraging parties, he dispatched merchantmen and money to purchase grain. But the Syracusans, who had many ships of war and kept putting in an appearance at opportune places, made off with many of the supplies which were being brought in by the traders. This was the situation of affairs in Syracuse.
14. In Greece Alexander, tyrant of Pherae, was assassinated by his own wife Thebê and her brothers Lycophron and Tisiphonus.1 The brothers at first received great acclaim as tyrannicides, but later, having changed their purpose and bribed the mercenaries, they disclosed themselves as tyrants, slew many of their opponents, and, having contrived to make their forces imposing, retained the government by force. Now the faction among the Thessalians called Aleuadae, who enjoyed a far-flung reputation by reason of their noble birth, began to oppose the tyrants. But not being of sufficient strength to fight by themselves they took on Philip, the king of the Macedonians, as ally. And he, entering Thessaly, defeated the tyrants and, when he had vindicated the independence of their cities, showed himself very friendly to the Thessalians.

1Diodorus has this event one year too late. It should be 358/7, counting eleven years from Book 15. 61. 2 (see Beloch, Griechische Geschichte2, 3. 2. 83–84). For the story see Xenophon, Hell. 6. 4. 35 ff.; Plutarch, Pelopidas, 35; Cicero, De Officiis 2. 7. 25; Valerius Maximus, 9. 13, ext. 3. Peitholaüs, the third brother, here omitted, is mentioned chap. 37. 3.277