Diodorus of Sicily

εἰς τὰς Θήβας καὶ παρακαλεῖν τοὺς Βοιωτοὺς κοινῇ
τὸν ὑπὲρ τῆς ἐλευθερίας ἀγῶνα τίθεσθαι· πρὸς γὰρ
τοὺς ἄλλους συμμάχους ὁ καιρὸς οὐ συνεχώρει
πέμπειν πρεσβείας περὶ τῆς συμμαχίας· ἐν ἡμέραις
γὰρ δυσὶ προσδόκιμος ἦν ὁ βασιλεὺς ἥξειν εἰς τὴν
Ἀττικὴν καὶ τῆς ὁδοιπορίας οὔσης διὰ τῆς Βοιωτίας
ἡ παρὰ τῶν Βοιωτῶν συμμαχία μόνη κατελείπετο,
φανεροῦ γ᾿1 ὄντος ὅτι Φίλιππος, φίλος
ὢν καὶ σύμμαχος Βοιωτοῖς, τούτους ἐν παρόδῳ
πειράσεται παραλαβεῖν εἰς τὸν κατ᾿ Ἀθηναίων
πόλεμον.
85. Τοῦ δὲ δήμου τὸν λόγον ἀποδεξαμένου καὶ
τοῦ περὶ τῆς πρεσβείας ψηφίσματος ὑπὸ Δημοσθένους
γραφέντος ὁ μὲν δῆμος ἐζήτει τὸν δυνατώτατον
εἰπεῖν· ὁ δὲ Δημοσθένης ὑπήκουσε προθύμως
πρὸς τὴν χρείαν. τέλος δ᾿ ὀξέως πρεσβεύσας καὶ
πείσας ἐπανῆλθεν εἰς τὰς Ἀθήνας.
Ὁ δὲ δῆμος τῇ τῶν Βοιωτῶν συμμαχίᾳ διπλασιάσας
τὴν προϋπάρχουσαν δύναμιν ἀνεθάρρησε
2ταῖς ἐλπίσιν. εὐθὺ δὲ καὶ στρατηγοὺς κατέστησε
τοὺς περὶ Χάρητα καὶ Λυσικλέα καὶ πανδημεὶ μετὰ
τῶν ὅπλων ἐξέπεμψε τοὺς στρατιώτας εἰς τὴν
Βοιωτίαν. τῶν δὲ νέων ἁπάντων προθύμως εἰς τὸν
ἀγῶνα καταντώντων οὗτοι μὲν κατὰ σπουδὴν
ὁδοιπορήσαντες ἧκον εἰς Χαιρώνειαν τῆς Βοιωτίας·
οἱ δὲ Βοιωτοὶ θαυμάσαντες τὴν ὀξύτητα τῆς τῶν
Ἀθηναίων παρουσίας καὶ αὐτοὶ σπουδῆς οὐδὲν
ἐλλείποντες ἀπήντησαν μετὰ τῶν ὅπλων καὶ κοινῇ
στρατοπεδεύσαντες ὑπέμενον τὴν τῶν πολεμίων
3ἔφοδον. Φίλιππος δὲ τὸ μὲν πρῶτον ἐξέπεμψεν
ἐπὶ τὸ κοινὸν τῶν Βοιωτῶν πρέσβεις, ὧν ἦν ἐπιφανέστατος

1γ᾿ editors: δ᾿.74Book XVI

and invite the Boeotians to join them to make a 338/7 b.c. struggle for freedom. There was no time to send envoys to their other allies1 invoking the treaties of alliance, since in two days the king could be expected to enter Attica. As his way led through Boeotia, the support of the Boeotians was their only recourse, especially since Philip was at that time the friend and ally of the Boeotians and would evidently try to take them along as he marched past to the war against Athens.
85. When the people accepted the proposal and the decree authorizing the embassy had been drafted by Demosthenes, they turned to the search for their most eloquent representative. Demosthenes willingly answered the call to service. He carried out the mission vigorously and returned to Athens at last having secured the adhesion of the Thebans.
Now that they had doubled their existing armed forces by the Boeotian alliance, the Athenians recovered their confidence. At once they designated Chares and Lysicles as generals and sent forth their entire army under arms into Boeotia. All their youth reported eager for battle and advanced with forced marches as far as Chaeroneia in Boeotia. Impressed by the promptness of the Athenian arrival and themselves no less ready to act decisively, the Boeotians joined them with their weapons and, brigaded together, all awaited the approach of the enemy. Philip’s first move was to send envoys to the Boeotian

1These are listed by Demosthenes (De Corona, 237) as Euboea, Achaia, Corinth, Megara, Leucas, and Corcyra. Aeschines (In Ctesiphontem, 97) mentions Acarnania also.75