Diodorus of Sicily

τε καὶ τοῖς βασιλεῦσιν ἔλαβε σατραπείαν
Καππαδοκίαν καὶ τοὺς συνορίζοντας ταύτῃ τόπους,
ἐν οἷς μεγάλων δυνάμεων καὶ πολλῶν χρημάτων
3κυριεύσας περιβόητον ἔσχε τὴν εὐτυχίαν. Κρατερὸν
μὲν γὰρ καὶ Νεοπτόλεμον, διωνομασμένους ἡγεμόνας
καὶ τὰς ἀνικήτους τῶν Μακεδόνων ἔχοντας
δυνάμεις, ἐνίκησε παρατάξει καὶ αὐτοὺς κατὰ τὴν
4μάχην ἀνεῖλεν. δόξας δὲ ἀνυπόστατος εἶναι τηλικαύτης
ἐπειράθη μεταβολῆς ὥστε ὑπ᾿ Ἀντιγόνου
μεγάλῃ παρατάξει λειφθῆναι καὶ μετ᾿ ὀλίγων φίλων
ἀναγκασθῆναι καταφυγεῖν εἴς τι χωρίον παντελῶς
μικρόν. εἰς τοῦτο δ᾿ ἐγκλεισθεὶς καὶ περιληφθεὶς
ὑπὸ τῶν πολεμίων διπλοῖς τείχεσιν οὐδένα βοηθὸν
5ἔσχε τῆς ἰδίας συμφορᾶς. ἐνιαυσίου δ᾿ οὔσης τῆς
πολιορκίας καὶ τῆς σωτηρίας ἀπογινωσκομένης
ἄφνω παράδοξος λύσις ἐφάνη τῶν ἀτυχημάτων.
ὁ γὰρ πολιορκῶν τὸν Εὐμενῆ καὶ σπεύδων ἀνελεῖν
Ἀντίγονος ἐκ μεταβολῆς παρεκάλεσεν αὐτὸν πρὸς
κοινοπραγίαν καὶ λαβὼν διὰ τῶν ὅρκων τὰς πίστεις
6τῆς πολιορκίας ἀπέλυσε.1 μετὰ δέ τινα χρόνον
ἀνελπίστως διασωθεὶς τότε μὲν περὶ τὴν Καππαδοκίαν
διέτριβεν ἀναλαμβάνων τοὺς προγεγονότας
φίλους καὶ τοὺς κατὰ τὴν χώραν πλανωμένους τῶν
συνεστρατευκότων αὐτῷ πρότερον. ἀγαπώμενος
δὲ διαφερόντως ταχὺ πολλοὺς ἔσχε κοινωνοὺς τῶν
αὐτῶν ἐλπίδων καὶ πρὸς τὴν μετ᾿ αὐτοῦ στρατείαν
7ὑπακούοντας. τέλος δὲ ἐν ὀλίγαις ἡμέραις χωρὶς
τῶν ἐν τῷ φρουρίῳ συμπεπολιορκημένων φίλων





1ἀπέλυσε Geer: ἀπελύθη.158Book XVIII

he was fighting for Perdiccas and the kings, he had 319 b.c received as his satrapy Cappadocia and the
adjacent regions, in which as master of great armies and
much wealth his good fortune became famous. For he defeated in a pitched battle Craterus and Neoptolemus,
famous generals in command of the invincible forces of the Macedonians, and killed them on the field.1 But although he won the reputation of being irresistible, he experienced such a change of fortune that he was defeated by Antigonus in a great battle and compelled to take refuge with a few friends in a certain very small fortress.2 Shut up there and surrounded by the enemy with a double wall, he had no one to give him aid in his own misfortune. When the siege had lasted a year3 and hope of safety had been abandoned, there suddenly appeared an unexpected deliverance from his plight; for Antigonus, who was besieging him and bent on destroying him, changed his plan, invited him to share in his own undertakings, and after receiving an oath-bound pledge, freed him from the siege.4 Thus unexpectedly saved after a considerable time, he stayed for the present in Cappadocia, where he gathered together his former friends and those who had once served under him and were now wandering about the country. Since he was highly esteemed, he quickly found many men to share in his expectations and to enlist for the campaign with him. In the end, within a few days, in addition to the five hundred friends who had been besieged in the fortress with him, he


1Cp. chaps. 30–31.2That is, Nora. Cp. chaps. 40–42. death of Antipater has reached Asia (Plutarch, Eumenes, 12. 1), the longer time is more probable.3Nepos (Eumenes, 5. 6–7) seems to reduce this time to
about six months, but since the siege ends after news of the4Cp. chap. 50. 4. For the terms of the oath and for the alterations that Eumenes made in it cp. Plutarch, Eumenes, 12. 1–3; Nepos, Eumenes, 5. 7.159