Diodorus of Sicily

κατηγορουμένων, ὄντων πολλῶν καὶ1 μεγαλοπλούτων,
καταγνῶναι θάνατον. ἀναιρεθέντων δὲ τῶν
δυνατῶν ἀνδρῶν πλειόνων ἢ χιλίων καὶ διακοσίων,2
καὶ τῶν δημαγωγῶν αὐτῶν ὁ δῆμος οὐκ ἐφείσατο.
4διὰ γὰρ τὸ μέγεθος τῆς συμφορᾶς οἱ μὲν δημαγωγοὶ
φοβηθέντες μή τι παράλογον αὐτοῖς ἀπαντήσῃ, τῆς
κατηγορίας ἀπέστησαν, οἱ δ᾿ ὄχλοι δόξαντες ὑπ᾿
αὐτῶν ἐγκαταλελεῖφθαι καὶ διὰ τοῦτο παροξυνθέντες,
ἅπαντας τοὺς δημαγωγοὺς ἀπέκτειναν. οὗτοι
μὲν οὖν, ὡσπερεί τινος νεμεσήσαντος δαιμονίου,
τῆς ἁρμοζούσης τιμωρίας ἔτυχον, ὁ δὲ δῆμος παυσάμενος
τῆς λύττης3 εἰς τὴν προϋπάρχουσαν ἔννοιαν4
ἀποκατέστη.
59. Περὶ δὲ τοὺς αὐτοὺς χρόνους Λυκομήδης ὁ
Τεγεάτης ἔπεισε τοὺς Ἀρκάδας εἰς μίαν συντέλειαν
ταχθῆναι καὶ κοινὴν ἔχειν σύνοδον συνεστῶσαν ἐξ
ἀνδρῶν μυρίων, καὶ τούτους ἐξουσίαν ἔχειν περὶ
2πολέμου καὶ εἰρήνης βουλεύεσθαι. γενομένης δὲ
στάσεως μεγάλης παρὰ τοῖς Ἀρκάσι, καὶ διὰ τῶν
ὅπλων διακριθέντων τῶν διαφερομένων, πολλοὶ μὲν
ἀνῃρέθησαν πλείους δὲ τῶν χιλίων καὶ τετρακοσίων
ἔφυγον, οἱ μὲν εἰς τὴν Σπάρτην, οἱ δ᾿ εἰς τὸ5
3Παλλάντιον. οὗτοι μὲν οὖν ἐκδοθέντες ὑπὸ τῶν
Παλλαντίων ὑπὸ τῶν νενικηκότων ἐσφαγιάσθησαν·







1ὄντων πολλῶν καὶ Dindorf, Bekker: ὄντων μὲν πολλῶν καὶ
(P omits καὶ, followed by Vogel).2καὶ διακοσίων omitted by P, καὶ ἑξακοσίων FJK.3λύττης Schäfer: λύπης.4ἔννοιαν Post: εὔνοιαν.5τὸ Wesseling: τὴν.114Book XV

death all the accused, who were many and wealthy. 370/69 b.c. When, however, more than twelve hundred influential men had been removed, the populace did not spare the demagogues themselves. For because of the magnitude of the calamity the demagogues were afraid that some unforeseen turn of fortune might overtake them and therefore desisted from their accusation, whereas the mob, now thinking that they had been left in the lurch by them, were angry at this and put to death all the demagogues. So these men received the punishment which fitted their crimes as if some divinity were visiting its just resentment upon them, and the people, eased of their mad rage, were restored to their senses.
59. About the same time, Lycomedes1 of Tegea prevailed upon the Arcadians to form a single confederacy2 with a common council to consist of ten thousand men empowered to decide issues of war and peace. But since civil war broke out in Arcadia on a large scale and the quarrelling factions came to a decision by force of arms, many were killed and more than fourteen hundred fled, some to Sparta, others to Pallantium.3 Now these latter refugees were surrendered by the Pallantians and slaughtered by the victorious party, whereas those who took refuge



1According to Xenophon, Hell. 7. 1. 23, Lycomedes was from Mantineia (also Pausanias, 8.27.2 and Diodorus himself, chap. 62. 2). Lycomedes urged the Arcadians, who at this time entered the services of other states in great numbers as mercenaries, to devote themselves to strengthening their own state.2See for the Arcadian League Cary, Cambridge Ancient History, 6. 88 f., or better Glotz, Hist. gr. 3. 154–156. Also Freeman, History of Federal Government, 154 ff.3Arcadian town just west of Tegea, said to have been the home of Evander and origin of the name Palatine (Virgil, Aeneïd, 8. 51–54).115