Diodorus of Sicily
95. Δημήτριος δὲ τῶν τε μηχανῶν αὐτῷ τέλος
ἐχουσῶν καὶ τοῦ πρὸς τὸ τεῖχος τόπου παντὸς
ἀνακαθαρθέντος τὴν μὲν ἑλέπολιν μέσην ἔστησε,τὰς
δὲ χωστρίδας χελώνας ἐπιδιεῖλεν, οὔσας1 ὀκτώ·
κατέστησεν δ᾿ εἰς ἑκάτερον μέρος τῆς μηχανῆς
τέτταρας καὶ τούτων ἑκάστῃ συνῆψεν στοὰν μίαν
εἰς τὸ δύνασθαι μετ᾿ ἀσφαλείας ἐπιτελεῖν τὸ προσταττόμενον
τοὺς εἰσιόντας τε καὶ πάλιν ἐξιόντας,
κριοφόρους δὲ δύο πολλαπλασίας τοῖς μεγέθεσιν·
εἶχε γὰρ ἑκατέρα δοκὸν2 πηχῶν ἑκατὸν εἴκοσι,
σεσιδηρωμένην καὶ τὴν ἐμβολὴν ἔχουσαν παραπλησίαν
νεὼς ἐμβόλῳ, καὶ προωθουμένην μὲν εὐκινήτως,
ὑπότροχον δὲ καὶ τὴν ἐναγώνιον ἐνέργειαν
λαμβάνουσαν δι᾿ ἀνδρῶν οὐκ ἐλαττόνων ἢ χιλίων.
2μέλλων δὲ προσάγειν τὰς μηχανὰς τοῖς τείχεσι τοὺς
μὲν πετροβόλους καὶ τοὺς ὀξυβελεῖς παρήνεγκε τῆς
ἑλεπόλεως εἰς ἑκάστην στέγην τοὺς ἁρμόζοντας,
3ἐπὶ δὲ τοὺς λιμένας καὶ τοὺς πλησίον τόπους
ἀπέστειλε τὴν ναυτικὴν δύναμιν, πρὸς δὲ τὸ λοιπὸν
τεῖχος τὸ δυνάμενον προσβολὰς δέξασθαι τὸ πεζὸν
4στρατόπεδον ἐπιδιεῖλεν. ἔπειτα δὲ πρὸς ἓν παρακέλευσμα
καὶ σημεῖον πάντων συναλαλαξάντων
πανταχόθεν τῇ πόλει προσβολὰς ἐποιεῖτο. διασείοντος
δ᾿ αὐτοῦ τοῖς κριοῖς καὶ τοῖς πετροβόλοις
τὰ τείχη παρεγενήθησαν Κνιδίων πρέσβεις, ἀξιοῦντες
ἐπισχεῖν καὶ πείσειν ἐπαγγελλόμενοι τοὺς
Ῥοδίους δέχεσθαι τὰ δυνατώτατα τῶν προσταγμάτων.
5ἀνέντος δὲ τοῦ βασιλέως καὶ τῶν


1εἰς after οὔσας omitted by Hertlein.2ἑκατέρα δοκὸν Reiske: ἑκατέραν.394Book XX
95. Demetrius, when his engines of war were completed 304 b.c. and all the space before the walls was cleared, stationed the helepolis in the centre, and assigned positions to the penthouses, eight in number, which were to protect the sappers. He placed four of these on each side of the helepolis and connected with each of them one covered passage so that the men who were going in and out might accomplish their assigned tasks in safety; and he brought up also two enormous penthouses in which battering rams were mounted. For each shed held a ram with a length of one hundred and twenty cubits, sheathed with iron and striking a blow like that of a ship’s ram; and the ram was moved with ease, being mounted on wheels and receiving its motive power in battle from not less than a thousand men.1 When he was ready to advance the engines against the walls, ho placed on each storey of the helepolis ballistae and catapults of appropriate size,2 stationed his fleet in position to attack the harbours and the adjacent areas, and distributed his infantry along such parts of the wall as could be attacked. Then, when all at a single command and signal had raised the battle cry together,. he launched attacks on the city from every side. While he was shaking the walls with the rams and the ballistae, Cnidian envoys arrived, asking him to withhold his attack and promising to persuade the Rhodians to accept the most feasible of his demands. The king broke off the attack, and the envoys carried on


1A ram 180 feet long would probably buckle in use in spite of the iron reinforcement; but see the footnote on chap. 91. 2 for the possibility that the cubit used here is shorter than the Attic standard. Cp. the rams used by the Romans before Carthage in 149 b.c., Appian, Punic Wars, 98.2Cp. chap. 48. 3.395