Diodorus of Sicily
6Περδίκκας δὲ τούς τε φίλους καὶ τοὺς ἡγεμόνας
ἀθροίσας προέθηκε βουλὴν πότερον ἐπὶ τὴν Μακεδονίαν
χρὴ στρατεύειν ἢ πρότερον ἐπὶ τὸν Πτολεμαῖον
ὁρμῆσαι. πάντων δ᾿ ἐπενεχθέντων ἐπὶ τὸ
πρότερον καταπολεμῆσαι τὸν Πτολεμαῖον, ὅπως
μηδὲν ἐμπόδιον ἔχωσι τῆς κατὰ τὴν Μακεδονίαν
ὁρμῆς, Εὐμενῆ μὲν ἐξέπεμψε μετὰ δυνάμεως ἀξιολόγου,
προστάξας ἐφεδρεύειν τοῖς περὶ τὸν Ἑλλήσποντον
τόποις καὶ τὴν διάβασιν κωλύειν, αὐτὸς
δὲ ἀναλαβὼν τὴν δύναμιν1 ἐκ τῆς Πισιδικῆς τὴν
πορείαν ἐπὶ τὴν Αἴγυπτον ἐποιεῖτο.
Ταῦτα μὲν οὖν ἐπράχθη κατὰ τοῦτον τὸν ἐνιαυτόν.
26. Ἐπ᾿ ἄρχοντος δ᾿ Ἀθήνησι Φιλοκλέους ἐν
Ῥώμῃ κατεστάθησαν ὕπατοι Γάιος Σολπίκιος καὶ
Γάιος Αἴλιος. ἐπὶ δὲ τούτων Ἀρριδαῖος ὁ κατασταθεὶς
ἐπὶ τὴν κατακομιδὴν τοῦ Ἀλεξάνδρου σώματος,
συντετελεκὼς τὴν ἁρμάμαξαν ἐφ᾿ ἧς ἔδει
κατακομισθῆναι τὸ βασιλικὸν σῶμα, παρεσκευάζετο
2τὰ πρὸς τὴν κομιδήν. ἐπεὶ δὲ τὸ κατασκευασθὲν
ἔργον, ἄξιον2 ὑπάρχον τῆς Ἀλεξάνδρου δόξης,
οὐ μόνον κατὰ τὴν δαπάνην διήνεγκε τῶν ἄλλων,
ὡς ἀπὸ πολλῶν ταλάντων κατασκευασθέν, ἀλλὰ
καὶ τῇ κατὰ τὴν τέχνην περιττότητι περιβόητον
ὑπῆρξε, καλῶς ἔχειν ὑπολαμβάνομεν ἀναγράψαι
περὶ αὐτοῦ.
1τὴν δύναμιν added by Fischer.2ἄξιον Dindorf: ἀξιόλογον.86Book XVIII
Perdiccas, gathering his friends and generals, 322 b.c. referred to them for consideration the question whether it was better to march against Macedonia or first to take the field against Ptolemy. When all favoured defeating Ptolemy first in order that there might be no obstacle in the way of their Macedonian campaign, he sent Eumenes off with a considerable army, ordering him to watch over the region of the Hellespont and prevent a crossing; and he himself, taking the army from Pisidia, proceeded against Egypt.1
Such, then, were the events of this year.
26. When Philocles was archon in Athens, Gaius Sulpicius and Gaius Aelius were elected consuls in Rome.2 In this year Arrhidaeus, who had been placed in charge of bringing home the body of Alexander,3 having completed the vehicle on which the royal body was to be carried, was making preparations for the journey. Since the structure that had been made ready, being worthy of the glory of Alexander, not only surpassed all others in cost—it had been constructed at the expense of many talents—but
was also famous for the excellence of its workmanship, I believe that it is well to describe it.4
1Cp. chaps. 29–32 for the campaign of Eumenes, and
chaps. 33–37 for that of Perdiccas.2Philocles was archon in 322/1. Livy (8. 37. 1–3) calls
these consuls C. Sulpicius Longus and Q. Aemilius Cerre- tanus (adding that some gave the nomen of the latter as Aulius) and assigns them to the year following the consuls mentioned in chap. 2. 1 above; but the Fasti insert a “dictator year” between the two sets of consuls, and the traditional chronology assigns Sulpicius and his colleague to 323 b.c. See H. Stuart Jones in Cambridge Ancient History, 7. 321–322.3Cp. chap. 3. 5.4For a discussion of this funeral car cp. Kurt F. Müller, Der Leichenwagen Alexanders des Grossen (Leipzig, 1905), and H. Bulle, “Der Leichenwagen Alexanders,” Jahrbuch der Deutschen Archäologischen Instituts, 21 (1906),
53–73.87