Diodorus of Sicily

τῶν ἀνῃρημένων συγγενεῖς, Κασάνδρῳ τε χαρίζεσθαι
βουλόμενοι καὶ τοῖς τετελευτηκόσιν ἀμῦναι,
κατέσφαξαν τὴν βασίλισσαν, οὐδεμίαν ἀγεννῆ καὶ
γυναικείαν προεμένην ἀξίωσιν.
6Ὀλυμπιὰς μὲν οὖν, μέγιστον τῶν καθ᾿ αὑτὴν
ἐσχηκυῖα ἀξίωμα καὶ γεγενημένη θυγάτηρ μὲν
Νεοπτολέμου τοῦ βασιλέως τῶν Ἠπειρωτῶν,
ἀδελφὴ δὲ Ἀλεξάνδρου τοῦ στρατεύσαντος εἰς
Ἰταλίαν, ἔτι δὲ γυνὴ μὲν Φιλίππου τοῦ πλεῖστον
ἰσχύσαντος τῶν πρὸ αὐτοῦ κατὰ τὴν Εὐρώπην
δυναστευσάντων, μήτηρ δὲ Ἀλεξάνδρου τοῦ πλεῖστα
καὶ κάλλιστα κατεργασαμένου τοιαύτης καταστροφῆς
ἔτυχε.
52. Κάσανδρος δέ, κατὰ νοῦν αὐτῷ τῶν πραγμάτων
προχωρούντων, περιελάμβανε ταῖς ἐλπίσι
τὴν Μακεδόνων βασιλείαν. διὸ καὶ Θεσσαλονίκην
ἔγημε, τὴν Φιλίππου μὲν θυγατέρα Ἀλεξάνδρου δὲ
ἀδελφὴν ὁμοπάτριον, σπεύδων οἰκεῖον αὑτὸν ἀποδεῖξαι
2τῆς βασιλικῆς συγγενείας. ἔκτισε δὲ καὶ
πόλιν ἐπὶ τῆς Παλλήνης ὁμώνυμον αὐτοῦ Κασάνδρειαν,
εἰς ἣν τάς τε ἐκ τῆς χερρονήσου πόλεις
συνῴκισε καὶ τὴν Ποτίδαιαν, ἔτι δὲ τῶν σύνεγγυς
χωρίων οὐκ ὀλίγα· κατῴκισε δ᾿ εἰς αὐτὴν καὶ τῶν
Ὀλυνθίων τοὺς διασωζομένους, ὄντας οὐκ ὀλίγους.
3πολλῆς δὲ χώρας προσορισθείσης τοῖς Κασανδρεῦσι
καὶ ταύτης ἀγαθῆς, ἔτι δὲ τοῦ Κασάνδρου πολλὰ
συμφιλοτιμηθέντος εἰς τὴν αὔξησιν ταχὺ μεγάλην
ἐπίδοσιν ἔλαβεν ἡ πόλις καὶ πλεῖστον ἴσχυσε τῶν
4ἐν Μακεδονίᾳ. ὁ δὲ Κάσανδρος διεγνώκει μὲν
ἀνελεῖν Ἀλεξάνδρου τὸν παῖδα καὶ τὴν μητέρα


370Book XIX

wishing to curry favour with Cassander as well 316 b.c. as to avenge their dead, murdered the queen, who uttered no ignoble or womanish plea.
Such was the end of Olympias, who had attained to the highest dignity of the women of her day, having been daughter of Neoptolemus, king of the Epirotes, sister of the Alexander who made a campaign into Italy,1 and also wife of Philip, who was the mightiest of all who down to this time had ruled in Europe, and mother of Alexander, whose deeds were the greatest and most glorious.
52. As for Cassander, now that his affairs had succeeded according to his intentions, he began to embrace in his hopes the Macedonian kingdom. For this reason he married Thessalonicê, who was Philip’s daughter and Alexander’s half-sister, since he desired to establish a connection with the royal house.2 He also founded on Pallenê a city called Cassandreia after his own name,3 uniting with it as one city the cities of the peninsula, Potidaea, and a considerable number of the neighbouring towns. He also settled in this city those of the Olynthians who survived,4 not few in number. Since a great deal of land, and good land too, was included within the boundaries of Cassandreia, and since Cassander was very ambitious for the city’s increase, it quickly made great progress and became the strongest of the cities of Macedonia. Cassander had determined to do away with Alexander’s son and the son’s mother, Roxanê, so that



1Cp. Livy, 8. 24.2Cp. Justin, 14. 6. 13, Pausanias, 9. 7. 3.3Pallenê is the south-western promontory of Chalcidicê. Since only kings gave their names to cities, Cassander was in effect claiming the throne. Cp. Strabo, 7. frag. 25; Livy, 44. 11. 2.4For the destruction of Olynthus by Philip cp. Book 16. 53.371