Diodorus of Sicily

τῆς ὅλης κατὰ τὴν Περσικὴν βασιλείαν μεταβολῆς
ὑπέλαβεν ἑαυτὸν ὑπερήφανόν τι πεποιηκέναι
καὶ τῆς πρὸς τὰς αἰχμαλωτίδας ἐπιεικείας ἀλλοτριώτατον.
7διόπερ προσκαλεσάμενος τὸν θέντα τὴν
τράπεζαν ἐπέταξεν ἆραι πάλιν. ἐνταῦθα παρεστὼς
Φιλώτας, Ἀλλ᾿ οὐχ ὕβρις ἐστίν, εἶπεν, τὸ μὴ
ὑπὸ σοῦ προσταχθέν, ἀλλὰ δαίμονός τινος ἀγαθοῦ
προνοίᾳ καὶ βουλήσει. ὁ δὲ βασιλεὺς οἰωνισάμενος
τὸ ῥηθὲν προσέταξεν ἐᾶν κειμένην ὑπὸ τῷ θρόνῳ
τὴν τράπεζαν.
67. Μετὰ δε ταῦτα τὴν μὲν Δαρείου μητέρα καὶ
τὰς θυγατέρας καὶ τὸν υἱὸν ἀπέλιπεν ἐν Σούσοις
καὶ παρακατέστησε τοὺς διδάξοντας τὴν Ἑλληνικὴν
διάλεκτον, αὐτὸς δὲ μετὰ τῆς δυνάμεως ἀναζεύξας
2τεταρταῖος ἐπὶ τὸν Τίγριν ποταμὸν ἀφίκετο. ὃς
ῥέων ἀπὸ τῆς Οὐξίων ὀρεινῆς τὸ μὲν πρῶτον
φέρεται διὰ χώρας τραχείας καὶ χαράδραις μεγάλαις
διειλημμένης ἐπὶ σταδίους χιλίους, ἔπειτα διαρρεῖ
χώραν πεδιάδα, πραϋνόμενος αἰεὶ μᾶλλον, καὶ διελθὼν
σταδίους ἑξακοσίους ἐξίησιν εἰς τὴν κατὰ
3Πέρσας θάλασσαν. διαβὰς δὲ τὸν Τίγριν προῆγεν
ἐπὶ τὴν Οὐξίων χώραν, οὖσαν πάμφορον καὶ
δαψιλέσιν ὕδασι διαρρεομένην καὶ πολλοὺς καὶ
παντοδαποὺς ἐκφέρουσαν καρπούς· διὸ καὶ τῆς
ὡρίμου ξηραινομένης ὀπώρας παντοδαπὰ πλάσματα
χρήσιμα πρὸς ἀπόλαυσιν οἱ τὸν Τίγριν πλέοντες
ἔμποροι κατάγουσιν εἰς τὴν Βαβυλωνίαν.
4Καταλαβὼν δὲ τὰς παρόδους φυλαττομένας ὑπὸ
Μαδέτου,1 συγγενοῦς μὲν ὄντος Δαρείου, δύναμιν
δὲ ἔχοντος ἀξιόλογον, κατεσκέψατο τὴν ὀχυρότητα

1Μαδέτου Cospi; Μαδέου τοῦ F; Μέτου RX. The manuscripts
of Curtius (5. 3. 4) give Medates and Madates.308Book XVII

had come over the Persian kingdom. He saw that he 330/29 b.c. had committed an act of arrogance quite the reverse of his gentleness to the captives, and calling the page who had placed the table ordered him to remove it. Then Philotas, who was present, said, “But this was not insolence, for the action was not commanded by you; it occurred through the providence and design of a good spirit.” So the king took this remark for an omen, and ordered the table to be left standing at the foot of the throne.
67. After this Alexander left Dareius’s mother, his daughters, and his son in Susa,1 providing them with persons to teach them the Greek language, and marching on with his army on the fourth day reached the Tigris River.2 This flows down from the mountains of the Uxii and passes at first for a thousand furlongs through rough country broken by great gorges, but then traverses a level plain and becomes ever quieter, and after six hundred furlongs empties into the Persian sea. This he crossed, and entered the country of the Uxii, which was rich, watered by numerous streams, and productive of many fruits of all kinds. At the season when the ripe fruit is dried, the merchants who sail on the Tigris are able to bring down to Babylonia all sorts of confections good for the pleasures of the table.3
Alexander found the passages guarded by Madetes, a cousin of Dareius, with a substantial force, and he saw at once the difficulty of the place. The sheer



1Curtius, 5. 2. 17.2That is, the Pasitigris (Curtius, 5. 3. 1: “fourth day”; Arrian, 3. 17. 1).3For the character of the country cp. Strabo, 15. 3. 6. 729. No one else so emphasizes its fertility.309