Diodorus of Sicily

ἀπέλιπον καὶ τοῦ μὲν λιβανωτοῦ καὶ τῆς σμύρνης
συνεσκευάσαντο τὸ πλεῖον μέρος, ἀργυρίου δὲ περὶ
πεντακόσια τάλαντα. ἐνδιατρίψαντες δ᾿ οὐ πλείω
χρόνον φυλακῆς ἑωθινῆς1 εὐθὺς ἀνέστρεψαν κατὰ
σπουδήν, διαλαμβάνοντες ὑπὸ τῶν βαρβάρων διωχθήσεσθαι.
διατείναντες δὲ σταδίους διακοσίους
κατεστρατοπέδευσαν, ὄντες κατάκοποι καὶ ῥᾳθύμως
ἔχοντες τὰ περὶ τὰς φυλακάς, ὡς ἂν νομίζοντες μὴ
πρότερον δύνασθαι τοὺς πολεμίους ἐλθεῖν δυεῖν ἢ
4τριῶν ἡμερῶν. οἱ δ᾿ Ἄραβες πυθόμενοι παρὰ τῶν
ἑωρακότων τὸ στρατόπεδον παραχρῆμα ἠθροίσθησαν
καὶ τὴν πανήγυριν ἀπολιπόντες ἧκον ἐπὶ τὴν
πέτραν· παρὰ δὲ τῶν τραυματιῶν μαθόντες τὰ γεγονότα
5κατὰ σπουδὴν ἐδίωκον τοὺς Ἕλληνας. τῶν
δὲ περὶ τὸν Ἀθήναιον στρατοπεδευσάντων καταπεφρονηκότως
καὶ διὰ τὸν κόπον ἐν ὕπνῳ καθεστώτων
ἔλαθόν τινες τῶν αἰχμαλώτων διαδράντες, παρ᾿
ὧν οἱ Ναβαταῖοι μαθόντες τὰ κατὰ τοὺς πολεμίους
ἐπέθεντο τῇ στρατοπεδείᾳ περὶ τρίτην φυλακήν,
ὄντες οὐκ ἐλάσσω ὀκτακισχιλίων. καὶ τοὺς πλείους
μὲν ἐν ταῖς κοίταις ὄντας ἔτι κατέσφαξαν,
τοὺς δὲ διεγειρομένους καὶ χωροῦντας εἰς ὅπλα
κατηκόντιζον· καὶ πέρας οἱ μὲν πεζοὶ πάντες ἀνῃρέθησαν,
τῶν δὲ ἱππέων διεσώθησαν εἰς πεντήκοντα
καὶ τούτων οἱ πλείους τραυματίαι.
6Οἱ μὲν οὖν περὶ τὸν Ἀθήναιον ἐν ἀρχῇ κατορθώσαντες
ἐξ ὑστέρου διὰ τὴν ἑαυτῶν ἀβουλίαν τοῦτον
τὸν τρόπον ἐσφάλησαν· ταῖς γὰρ εὐτυχίαις εἴωθεν
ὡς ἐπίπαν ἀκολουθεῖν ῥᾳθυμία καὶ καταφρόνησις.
1ἑωθινῆς added by Kallenberg.92Book XIX

wounded he left behind; and of the frankincense and 312 b.c. myrrh he gathered together the larger part, and about five hundred talents of silver. Delaying no longer than the early morning watch,1 he at once departed at top speed, expecting to be pursued by the barbarians. When he and his men had marched without pause for two hundred stades,2 they made camp, being tired and keeping a careless watch as if they believed that the enemy could not come before two or three days. But when the Arabs heard from those who had seen the expedition, they at once gathered together and, leaving the place of assembly, came to the rock; then, being informed by the wounded of what had taken place, they pursued the Greeks at top speed. While the men of Athenaeus were encamped with little thought of the enemy and because of their weariness were deep in sleep, some of their prisoners escaped secretly; and the Nabataeans, learning from them the condition of the enemy, attacked the camp at about the third watch, being no less than eight thousand in number. Most of the hostile troops they slaughtered where they lay; the rest they slew with their javelins as they awoke and sprang to arms. In the end all the foot-soldiers were slain, but of the horsemen about fifty escaped, and of these the larger part were wounded.
And so Athenaeus, after being successful at first, later because of his own folly failed in this manner; for carelessness and indifference are, in general,




1i.e. the last watch of the night. If we follow the MSS. and omit ἑωθινῆς, we may translate: “Delaying no longer than a single watch, he departed at top speed . . .”2About 22½ miles.93