Diodorus of Sicily

τὸν Βαγώαν ἐπαγγελλόμενοι παραδώσειν τὴν πόλιν
2ἐὰν αὐτοῖς τὴν ἀσφάλειαν συγχωρήσωσιν. οἱ
δ᾿ Ἕλληνες αἰσθόμενοι τὸ γεγονὸς κατεδίωξαν τὸν
ἀπεσταλμένον καὶ φόβον ἐπικρεμάσαντες ἤκουσαν
τὴν ἀλήθειαν· ἐφ᾿ οἷς παροξυνθέντες ἐπέθεντο τοῖς
Αἰγυπτίοις καί τινας μὲν ἀπέκτειναν τινὰς δὲ
τραυματίας ποιήσαντες τοὺς λοιποὺς συνήλασαν εἴς
3τι μέρος τῆς πόλεως. οἱ δ᾿ ἡττηθέντες δηλώσαντες
τῷ Βαγώᾳ τὸ γεγονὸς ἠξίουν κατὰ τάχος ἐλθόντα
παραλαβεῖν τὴν πόλιν παρ᾿ αὐτῶν. τῶν δὲ Ἐλλήνων
πρὸς τὸν Μέντορα λάθρᾳ διακηρυκευσαμένων
ὁ Μέντωρ ἐν ἀπορρήτοις παρεκάλεσεν αὐτούς, ὅταν
Βαγώας εἰς τὴν πόλιν εἰσέλθῃ, τὴν ἐπίθεσιν τοῖς
4βαρβάροις ποιήσασθαι. μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα τοῦ Βαγώου
μετὰ τῶν Περσῶν εἰσιόντος ἄνευ τῆς τῶν Ἑλλήνων
συγκαταθέσεως καὶ μέρους τῶν στρατιωτῶν εἰσεληλυθότος
οἱ μὲν Ἕλληνες ἄφνω τὰς θύρας κλείσαντες
ἐπέθεντο τοῖς ἐντὸς τῶν τειχῶν ὑπάρχουσι
καὶ πάντας ἀνελόντες τὸν Βαγώαν αὐτὸν ἐζώγρησαν.
5ὁ δὲ τὰς τῆς σωτηρίας ἐλπίδας ὁρῶν ἐν
τῷ Μέντορι κειμένας ἐδεήθη σῶσαι καὶ εἰς τὸ
λοιπὸν κατεπηγγείλατο μηθὲν πράξειν ἄνευ τῆς
6ἐκείνου γνώμης. ὁ δὲ Μέντωρ πείσας τοὺς Ἕλληνας
ἀφεῖναι τὸν Βαγώαν καὶ δι᾿ ἑαυτοῦ γενέσθαι
τὴν παράδοσιν τὴν μὲν ἐπιγραφὴν1 τοῦ προτερήματος
αὐτὸς ἀπηνέγκατο, τῷ δὲ Βαγώᾳ τῆς σωτηρίας
αἴτιος γενόμενος συνέθετο πρὸς αὐτὸν
κοινοπραγίαν καὶ δοὺς ὅρκους καὶ λαβὼν περὶ
τούτων διετέλεσε τὴν σύνθεσιν φυλάττων μέχρι τῆς
7τοῦ βίου τελευτῆς. διὸ καὶ συνέβη τούτους παρὰ
βασιλεῖ συμφρονοῦντας ὕστερον πλεῖστον ἰσχῦσαι
τῶν φίλων καὶ συγγενῶν τῶν παρ᾿ Ἀρταξέρξῃ· ὁ
1So Stephanus: ἀναγραφὴν.378Book XVI

to Bagoas offering to deliver the city if he would consent 350/49 b.c. to their safety. The Greeks, having knowledge of the mission, overtook the envoy and by dire threats extracted the truth, whereat they were much enraged and attacked the Egyptians, slew some, wounded others, and herded the rest into a quarter of the city. The discomfited men, having notified Bagoas of what had taken place, asked him to come with all speed and receive the city from themselves. But the Greeks had been privately treating with Mentor, who gave them secret encouragement, as soon as Bagoas should enter Bubastus, to attack the barbarians. Later on, when Bagoas with the Persians was entering the city without the sanction of the Greeks and a portion of his men had got inside, the Greeks suddenly closed the gates and attacked those who were inside the walls, and, having slain all the men, took Bagoas himself prisoner. The latter, seeing that his hopes of safety lay in Mentor, besought him to spare his life and promised in future to do nothing without his advice. Mentor, who now prevailed upon the Greeks to set Bagoas free and to arrange the surrender through himself, won credit himself for his success, but, having become responsible for Bagoas’ life, he made an agreement with him for common action, and after an exchange of pledges on this matter kept the agreement faithfully till the end of his life. The result of this was that these two by their co-operation in the service of the King attained later on to the greatest power of all the friends and relatives


379