Diodorus of Sicily

μὲν ἐκπορθήσας, ἃ δὲ καταπληξάμενος, συνηνάγκασεν
εἰς τὴν Μεγάλην πόλιν μετοικῆσαι. καὶ τὰ
μὲν περὶ τὸν συνοικισμὸν τῶν πόλεων ἐπὶ τοσοῦτο
ταραχῆς ἐλθόντα ἔτυχεν ἐνδεχομένης καταστολῆς.
4Τῶν δὲ συγγραφέων Ἀθάνας ὁ Συρακόσιος τῶν
περὶ Δίωνα πράξεων ἐντεῦθεν ἀρξάμενος ἔγραψε
μὲν βύβλους τρισκαίδεκα, προανέλαβε1 δὲ τὸν
ἄγραφον χρόνον ἐτῶν ἑπτὰ ἀπὸ τῆς Φιλίστου συντάξεως
ἐν μιᾷ βύβλῳ καὶ διελθὼν τὰς πράξεις ἐν
κεφαλαίοις συνεχῆ τὴν ἱστορίαν ἐποίησεν.
95. Ἐπ᾿ ἄρχοντος δ᾿ Ἀθήνησι Νικοφήμου τὴν
ὑπατικὴν ἀρχὴν ἐν Ῥώμῃ διέλαβε Γάιος Σολπίκιος
καὶ Γάιος Λικίνιος. ἐπὶ δὲ τούτων Ἀλέξανδρος
μὲν ὁ Φερῶν τύραννος λῃστρίδας ναῦς ἐκπέμψας
ἐπὶ τὰς Κυκλάδας νήσους, τινὰς μὲν ἐκπολιορκήσας
πολλῶν σωμάτων ἐκυρίευσεν, εἰς δὲ τὴν Πεπάρηθον
ἀποβιβάσας μισθοφόρους στρατιώτας ἐπολιόρκει
2τὴν πόλιν. Ἀθηναίων δὲ βοηθησάντων τοῖς Πεπαρηθίοις
καὶ στρατηγὸν Λεωσθένην ἀπολιπόντων,
ἐπέθετο τοῖς Ἀθηναίοις· ἐτύγχανον δ᾿ οὗτοι παραφυλάττοντες
τοὺς ἐν τῷ Πανόρμῳ διατρίβοντας
τῶν Ἀλεξάνδρου στρατιωτῶν. ἀπροσδοκήτως δὲ
ἐπιθεμένων τῶν τοῦ δυνάστου, παράδοξος εὐημερία
περὶ τὸν ἀλέξανδρον ἐγένετο. οὐ μόνον γὰρ τοὺς
ἀπεσταλμένους ἐν τῷ Πανόρμῳ διέσωσεν ἐκ τῶν
μεγίστων κινδύνων, ἀλλὰ καὶ τριήρεις μὲν Ἀττικὰς



1προανέλαβε Post: προσανέλαβε.218Book XV

sacking some of the towns and terrifying others he 362/1 b.c. compelled their inhabitants to change their abode to Megalopolis. So the problem of the amalgamation of the cities, after it had reached such a state of turmoil, was reduced to such calm as was possible.
Of the historians, Athanas1 of Syracuse wrote thirteen books beginning with the events attending and following Dion’s expedition, but he prefixed, in one book, an account of the period of seven years not recorded in the treatise of Philistus and by recording these events in summary fashion made of the history a continuous narrative.
95. When Nicophemus was archon at Athens, the 361/0 b.c. consular office at Rome was assumed by Gaius Sulpicius and Gaius Licinius. During their term of office Alexander, tyrant of Pherae, sent pirate ships against the Cyclades,2 stormed some and took many captives, then disembarking mercenaries on Peparethos3 put the city under siege. And when the Athenians came to the assistance of the Peparethians and left Leosthenes in command of the mission, Alexander attacked the Athenians. Actually they were blockading such of Alexander’s soldiers as were stationed in Panormus. And since the tyrant’s men attacked unexpectedly, Alexander won a surprising success. For he not only rescued the detachment at Panormus from the greatest danger, but he also captured five Attic



1Athanas (Athanis in Plutarch and Athenaeus, 3. 98 d, who
entitles his history Σικελικά) seems to have played an outstanding
political rôle in Syracuse during Dion’s time (Theopompus,
fr. 212 M or 184 Oxford). The first book of his work
handled the last seven years of the younger Dionysius from 363. where Philistus ended (see chap. 89. 3), to Dion’s return in 357. Then the presentation was more detailed and developed in twelve books to the death of Timoleon (FHG, 2. 82. 3). His influence is seen in Plutarch, Timoleon, 23. 4, 37, 6. See Christ-Schmidt6, Gr. Litt. 526.2See Demosthenes, 50. 4–5; Polyaenus, 6. 2.3An island off Thessaly, north of Scyros. Perhaps Panormus is its harbour town.219