Diodorus of Sicily
4τὸ δὲ πάντων χαλεπώτατον, πολλῶν ἀναιρεθέντων
καὶ παρὰ τὸν αἰγιαλὸν ἐρριμμένων τῶν
σωμάτων οὔτε συγγενὴς οὐδεὶς οὔτε φίλος ἐτόλμα
τινὰ κηδεύειν, φοβούμενος μὴ δόξῃ προσαγγέλλειν
ἑαυτὸν μετέχοντα τῆς ἐκείνων οἰκειότητος.
5διὰ δὲ τὸ πλῆθος τῶν φονευθέντων ἐπὶ τοῦ κύματος
συνέβη τὴν θάλατταν ἐφ᾿ ἱκανὸν τόπον αἵματι
κραθεῖσαν πόρρωθεν διαφαίνειν τὴν ὑπερβολὴν
τῆς τοῦ πάθους ὠμότητος.
73. Τοῦ δ᾿ ἐνιαυσίου χρόνου διεληλυθότος Ἀθήνησι
μὲν ἦρχε Κόροιβος, ἐν Ῥώμῃ δὲ τὴν ὕπατον
ἀρχὴν παρέλαβον Κόιντος Μάρκιος καὶ Πόπλιος
Κορνήλιος. ἐπὶ δὲ τούτων Ἀντίγονος ὁ βασιλεύς,
τελευτήσαντος αὐτῷ τοῦ νεωτέρου τῶν υἱῶν Φοίνικος,
τοῦτον μὲν βασιλικῶς ἔθαψε, τὸν δὲ Δημήτριον
ἐκ τῆς Κύπρου μεταπεμψάμενος ἤθροιζε
τὰς δυνάμεις εἰς τὴν Ἀντιγονίαν. ἔκρινε δὲ στρατεύειν
2ἐπὶ τὴν Αἴγυπτον. αὐτὸς μὲν οὖν τοῦ πεζοῦ
στρατεύματος ἀφηγούμενος προῆγε διὰ τῆς Κοίλης
Συρίας, ἔχων πεζοὺς μὲν πλείους τῶν ὀκτακισμυρίων,
ἱππεῖς δὲ περὶ ὀκτακισχιλίους, ἐλέφαντας
δὲ τρισὶ πλείους τῶν ὀγδοήκοντα· τῷ δὲ Δημητρίῳ
παραδοὺς τὸν στόλον συνέταξε συμπαραπλεῖν
ἅμα πορευομένῃ τῇ δυνάμει, παρεσκευασμένων νεῶν
τῶν ἁπασῶν μακρῶν μὲν ἑκατὸν πεντήκοντα, πορίων
δὲ στρατιωτικῶν ἑκατόν, ἐν οἷς ἐκομίζετο
3βελῶν πλῆθος. τῶν δὲ κυβερνητῶν οἰομένων δεῖν



336Book XX

put to death before them. And what was most 307 b.c. cruel of all, when many had been slain and their bodies had been cast out along the shore, neither kinsmen nor friend dared pay the last rites to any, fearing lest he should seem to inform on himself as one who enjoyed intimacy with those who were dead. And because of the multitude of those who had been slain beside its waves, the sea, stained with blood over a great expanse, proclaimed afar the unequalled savagery of this outrage.1
73. When this year had passed, Coroebus became 306 b.c. archon in Athens, and in Rome Quintus Marcius and Publius Cornelius succeeded to the consulship.2 While these held office King Antigonus, the younger of whose sons, Phoenix,3 had died, buried this son with royal honours; and, after summoning Demetrius from Cyprus, he collected his forces in Antigonia.4 He had decided to make a campaign against Egypt. So he himself took command of the land army and advanced through Coelê Syria with more than eighty thousand foot soldiers, about eight thousand horsemen, and eighty-three elephants. Giving the fleet to Demetrius, he ordered him to follow along the coast in contact with the army as it advanced. In all there had been made ready a hundred and fifty warships and a hundred transports in which a large stock of ordnance was being conveyed. When the pilots thought it necessary to heed the setting of the



1Continued in chap. 77.2Coroebus was archon in 306/5. Livy, 9. 42. 10, gives the consuls for 306 b.c. as P. Cornelius Arvina and Q. Marcius Tremulus. The Capitoline Fasti are fragmentary for a period of some 40 years beginning at this point.3An error by Diodorus or a copyist for Philip; cp. chap. 19. 5; Plutarch, Demetrius, 2. 1.4Continued from chap. 53. For the following campaign cp. Plutarch, Demetrius, 19, 1–2; Pausanias, 1. 6. 6.337