Diodorus of Sicily
100. Ὁ δὲ Ἀλέξανδρος διασωθεὶς ἐκ τοῦ τραύματος
καὶ θύσας τοῖς θεοῖς σωτήρια μεγάλας
ἑστιάσεις τῶν φίλων ἐποιεῖτο. παρὰ δὲ τὸν πότον
2ἴδιόν τι συνέβη γενέσθαι καὶ μνήμης ἄξιον. ἐν γὰρ
τοῖς ἑταίροις παραληφθείς τις Μακεδών, ὄνομα
Κόραγος, ῥώμῃ σώματος διαφέρων καὶ πολλάκις
ἐν ταῖς μάχαις ἠνδραγαθηκώς, παροξυνθεὶς ὑπὸ τῆς
μέθης προεκαλέσατο μονομαχῆσαι Διώξιππον τὸν
Ἀθηναῖον, ἀθλητὴν ἄνδρα καὶ ταῖς ἐπιφανεστάταις
3νίκαις ἐστεφανωμένον. τῶν δὲ παρακεκλημένων
ἐπὶ τὸν πότον, ὡς εἰκός, συνεπιλαβομένων τῆς
φιλοτιμίας καὶ τοῦ μὲν Διωξίππου συγκαταθεμένου,
τοῦ δὲ βασιλέως ἡμέραν τῆς μάχης τάξαντος, ὡς ὁ
τῆς μονομαχίας χρόνος ἧκεν, πολλαὶ μυριάδες
4ἀνδρῶν συνήχθησαν ἐπὶ τὴν θέαν. καὶ τῶν μὲν
Μακεδόνων ὁμοεθνῶν ὄντων τῷ Κοράγῳ καὶ τοῦ
βασιλέως συμφιλοτιμουμένου, τῶν δὲ Ἑλλήνων τῷ
Διωξίππῳ συναγωνιώντων προῆλθεν εἰς τὸν ἀγῶνα
ὁ μὲν Μακεδὼν πολυτελέσιν ὅπλοις κεκοσμημένος,
5ὁ δ᾿ Ἀθηναῖος γυμνὸς ὑπαληλιμμένος, ἔχων ῥόπαλον1
σύμμετρον.
Ἀμφοτέρων δὲ τῇ τε τοῦ σώματος ῥώμῃ καὶ τῇ
τῆς ἀλκῆς ὑπεροχῇ θαυμαζομένων οἱονεί τις θεομαχία
μέλλουσα γίνεσθαι προσεδοκήθη· ὁ μὲν γὰρ
Μακεδὼν διά τε τὴν φύσιν τοῦ σώματος καὶ τὴν
λαμπρότητα τῶν ὅπλων μεγάλην ἐπιφέρων κατάπληξιν
Ἄρει παρεμφερὴς ὑπελαμβάνετο, ὁ δὲ Διώξιππος
ὑπερέχων τε τῇ ῥώμῃ καὶ διὰ τὴν ἐκ τῆς
ἀθλήσεως μελέτην, ἔτι δὲ διὰ τὴν περὶ τὸ ῥόπαλον
ἰδιότητα τὴν πρόσοψιν Ἡρακλεωτικὴν εἶχεν.
1πῖλον codd.; corrected by Hemsterhuys. Cp. sect. 5, below.406Book XVII
100. Alexander recovered from his wound, sacrificed 326/5 b.c. to the gods, and held a great banquet for his Friends. In the course of the drinking a curious event occurred which is worth mention.1 Among the king’s companions there was a Macedonian named Coragus, strong in body, who had distinguished himself many times in battle. His temper was sharpened by the drink, and he challenged to single combat Dioxippus the Athenian, an athlete who had won a crown in the foremost games. As you would expect, the guests at the banquet egged them on and Dioxippus accepted. The king set a day for the contest, and when the time came, many myriads of men gathered to see the spectacle. The Macedonians and Alexander backed Coragus because he was one of them, while the Greeks favoured Dioxippus. The two advanced to the field of honour, the Macedonian clad in his expensive armour but the Athenian naked, his body oiled, carrying a well-balanced club.
Both men were fine to look upon with their magnificent physiques and their ardour for combat. Everyone looked forward, as it were, to a battle of gods. By his carriage and the brilliance of his arms, the Macedonian inspired terror as if he were Ares, while Dioxippus excelled in sheer strength and condition; still more because of his club he bore a certain resemblance to Heracles.
1The story of Coragus and Dioxippus is otherwise told only by Curtius, 9. 7. 16–26 (calling the Macedonian “Corratas”). Dioxippus had won the victory in boxing at Olympia, probably in 336 b.c. (Berve, Alexanderreich, 2, no. 284). See Addenda.407