Diodorus of Sicily

τὰς ἐν Καρίᾳ πόλεις ὅσαι συνεμάχουν τοῖς περὶ
Πτολεμαῖον καὶ Σέλευκον, ἐξέπεμψε δύναμιν εἰς
τὴν Καρίαν, ἅμα μὲν βουλόμενος βοηθεῖν τοῖς συμμάχοις,
ἅμα δὲ σπεύδων εἰς περισπασμοὺς ἐμβαλεῖν
Ἀντίγονον ἵνα μὴ σχολὴν ἔχῃ διαβαίνειν εἰς
3τὴν Εὐρώπην. ἔγραψε δὲ καὶ πρὸς Δημήτριον
τὸν Φαληρέα καὶ Διονύσιον τὸν φρουροῦντα τὴν
Μουνυχίαν, προστάττων εἴκοσι ναῦς εἰς Λῆμνον
ἐκπέμψαι. ἀποστειλάντων δ᾿ αὐτῶν εὐθὺς τὰ
σκάφη καὶ ναύαρχον ἐπ᾿ αὐτῶν Ἀριστοτέλη οὗτος
μὲν καταπλεύσας εἰς Λῆμνον καὶ μεταπεμψάμενος
Σέλευκον μετὰ στόλου τοὺς Λημνίους ἔπειθεν ἀποστῆναι
τῶν περὶ Ἀντίγονον· οὐ προσεχόντων δ᾿
αὐτῶν τήν τε χώραν ἐδῄωσε καὶ τὴν πόλιν περιχαρακώσας
4ἐπολιόρκει. μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα Σέλευκος
μὲν ἀπέπλευσεν εἰς Κῶν, Διοσκουρίδης δὲ κατασταθεὶς
ναύαρχος ὑπ᾿ Ἀντιγόνου, πυθόμενος τὸν
πλοῦν Σελεύκου, κατῆρεν εἰς Λῆμνον καὶ τὸν μὲν
Ἀριστοτέλη ἐξέβαλεν ἐκ τῆς νήσου, τῶν δὲ νεῶν
τὰς πλείους αὐτάνδρους εἷλε.
5Ἄσανδρος1 δὲ καὶ Πρεπέλαος ἀφηγοῦντο μὲν τῆς
ὑπὸ Κασάνδρου πεμφθείσης δυνάμεως εἰς τὴν
Καρίαν, πυθόμενοι δὲ Πτολεμαῖον τὸν Ἀντιγόνου
στρατηγὸν τὴν δύναμιν εἰς παραχειμασίαν διῃρηκέναι




1Ἄσανδρος Wesseling (cp. Book 18. 3. 1); Κάσανδρος.16Book XIX

all the cities in Caria that were allied to Ptolemy 314 b.c. and Seleucus, he sent an army into Caria, for he both wished to aid his allies and at the same time was eager to force Antigonus into distracting undertakings so that he might not have leisure for crossing over into Europe. He also wrote to Demetrius of Phalerum and to Dionysius, who commanded the garrison on Munychia, bidding them dispatch twenty ships to Lemnos. They at once sent the boats with Aristotle in command of them. After the latter had sailed to Lemnos and had summoned Seleucus and a fleet, he undertook to persuade the Lemnians to revolt from Antigonus; but as they did not assent, he ravaged their land, invested the city, and began a siege. Afterwards, however, Seleucus sailed off to Cos; and Dioscurides,1 who had been made admiral by Antigonus, on learning of Seleucus’ departure, swooped down upon Lemnos, drove Aristotle himself from the island, and captured most of his ships together with their crews.
Asander2 and Prepelaüs3 were in command of the expedition sent by Cassander into Caria; and, on being informed that Ptolemaeus,4 the general of Antigonus, had divided his army for wintering5
1A nephew of Antigonus (chap. 62. 9).2Cp. the eritical note. Asander became governor of
Caria in 323 b.c., continued in power in 321 b.c., and was
still satrap of Caria (Books 18. 3. 1, 39. 6; 19. 62. 2, 75. 1).
In the MSS. his name is often confused with that of Cassander,
as here.3Prepelaüs had been sent by Cassander to Polyperchon’s son, Alexander, in a successful effort to win him away from Antigonus (chap. 64. 3). We hear no more of him after the present campaign until 303 b.c., when he commanded the garrison at Corinth for Cassander (Book 20. 103. 1).4Ptolemaeus (or Polemaeus, cp. IG, 22. 1. 469), a nephew of Antigonus. had accompanied his uncle at the siege of Nora and had been accepted by Eumenes as a hostage (Plutarch, Eumenes, 10. 3). In 315 b.c. he conducted a successful campaign in Asia Minor against the generals of Cassander (chaps. 57. 4; 60. 2).5The winter of 314/13.17