Diodorus of Sicily

δὲ παραλαβὼν τὴν ἐπιμέλειαν τῆς πόλεως ἦρχεν
εἰρηνικῶς καὶ πρὸς τοὺς πολίτας φιλανθρώπως.
75. Μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα Νικάνορος καταπλεύσαντος
εἰς τὸν Πειραιᾶ κεκοσμημένῳ τῷ στόλῳ τοῖς ἀπὸ
τῆς νίκης ἀκροστολίοις τὸ μὲν πρῶτον ἀποδοχῆς
αὐτὸν ἠξίωσε μεγάλης ὁ Κάσανδρος διὰ τὰς εὐημερίας,
μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα ὁρῶν αὐτὸν ὄγκου πλήρη
καὶ πεφρονηματισμένον, ἔτι δὲ τὴν Μουνυχίαν διὰ
τῶν ἑαυτοῦ στρατιωτῶν φρουροῦντα, κρίνας αὐτὸν
ἀλλότρια φρονεῖν ἐδολοφόνησεν. ἐστράτευσε δὲ καὶ
εἰς Μακεδονίαν καὶ πολλοὺς ἔσχε τῶν ἐγχωρίων
2ἀφισταμένους πρὸς αὐτόν. ὁμοίως δὲ καὶ εἰς τὰς
Ἑλληνίδας πόλεις ἐνέπεσέν τις ὁρμὴ τῆς Κασάνδρου1
συμμαχίας. ὁ μὲν γὰρ Πολυπέρχων ἀργῶς
ἐδόκει καὶ ἀφρόνως προστατεῖν τῆς τε βασιλείας
καὶ τῶν συμμάχων, ὁ δὲ Κάσανδρος ἐπιεικῶς
προσφερόμενος πᾶσι καὶ κατὰ τὰς πράξεις
ἐνεργὸς
ὢν πολλοὺς εἶχεν αἱρετιστὰς τῆς αὑτοῦ δυναστείας.
3Ἐπεὶ δὲ κατὰ τὸν ἑπόμενον ἐνιαυτὸν Ἀγαθοκλῆς
ἐγένετο τύραννος τῶν Συρακοσίων, ταύτην μὲν τὴν
βύβλον αὐτοῦ περιγράψομεν κατὰ τὴν ἐν ἀρχῇ
πρόθεσιν, τῆς δ᾿ ἐχομένης τὴν ἀρχὴν ἀπὸ τῆς
Ἀγαθοκλέους τυραννίδος ποιησάμενοι διέξιμεν τὰς
οἰκείας τῇ γραφῇ πράξεις.
1Κασάνδρου Rhodoman, Dindorf: Ἀντιπάτρου MSS.,
Fischer.214Book XVIII

who, when he became overseer, ruled the city peacefully 317 b.c. and with goodwill toward the citizens.1
75. Afterwards Nicanor sailed into the Piraeus with his fleet ornamented with the beaks of the ships taken at his victory.2 At first Cassander regarded him with great approval because of his success, but later, when he saw that he was filled with arrogance and puffed up, and that he was, moreover, garrisoning Munychia with his own men, he decided that he was planning treachery and had him assassinated. He also made a campaign into Macedonia,3 where he found many of the inhabitants coming over to him. The Greek cities, too, felt an impulse to join the alliance of Cassander4; for Polyperchon seemed to lack both energy and wisdom in representing the kings and his allies, but Cassander, who treated all fairly and was active in carrying out his affairs, was winning many supporters of his leadership.
Since Agathocles became tyrant of Syracuse in the following year, we shall bring this book to an end at this point as was proposed at the beginning.5 We shall begin the next Book with the tyranny of Agathocles and include in it the events that deserve commemoration in our account.
1The peace was made in the spring of 317. Cp. Strabo, 9. 1. 20 (398); Timaeus, FHG, 1. 228; Marmor Parium for 317/16.2Cp. chap. 72.3Cp. Book 19. 35. 7.4But cp. the critical note.5Cp. chap. 1. 6.215