Diodorus of Sicily
5ἐβλασφημεῖτο. μετὰ δὲ ταῦτ᾿ ἐκ τῶν Ἀθηνῶν
τὴν ἐπιφανεστάτην τῶν ἑταιρῶν ὄνομα Πυθονίκην
μετεπέμψατο καὶ ζῶσάν τε αὐτὴν βασιλικαῖς δωρεαῖς
ἐτίμησε καὶ μεταλλάξασαν ἔθαψε πολυτελῶς
καὶ τάφον κατὰ τὴν Ἀττικὴν κατεσκεύασε
πολυδάπανον.
6Μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα ἄλλην ἑταίραν Ἀττικὴν ὄνομα
Γλυκέραν1 μεταπεμψάμενος ἐν ὑπερβαλλούσῃ τρυφῇ
καὶ πολυδαπάνῳ διαιτήματι διεξῆγεν· εἰς δὲ τὰ
παράλογα τῆς τύχης καταφυγὰς ποριζόμενος εὐεργέτει
τὸν τῶν Ἀθηναίων δῆμον.
Τοῦ δὲ Ἀλεξάνδρου μετὰ τὴν ἐξ Ἰνδῶν ἐπάνοδον
πολλοὺς τῶν σατραπῶν κατηγορηθέντας ἀνελόντος
φοβηθεὶς τὴν τιμωρίαν καὶ συσκευασάμενος ἀργυρίου
μὲν τάλαντα πεντακισχίλια, μισθοφόρους δὶ
ἀθροίσας ἑξακισχιλίους ἀπῆρεν ἐκ τῆς Ἀσίας κα᾿
7κατέπλευσεν εἰς τὴν Ἀττικήν. οὐδενὸς δὲ αὐτῷ
προσέχοντος τοὺς μὲν μισθοφόρους ἀπέλιπε περὶ
Ταίναρον τῆς Λακωνικῆς, αὐτὸς δὲ μέρος τῶν
χρημάτων ἀναλαβὼν ἱκέτης ἐγένετο τοῦ δήμου.
ἐξαιτούμενος δὲ ὑπ᾿ Ἀντιπάτρου καὶ Ὀλυμπιάδος
καὶ πολλὰ χρήματα διαδοὺς τοῖς ὑπὲρ αὐτοῦ δημηγοροῦσι
ῥήτορσι διέδρα καὶ κατῆρεν εἰς Ταίναρον
8πρὸς τοὺς μισθοφόρους. ἐκεῖθεν δὲ πλεύσας εἰς
Κρήτην ὑπὸ Θίβρωνος ἑνὸς τῶν φίλων ἐδολοφονήθη.
οἱ δ᾿ Ἀθηναῖοι τῶν τοῦ Ἁρπάλου χρημάτων λόγον



1ᾗ ὄνομα Γλυκέρα RX.436Book XVII

Later, moreover, he sent and brought from Athens 326/5 b.c. the most dazzling courtesan of the day, whose name was Pythonicê.1 As long as she lived he gave her gifts worthy of a queen, and when she died, he gave her a magnificent funeral and erected over her grave a costly monument of the Attic type.
After that, he brought out a second Attic courtesan named Glycera2 and kept her in exceeding luxury, providing her with a way of life which was fantastically expensive. At the same time, with an eye on the uncertainties of fortune, he established himself a place of refuge by benefactions to the Athenians.
When Alexander did come back from India and put to death many of the satraps who had been charged with neglect of duty, Harpalus became alarmed at the punishment which might befall him. He packed up five thousand talents of silver, enrolled six thousand mercenaries, departed from Asia and sailed across to Attica. When no one there accepted him, he shipped his troops off to Taenarum in Laconia, and keeping some of the money with him threw himself on the mercy of the Athenians. Antipater and Olympias demanded his surrender, and although he had distributed large sums of money to those persons who spoke in his favour, he was compelled to slip away and repaired to Taenarum and his mercenaries. Subsequently he sailed over to Crete, where he was murdered by Thibron, one of his Friends.3 At Athens, an accounting was undertaken of the funds of Harpalus, 


1She is mentioned by Athenaeus, 13. 586 c, who refers to
accounts of her by Theopompus and Cleitarchus.2Athenaeus, 13. 586 c. The considerable evidence on these two is collected by Berve, Alexanderreich, 2, nos. 231 and 676.3Curtius, 10. 2. 1–3; Book 18. 19. 2. The collaboration of Antipater and Olympias is odd, for they were ordinarily hostile to each other.437