Diodorus of Sicily
7διήνυσεν εἰς Ἐκβάτανα τῆς Μηδείας. ταύτης
δέ φασι διακοσίων μὲν καὶ πεντήκοντα σταδίων τὴν
περίμετρον ὑπάρχειν, βασίλεια δ᾿ ἔχειν τῆς ὅλης
Μηδείας καὶ θησαυροὺς πολλῶν χρημάτων.
Ἔνθα δὴ χρόνον τινὰ τὴν δύναμιν ἀναλαβὼν ἀγῶνάς
τε θυμελικοὺς ἐποίει καὶ πότους συνεχεῖς τῶν
8φίλων, ἐν οἷς Ἡφαιστίων ἀκαίροις μέθαις χρησάμενος1
καὶ περιπεσὼν ἀρρωστίᾳ τὸν βίον ἐξέλιπεν·
ὁ δὲ βασιλεὺς χαλεπῶς ἐνέγκας τὸ συμβὰν τὸ σῶμα
τοῦ τετελευτηκότος Περδίκκᾳ παρέδωκεν εἰς Βαβυλῶνα
κομίσαι, βουλόμενος ἐπιφανεστάτην αὐτοῦ
ποιήσασθαι τὴν ταφήν.
111. Ἅμα δὲ τούτοις πραττομένοις κατὰ τὴν
Ἑλλάδα ταραχαὶ συνίσταντο καὶ πραγμάτων καινῶν
κινήσεις, ἐξ ὧν ὁ Λαμιακὸς πόλεμος κληθεὶς
ἔλαβε τὴν ἀρχήν, ἐκ τοιαύτης τινὸς αἰτίας, τοῦ
βασιλέως προστάξαντος τοῖς σατράπαις ἅπασιν
ἀπομίσθους ποιῆσαι τοὺς μισθοφόρους καὶ τούτων
τὸ πρόσταγμα συντελεσάντων πολλοὶ τῆς στρατείας
ἀπολελυμένοι ξένοι διέτρεχον καθ᾿ ὅλην τὴν Ἀσίαν
πλανώμενοι καὶ τὰς ἀναγκαίας τροφὰς ἐκ τῶν
προνομῶν ποριζόμενοι. μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα πανταχόθεν
2διῆραν2 ἐπὶ Ταίναρον τῆς Λακωνικῆς. ὁμοίως δὲ
καὶ τῶν Περσικῶν σατραπῶν καὶ τῶν ἄλλων ἡγεμόνων
οἱ περιλειφθέντες χρήματά τε καὶ στρατιώτας
ἀθροίζοντες ἔπλεον ἐπὶ Ταίναρον καὶ κοινὴν δύναμιν
3ἤθροιζον. τὸ δὲ τελευταῖον Λεωσθένην τὸν Ἀθηναῖον,
ἄνδρα ψυχῆς λαμπρότητι διάφορον και
μάλιστ᾿ ἀντικείμενον τοῖς Ἀλεξάνδρου πράγμασιν,
εἵλοντο στρατηγὸν αὐτοκράτορα. οὗτος δὲ τῇ
1ἐν οἷς καιροῖς τῶν φίλων Ἡφαιστίων μέθαις χρησάμενος RX.2ἀπῆραν F.444Book XVII

day came to Ecbatana of Media. They say that its 325/4 b.c. circuit is two hundred and fifty stades. It contains the palace which is the capital of all Media and storehouses filled with great wealth.
Here he refreshed his army for some time and staged a dramatic festival, accompanied by constant drinking parties among his friends. In the course of these, Hephaestion drank very much, fell ill, and died. The king was intensely grieved at this and entrusted his body to Perdiccas to conduct to Babylon, where he proposed to celebrate a magnificent funeral for him.1
111. During this period Greece was the scene of disturbances and revolutionary movements from which arose the war called Lamian.2 The reason was this. The king had ordered all his satraps to dissolve their armies of mercenaries,3 and as they obeyed his instructions, all Asia was overrun with soldiers released from service and supporting themselves by plunder. Presently they began assembling from all directions at Taenarum in Laconia, whither came also such of the Persian satraps and generals as had survived, bringing their funds and their soldiers, so that they constituted a joint force. Ultimately they chose as supreme commander the Athenian Leosthenes, who was a man of unusually brilliant mind, and thoroughtly opposed to the cause of Alexander.






1Justin, 12. 12. 11; Plutarch, Alexander, 72; Arrian, 7. 14.2Justin, 13. 5. 1–8. The war did not actually break out until after Alexander’s death, and Diodorus gives an account of it later (Book 18. 8 ff.) which repeats some of this material.3Cp. chap. 106. 3.445