Diodorus of Sicily

Ἠλείους πρεσβεύσαντες ἠξίουν βοηθεῖν. ὁμοίως
δὲ καὶ πρὸς Ἀθηναίους περὶ συμμαχίας ἐπρέσβευον
καὶ παρὰ Δημοσθένους ὅπλων πλῆθος ἐν δωρεαῖς
6λαβόντες τοὺς ἀνόπλους καθώπλιζον. τῶν δ᾿ ἐπὶ
τὴν βοήθειαν παρακεκλημένων οἱ μὲν ἐν Πελοποννήσῳ
στρατιώτας ἐξέπεμψαν ἐπὶ τὸν Ἰσθμὸν καὶ
διατρίβοντες ἐκαραδόκουν, προσδοκίμου τοῦ βασιλέως
ὄντος. Ἀθηναῖοι δ᾿ ἐψηφίσαντο μὲν
βοηθεῖν τοῖς Θηβαίοις, πεισθέντες ὑπὸ Δημοσθένους,
οὐ μέντοι γε τὴν δύναμιν ἐξέπεμψαν, καραδοκοῦντες
7τὴν ῥοπὴν τοῦ πολέμου. ὁ δὲ τῆς ἐν τῇ
Καδμείᾳ φρουρᾶς ἡγούμενος Φιλώτας ὁρῶν τοὺς
Θηβαίους μεγάλας παρασκευὰς ποιουμένους πρὸς
τὴν πολιορκίαν καὶ τὰ τείχη φιλοτιμότερον κατεσκεύασεν
καὶ βελῶν παντοδαπῶν πλῆθος ἡτοιμάζετο.
9. Ἐπεὶ δ᾿ ὁ βασιλεὺς ἀνελπίστως ἐκ τῆς
Θρᾴκης ἧκε μετὰ πάσης τῆς δυνάμεως, αἱ μὲν
συμμαχία, τοῖς Θηβαίοις δισταζομένην εἶχον τὴν
παρουσίαν, ἡ δὲ τῶν πολεμίων δύναμις ὁμολογουμένην
καὶ φανερὰν ἐποιεῖτο τὴν ὑπεροχήν. τότε δὲ
συνεδρεύσαντες οἱ ἡγεμόνες προεβουλεύσαντο περὶ
τοῦ πολέμου καὶ πᾶσιν ἔδοξεν ὑπὲρ τῆς αὐτονομίας
διαγωνίζεσθαι. τοῦ δὲ πλήθους ἐπικυρώσαντος
τὴν γνώμην ἅπαντες μετὰ πολλῆς προθυμίας εἶχον
ἑτοίμως διακινδυνεύειν.
2Ὁ δὲ βασιλεὺς τὸ μὲν πρῶτον ἡσυχίαν ἦγε,
διδοὺς μετανοίας χρόνον εἰς τὸ βουλεύσασθαι καὶ
νομίζων μὴ τολμήσειν μίαν πόλιν πρὸς τηλικαύτην
3δύναμιν παρατάξασθαι. εἶχε γὰρ ὁ Ἀλέξανδρος
κατὰ τοῦτον τὸν καιρὸν πεζοὺς μὲν πλείους τῶν
τρισμυρίων, ἱππεῖς δ᾿ οὐκ ἐλάττους τρισχιλίων,
140Book XVII

Argives, and Eleians for help. They appealed for 335/4 b.c. support from the Athenians also, and when they received from Demosthenes a free gift of weapons, they equipped all of their citizens who lacked heavy armour. Of those who were asked for reinforcements, however, the Peloponnesians sent soldiers as far as the Isthmus and waited to see what would happen, since the king’s arrival was now expected, and the Athenians, under the influence of Demosthenes, voted to support the Thebans, but failed to send out their forces, waiting to see how the war would go.1 In the Cadmeia, the garrison commander Philotas observed the Thebans making great preparations for the siege, strengthened his walls as well as he could, and made ready a stock of missiles of all sorts.
9. So when the king appeared suddenly out of Thrace with all his army, the alliances of the Thebans had furnished them with only a hesitant support while the power of their opponents possessed an obvious and evident superiority. Nevertheless their leaders assembled in council and prepared a resolution about the war; they were unanimous in deciding to fight it out for their political freedom. The measure was passed by the assembly, and with great enthusiasm all were ready to see the thing through.
At first the king made no move, giving the Thebans time to think things over and supposing that a single city would never dare to match forces with such an army. For at that time Alexander had more than thirty thousand infantry and no less than three thousand cavalry, all battle-seasoned veterans

1Justin, 11. 3. 3–5; Plutarch, Demosthenes, 23. 2.141