Diodorus of Sicily

πολεμίων, προσλαβόμενος ἀπάτην καὶ τόπον, κατὰ
κράτος ἥττησεν, ὥστ᾿ ἀληθὲς εἶναι τὸ λεγόμενον
ὅτι πολλὰ τὰ κενὰ τοῦ πολέμου.
2Μετὰ δὲ τὴν τροπὴν οἱ μὲν Καρχηδόνιοι ἄλλοι1
κατ᾿ ἄλλους τόπους διασπαρέντες μόγις εἰς τὴν
ὑστεραίαν ἠθροίσθησαν, οἱ δὲ Συρακόσιοι μετὰ
πολλῶν λαφύρων ἐπανελθόντες εἰς τὴν πόλιν τὸν
Ἀμίλκαν παρέδοσαν τοῖς βουλομένοις λαμβάνειν
παρ᾿ αὐτοῦ τιμωρίαν· ἀνεμιμνήσκοντο δὲ καὶ τῆς
τοῦ μάντεως φωνῆς, ὃς ἔφησεν αὐτὸν εἰς τὴν ὑστεραίαν
εἰς Συρακούσσας δειπνήσειν, τοῦ δαιμονίου
παραγαγόντος τἀληθές. τὸν δ᾿ οὖν Ἀμίλκαν οἱ
τῶν ἀπολωλότων συγγενεῖς δεδεμένον ἀγαγόντες
διὰ τῆς πόλεως καὶ δειναῖς αἰκίαις κατ᾿ αὐτοῦ
χρησάμενοι μετὰ τῆς ἐσχάτης ὕβρεως ἀνεῖλον. εἶθ᾿
οἱ μὲν τῆς πόλεως προεστηκότες ἀποκόψαντες
αὐτοῦ τὴν κεφαλὴν ἀπέστειλαν τοὺς κομιοῦντας
εἰς τὴν Λιβύην πρὸς Ἀγαθοκλέα καὶ περὶ τῶν
γεγονότων εὐτυχημάτων ἀπαγγελοῦντας.
31. Ἡ δὲ τῶν Καρχηδονίων στρατιὰ μετὰ τὴν
γενομένην συμφορὰν μαθοῦσα τὴν αἰτίαν τῶν ἀτυχημάτων
μόγις ἀπηλλάγη τῶν φόβων. ἀναρχίας
δ᾿ οὔσης διέστησαν οἱ βάρβαροι πρὸς τοὺς Ἕλληνας.
2οἱ μὲν οὖν φυγάδες μετὰ τῶν λοιπῶν Ἑλλήνων
Δεινοκράτην στρατηγὸν ἀπέδειξαν, οἱ δὲ Καρχηδόνιοι
τοῖς δευτερεύουσι2 μετὰ τὸν στρατηγὸν τιμῇ
τὴν ἡγεμονίαν ἐνεχείρισαν.
Καθ᾿ ὃν δὴ χρόνον Ἀκραγαντῖνοι θεωροῦντες τὴν
ἐν Σικελίᾳ κατάστασιν εὐφυεστάτην οὖσαν πρὸς
ἐπίθεσιν ἠμφισβήτησαν τῆς κατὰ τὴν νῆσον ἡγεμονίας·


1ἄλλοι Hertlein: ἄλλος.2τῇ after δευτερεύουσι omitted by Madvig.222Book XX

in battle by a small number of the enemy who enlisted 309 b.c. deception and terrain on their side; so that the saying is true that many are the empty alarms of war.1
After the rout the Carthaginians, scattered some here some there, were with difficulty gathered on the next day; and the Syracusans, returning to the city with much plunder, delivered Hamilcar over to those who wished to take vengeance upon him. They recalled also the word of the soothsayer who had said that Hamilcar would enter Syracuse and dine there on the next day, the divinity having presented the truth in disguise. The kinsmen of the slain, after leading Hamilcar through the city in bonds and inflicting terrible tortures upon him, put him to death with the utmost indignities. Then the rulers of the city cut off his head and dispatched men to carry it into Libya to Agathocles and report to him the successes that had been gained.
31. When the Carthaginian army after the disaster had taken place learned the cause of its misfortune, it was with difficulty relieved from its fears. There being no established commander, the barbarians separated from the Greeks. Then the exiles along with the other Greeks elected Deinocrates general, and the Carthaginians gave the command to those who had been second in rank to Hamilcar.
About this time the Acragantines, seeing that the situation in Sicily was most favourable for an attempt, made a bid for the leadership of the whole island;

1Cp. Book 17. 86, 1; 20. 67. 4; Thucydides, 3. 30; Aristotle, Nicomachean Ethics, 1116 b 7; Cicero, Letters to Atticus, 5. 20. 3. In most of these passages the MSS. are divided between κενά (empty) and καινά (strange); and Tyrrell and Purser on the last passage suggest κοινά (common to all).223