Diodorus of Sicily

κατέλαβε προκατειλημμένον τοὺς ὑπερδεξίους τόπους
καὶ στρατιώτας ἔχοντα πλείους τῶν δισμυρίων,
ἀντεστρατοπέδευσε μὲν τοῖς πολεμίοις, προσλαβόμενος
δὲ συμμάχους παρὰ τῶν Θετταλῶν συνῆψε
5μάχην τοῖς ἐναντίοις. τοῦ δὲ Ἀλεξάνδρου διὰ τὰς
ὑπεροχὰς τῶν τόπων πλεονεκτοῦντος, ὁ Πελοπίδας
σπεύδων διὰ τῆς ἰδίας ἀνδρείας κρῖναι τὴν μάχην
ἐπ᾿ αὐτὸν ὥρμησε τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον. τοῦ δὲ δυνάστου
μετὰ τῶν ἐπιλέκτων ὑποστάντος, ἐγένετο
μάχη καρτερά, καθ᾿ ἣν ὁ Πελοπίδας ἀριστεύων
πάντα τὸν περὶ αὐτὸν τόπον νεκρῶν κατέστρωσε,
τέλος δ᾿ ἐπιθεὶς τῷ κινδύνῳ καὶ τοὺς πολεμίους
τρεψάμενος τὴν μὲν νίκην περιεποιήσατο, τὸν δὲ
αὑτοῦ βίον ἀπέβαλε,1 πολλοῖς περιπεσὼν τραύμασι
6καὶ τὸ ζῆν ἡρωικῶς προέμενος. ὁ δ᾿ Ἀλέξανδρος
δευτέρᾳ μάχῃ λειφθεὶς2 καὶ τοῖς ὅλοις συντριβείς,
ἠναγκάσθη καθ᾿ ὁμολογίαν τοῖς μὲν Θετταλοῖς
τὰς καταπεπολεμημένας πόλεις ἀποδοῦναι, Μάγνητας
δὲ καὶ τοὺς Φθιώτας Ἀχαιοὺς παραδοῦναι
Βοιωτοῖς, καὶ τὸ λοιπὸν Φερῶν μόνων3 ἄρχοντα
σύμμαχον εἶναι Βοιωτοῖς.
81. Οἱ δὲ Θηβαῖοι περιβόητον νίκην ἀπενηνεγμένοι,
πρὸς ἅπαντας ἔφασαν ἑαυτοὺς ἡττᾶσθαι4
διὰ τὴν Πελοπίδου τελευτήν· ἀξιόλογον γὰρ ἀπολωλεκότες
ἄνδρα, κατὰ λόγον ἔκρινον τὴν νίκην
ἥττονα ὑπάρχειν τῆς Πελοπίδου δόξης. πολλὰς
γὰρ καὶ μεγάλας χρείας παρέσχετο τῇ πατρίδι,
πλεῖστον δὲ συνεβάλετο πρὸς τὴν τῶν Θηβαίων



1ἀπέβαλε: ἀπέβαλεν P, ἀνέλιπε cet.2So Dindorf, Bekker, Vogel: ληφθεὶς.3So A, Vogel (cp. chap. 8. 2): μόνον cet.4ἡττᾶσθαι] ἡττῆσθαι Schäfer, edd.174Book XV

forestalled him by occupying the commanding positions 364/3 b.c. and had more than twenty thousand1 men, he encamped opposite the enemy, and, strengthening his forces with allied troops from among the Thessalians, joined battle with his opponents. Although Alexander had the advantage by reason of his superior position, Pelopidas, eager to settle the battle by his own courage, charged Alexander himself. The ruler with a corps of picked men resisted, and a stubborn battle ensued, in the course of which Pelopidas, performing mighty deeds of valour, strewed all the ground about him with dead men, and though he brought the contest to a close, routed the enemy and won the victory, he yet lost his own life, suffering many wounds and heroically forfeiting his life. But Alexander, after being worsted in a second battle and utterly crushed, was compelled by agreement to restore to the Thessalians the cities he had reduced, to surrender the Magnesians and the Phthiotian Achaeans to the Boeotians, and for the future to be the ruler over Pherae alone as an ally of the Boeotians.
81. Although the Thebans had won a famous victory, they declared to the world that they were the losers because of the death of Pelopidas; for having lost such a remarkable man, they rightly judged the victory of less account than the fame of Pelopidas. Indeed he had done many great services to his country and had contributed more than any other man to the



1Probably an exaggeration. The victory was not so important, otherwise the Thebans would not have found it necessary to send a large army into Thessaly shortly afterward. For this battle of Cynoscephalae see Gary, Cambridge Ancient History, 6. 86-87.175