Diodorus of Sicily

διαφερόντων ἐνίκησεν ὁ Φίλιππος. τῶν δὲ περὶ
τὸν Ὀνόμαρχον καταφυγόντων εἰς τὴν θάλατταν
καὶ τυχικῶς παραπλέοντος τοῦ Ἀθηναίου Χάρητος
μετὰ πολλῶν τριήρων πολὺς ἐγένετο φόνος τῶν
Φωκέων· οἱ γὰρ φεύγοντες ῥίψαντες τὰς πανοπλίας
διενήχοντο πρὸς τὰς τριήρεις, ἐν οἷς ἦν καὶ αὐτὸς
6Ὀνόμαρχος. τέλος δὲ τῶν Φωκέων καὶ μισθοφόρων
ἀνῃρέθησαν μὲν ὑπὲρ τοὺς ἑξακισχιλίους, ἐν
οἷς ἦν καὶ αὐτὸς ὁ στρατηγός,1 ἥλωσαν δὲ οὐκ
ἐλάττους τῶν τρισχιλίων. ὁ δὲ Φίλιππος τὸν μὲν
Ὀνόμαρχον ἐκρέμασε, τοὺς δ᾿ ἄλλους ὡς ἱεροσύλους
κατεπόντισεν.
36. Μετὰ δὲ τὴν Ὀνομάρχου τελευτὴν διεδέξατο
τὴν Φωκέων ἡγεμονίαν ὁ ἀδελφὸς Φάυλλος. οὗτος
δὲ τὴν γεγενημένην συμφορὰν διορθούμενος μισθοφόρων
τε πλῆθος ἤθροιζε, διπλασιάσας τοὺς εἰωθότας
μισθούς, καὶ παρὰ τῶν συμμάχων βοήθειαν
μετεπέμψατο· κατεσκευάζετο δὲ καὶ ὅπλων πλῆθος
καὶ νόμισμα κατέκοψε χρυσοῦν τε καὶ ἀργυροῦν.
2Ὑπὸ δὲ τοὺς αὐτοὺς καιροὺς Μαύσωλος ὁ Καρίας
δυνάστης ἐτελεύτησεν ἄρξας ἔτη εἴκοσι τέσσαρα,
τὴν δὲ ἀρχὴν διαδεξαμένη Ἀρτεμισία ἡ ἀδελφὴ
3καὶ γυνὴ ἐδυνάστευσεν ἔτη δύο. Κλέαρχος δ᾿ ὁ
Ἡρακλείας τύραννος Διονυσίων ὄντων ἐπὶ θέαν
βαδίζων ἀνῃρέθη, ἄρξας ἔτη δεκαδύο2· τὴν δὲ ἀρχὴν




1Madvig places ἐν οἷς ἦν καὶ αὐτὸς ὁ στρατηγός after τρισχιλίων.2So PX; δώδεκα RV, δυοκαίδεκα FM.336Book XVI

superior in numbers and valour, Philip won. Because 353/2 b.c. Onomarchus had fled toward the sea and Chares the Athenian was by chance sailing by1 with many triremes, a great slaughter of the Phocians took place, for the men in their effort to escape would strip off their armour and try to swim out to the triremes, and among them was Onomarchus. Finally more than six thousand of the Phocians and mercenaries were slain, and among them the general himself; and no less than three thousand were taken captives. Philip hanged Onomarchus2; the rest he threw into the sea as temple-robbers.
36. After the death of Onomarchus his brother Phaÿllus succeeded to the command of the Phocians. In an attempt to retrieve the disaster, he began to gather a multitude of mercenaries, offering double the customary pay, and summoned help from his allies. He got ready also a large supply of arms and coined gold and silver money.
About the same time Mausolus, the tyrant of Caria,3 died after ruling twenty-four years, and Artemisia, his sister and wife, succeeded to the throne and reigned for two years. Clearchus, the tyrant of Heracleia,4 was slain during the festival of Dionysus as he went to witness the spectacle, after ruling twelve years, and



1Beloch thinks it highly improbable that Chares happened
to be sailing by in the Gulf of Pagasae where this action is
placed. He thinks that the Athenians sent Chares to prevent
Philip from taking Pagasae but that Chares arrived too late
(Griechische Geschichte2, 3. 1. 476 and note 3). See chap.
34. 3.2Contrary to chap. 61. 2 and Pausanias, 10. 2. 5, who states that he was shot down (or “drowned,” if we read κατεποντίσθη) by his own men. If Onomarchus is the
“general” referred to, as he seems to be, then Philip must have crucified his dead body. For still another account of Onomarchus’ death (by drowning as he was being carried out to sea on a frightened horse) see Philo Judaeus in Eusebius, Praeparatio Evangelica, 8. 14. 33.3See chap. 7. 3.4See Book 15. 81. 5. On his death see Justin, 16. 5. 12 to end and Memnon (FHG, 3), 1. 4.337