Diodorus of Sicily
5ἀφῆκεν. ἑξῆς δὲ τῇ τῶν Ὀρχομενίων πόλει
προσβολὰς ποιησάμενος καὶ παρεισαχθεὶς ὑπὸ τῶν
ἀλλοτρίως ἐχόντων πρὸς Ἀλέξανδρον τῆς μὲν
πόλεως φυλακὴν ἀπέλιπε, τῶν δὲ φίλων τῶν Ἀλεξάνδρου
καταφυγόντων εἰς τὸ τῆς Ἀρτέμιδος ἱερὸν
ἔδωκε τὴν ἐξουσίαν τοῖς πολίταις ὃ βούλοιντο
πρᾶξαι. οἱ μὲν οὖν Ὀρχομένιοι τοὺς ἱκέτας βιαίως
ἀναστήσαντες ἅπαντας ἀνεῖλον παρὰ τὰ κοινὰ τῶν
Ἑλλήνων νόμιμα.
64. Ὁ δὲ Κάσανδρος παρελθὼν εἰς τὴν Μεσσηνίαν
καὶ καταλαβὼν φρουρουμένην ὑπὸ Πολυπέρχοντος
τὴν πόλιν τὸ μὲν πολιορκεῖν αὐτὴν ἐπὶ
τοῦ παρόντος ἀπέγνω, παρελθὼν δ᾿ εἰς Ἀρκαδίαν
Δάμιν μὲν ἐπιμελητὴν τῆς Μεγάλης1 πόλεως ἀπέλιπεν,
αὐτὸς δὲ παρελθὼν εἰς τὴν Ἀργείαν καὶ
θεὶς τὸν τῶν Νεμέων ἀγῶνα τὴν εἰς Μακεδονίαν
2ἐπάνοδον ἐποιήσατο. τούτου δὲ χωρισθέντος
Ἀλέξανδρος ἐπιὼν τὰς ἐν Πελοποννήσῳ πόλεις
μετ᾿ Ἀριστοδήμου τὰς μὲν ὑπὸ Κασάνδρου καθεσταμένας
φρουρὰς ἐκβαλεῖν ἐπειρᾶτο, ταῖς δὲ
3πόλεσιν ἀποκαθιστᾶν τὴν ἐλευθερίαν. ἃ δὴ πυθόμενος
ὁ Κάσανδρος ἔπεμψε πρὸς αὐτὸν Πρεπέλαον,2
ἀξιῶν Ἀντιγόνου μὲν ἀποστῆναι, συμμαχεῖν δ᾿
αὐτῷ γνησίως. τοῦτο δ᾿ αὐτοῦ πράξαντος στρατηγίαν
δώσειν ἔφησε πάσης Πελοποννήσου καὶ
δυνάμεως ἀποδείξειν κύριον, ἔτι δὲ κατ᾿ ἀξίαν
4τιμήσειν. ὁ δ᾿ Ἀλέξανδρος ὁρῶν αὑτῷ συγχωρούμενον
οὗ χάριν ἐξ ἀρχῆς ἐπολέμει πρὸς Κάσανδρον,
συμμαχίαν ποιησάμενος ἀπεδείχθη στρατηγὸς
Πελοποννήσου.
Ἅμα δὲ τούτοις πραττομένοις Πολύκλειτος ὁ

1Μεγάλης added by Niese.2Πρεπέλαον Rhodoman, cp. chap. 68. 5: Πρέπελλον.406Book XIX

placed in them by Alexander. Next he attacked the 315 b.c. city of Orchomenus.1 Being admitted by the faction hostile to Alexander, he installed a garrison in the city, and when the friends of Alexander took refuge in the shrine of Artemis, he permitted the citizens to treat them as they wished. The people of Orchomenus, accordingly, dragged the suppliants away by force and slew them all, contrary to the universal custom of the Greeks.
64. Cassander passed on into Messenia, but finding the city2 garrisoned by Polyperchon, he temporarily relinquished his plan of laying siege to it. Passing over into Arcadia, he left Damis as governor of Megalopolis, while he himself, after going into Argolis and presiding at the Nemean Games,3 returned to Macedonia. After he had gone, Alexander visited the cities of the Peloponnesus accompanied by Aristodemus and tried to drive out the garrisons that had been established by Cassander and to restore freedom to the cities. As soon as Cassander learned this, he sent Prepelaüs to Alexander, asking him to desert Antigonus and conclude with himself an alliance in due form. He said that if he did this, he would give him the command of all the Peloponnesus, make him general of an army, and honour him according to his deserts. Alexander, since he saw that the thing for which he had originally made war against Cassander was being granted to him, made the alliance and was appointed general of the Peloponnesus.
While all this was taking place, Polycleitus, who





1In Arcadia.2i.e. Messenê on the west side of Mount Ithomê. Cp. chap. 54. 3.3In the summer of 315.407