Diodorus of Sicily

κατὰ γένος διαδεξομένου τὴν ἀρχήν, προχειρισάμενος
ἕνα τῶν φίλων Δαρεῖον ὄνομα τούτῳ συγκατεσκεύασε
τὴν βασιλείαν. οὗτος δ᾿ ἦν υἱὸς μὲν
Ἀρσάνου τοῦ Ὀστάνου, ὃς ἦν ἀδελφὸς Ἀρταξέρξου
6τοῦ Περσῶν βασιλεύσαντος. ἴδιον δέ τι συνέβη
περὶ τὸν Βαγώαν γενέσθαι καὶ μνήμης ἄξιον· χρώμενος
γὰρ τῇ συνήθει μιαιφονίᾳ τὸν Δαρεῖον ἐπεβάλετο
διὰ φαρμακείας ἀνελεῖν· μηνυθείσης δὲ
τῆς ἐπιβουλῆς ὁ βασιλεὺς ὡς ἐπί τινι φιλανθρωπία
προσκαλεσάμενος τὸν Βαγώαν καὶ δοὺς τὸ ποτήριον
ἠνάγκασε πιεῖν τὸ φάρμακον.
6. Ἠξιώθη δὲ τῆς βασιλείας ὁ Δαρεῖος δοκῶν
πολὺ προέχειν ἀνδρείᾳ Περσῶν· Ἀρταξέρξου γάρ
ποτε τοῦ βασιλέως πολεμοῦντος πρὸς Καδουσίους
καί τινος τῶν Καδουσίων ἐπ᾿ ἀλκῇ καὶ ἀνδρείᾳ
διαβεβοημένου προκαλεσαμένου τὸν βουλόμενον
Περσῶν μονομαχῆσαι ἄλλος μὲν οὐδεὶς ἐτόλμησεν
ὑπακοῦσαι, μόνος δὲ Δαρεῖος ὑποστὰς τὸν κίνδυνον
τὸν προκαλεσάμενον ἀπέκτεινεν καὶ ὑπὸ μὲν τοῦ
βασιλέως μεγάλαις ἐτιμήθη δωρεαῖς, παρὰ δὲ τοῖς
Πέρσαις τὸ πρωτεῖον τῆς ἀνδρείας ἀπηνέγκατο.
2διὰ ταύτην δὴ τὴν ἀνδραγαθίαν ἄξιος τῆς βασιλείας
νομισθεὶς παρέλαβε τὴν ἀρχὴν περὶ τούτους τοὺς
χρόνους, ἐν οἷς Φιλίππου τελευτήσαντος διεδέξατο
τὴν βασιλείαν Ἀλέξανδρος.
3Τοιοῦτον δ᾿ ἄνδρα τῆς τύχης παραδούσης ἀντίπαλον
τῇ κατ᾿ Ἀλέξανδρον ἀρετῇ συνέβη πολλοὺς
καὶ μεγάλους ἀγῶνας συστῆναι περὶ τοῦ πρωτείου.
ἀλλὰ περὶ μὲν τούτων αἱ κατὰ μέρος πράξεις
ἕκαστα δηλώσουσιν· ἡμεῖς δ᾿ ἐπὶ τὸ συνεχὲς τῆς
ἱστορίας τρεψόμεθα.
132Book XVII

descent to claim the throne. Instead Bagoas selected 335/4 b.c. a certain Dareius, a member of the court circle, and secured the throne for him. He was the son of Arsanes, and grandson of that Ostanes who was a brother of Artaxerxes, who had been king.1 As to Bagoas, an odd thing happened to him and one to point a moral. Pursuing his habitual savagery he attempted to remove Dareius by poison. The plan leaked out, however, and the king, calling upon Bagoas, as it were, to drink to him a toast and handing him his own cup compelled him to take his own medicine.
6. Dareius’s selection for the throne was based on his known bravery, in which quality he far surpassed the other Persians. Once when King Artaxerxes2 was campaigning against the Cadusians, one of them with a wide reputation for strength and courage challenged a volunteer among the Persians to fight in single combat with him. No other dared accept, but Dareius alone entered the contest and slew the challenger, being honoured in consequence by the king with rich gifts, while among the Persians he was conceded the first place in prowess. It was because of this prowess that he was thought worthy to take over the kingship. This happened about the same time as Philip died and Alexander became king.
Such was the man whom fate had selected to be the antagonist of Alexander’s genius, and they opposed one another in many and great struggles for the supremacy. These our detailed narrative will describe in each case. And we may now proceed with our story.
1Artaxerxes II, 405–359 b.c.2Artaxerxes III (Ochus), 359–338 b.c.133