Diodorus of Sicily

μᾶλλον ηὐξήθη προσόδοις τε δημοσίαις καὶ τοῖς
τῶν ἰδιωτῶν πλούτοις, καὶ τὸ σύνολον ἐνάμιλλος
ἐγένετο ταῖς πρωτευούσαις πόλεσιν.
3Ἅμα δὲ τούτοις πραττομένοις ὁ τῶν Περσῶν
βασιλεὺς ἀποστείλας πρέσβεις ἔπεισε τοὺς Ἕλληνας
τοὺς μὲν πολέμους καταλύσασθαι καὶ κοινὴν
εἰρήνην συνθέσθαι πρὸς ἀλλήλους. διόπερ ὅ τε
Λακωνικὸς καὶ Βοιωτικὸς κληθεὶς πόλεμος κατελύθη,
πλείω1 μείνας ἐτῶν πέντε, τὴν ἀρχὴν λαβὼν
ἀπὸ τῶν Λευκτρικῶν.
4Ὑπῆρξαν δὲ κατὰ τούτους τοὺς χρόνους ἄνδρες
κατὰ παιδείαν ἄξιοι μνήμης Ἰσοκράτης τε ὁ ῥήτωρ
καὶ οἱ τούτου γενόμενοι μαθηταὶ καὶ Ἀριστοτέλης
ὁ φιλόσοφος, ἔτι δὲ Ἀναξιμένης ὁ Λαμψακηνὸς
καὶ Πλάτων ὁ Ἀθηναῖος, ἔτι δὲ τῶν Πυθαγορικῶν
φιλοσόφων οἱ τελευταῖοι, Ξενοφῶν τε ὁ τὰς
ἱστορίας συγγραψάμενος ἐσχατογήρως ὤν· μέμνηται
γὰρ τῆς Ἐπαμεινώνδου τελευτῆς μετ᾿ ὀλίγον
χρόνον γεγενημένης· Ἀρίστιππός τε καὶ Ἀντισθένης,
πρὸς δὲ τούτοις Αἰσχίνης ὁ Σφήττιος ὁ
Σωκρατικός.
77. Ἐπ᾿ ἄρχοντος δ᾿ Ἀθήνησι Χίωνος ἐν Ῥώμῃ
ἀντὶ τῶν ὑπάτων χιλίαρχοι κατεστάθησαν Κόιντος
Σερουίλιος2 καὶ Γάιος Οὐετόριος καὶ Αὖλος Κορνήλιος,
πρὸς δὲ τούτοις Μάρκος Κορνήλιος καὶ Μάρκος
Φάβιος.3 ἐπὶ δὲ τούτων εἰρήνης οὔσης κατὰ
πᾶσαν τὴν Ἑλλάδα, πάλιν ἀρχαὶ πολέμων συνέστησάν
τισι τῶν πόλεων καὶ νεωτέρων πραγμάτων



1πλείω Bekker, Vogel] πλείων F, πλέον Dindorf.2So Rhodoman (cp. Livy, 6. 36. 6): Σερούιος.3So Rhodoman: Φάνιος.162Book XV

public revenues and private wealth constantly increased, 366/5 b.c. so much so that it became in a word a rival of the leading cities of Greece.
While these things were going on, the Persian King1 sent envoys and succeeded in persuading the Greeks to settle their wars and make a general peace with one another. Accordingly the war called Sparto-Boeotian was settled after lasting more than five years counting from the campaign of Leuctra.
In this period there were men memorable for their culture,2 Isocrates the orator and those who became his pupils, Aristotle the philosopher, and besides these Anaximenes of Lampsacus, Plato of Athens, the last of the Pythagorean philosophers, and Xenophon who composed his histories in extreme old age, for he mentions the death of Epameinondas which occurred a few years later.3 Then there were Aristippus and Antisthenes, and Aeschines of Sphettus, the Socratic.
77. When Chion was archon at Athens, at Rome 365/4 b.c. military tribunes with consular power were elected, Quintus Servilius, Gaius Veturius, Aulus Cornelius, Marcus Cornelius, and Marcus Fabius. During their term of office, though peace prevailed throughout Greece, clouds of war again gathered in certain cities



1See Xenophon, Hell. 7. 1. 39. For previous embassies from Artaxerxes urging peace see chaps. 38. 1, 50. 4, 70. 2. This congress which met at Thebes seems to have been as unsuccessful as the previous ones.2“Paideia” is translated “culture” by Werner Jaeger in his three-volume work of that title (1. xvi). One may well be surprised at a list of names which includes the orator Anaximenes of Lampsacus and omits Demosthenes. The last of the Pythagoreans include Archytas, Timaeus, Xeno-philus, Phanton, Echecrates, Diodes, and Polymnastus (Diog. Laert. 8. 46, 79).3i.e. later than the year 366/5.163