Diodorus of Sicily
4παρεισπεσεῖν εἰς τὴν πόλιν. τούτου δὲ ταχὺ τὸ
προσταχθὲν ποιήσαντος οἱ μὲν Μακεδόνες διὰ τῆς
πυλίδος παρεισέπεσον εἰς τὴν πόλιν, οἱ δὲ Θηβαῖοι
καταπεπονηκότες μὲν τὴν πρώτην φάλαγγα τῶν
Μακεδόνων, ἀντιταχθέντες δ᾿ εὐρώστως τῇ δευτέρᾳ
εὐέλπιδες ἦσαν περὶ τῆς νίκης· ὡς δὲ κατενόησαν
μέρος τῆς πόλεως κατειλημμένον, εὐθὺς ἀνεχώρησαν
5ἐντὸς τῶν τειχῶν. ἅμα δὲ τούτοις πραττομένοις
οἱ μὲν τῶν Θηβαίων ἱππεῖς ὁμοίως τοῖς
πεζοῖς συνέτρεχον εἰς τὴν πόλιν καὶ πολλοὺς μὲν
τῶν ἰδίων συμπατοῦντες διέφθειρον, αὐτοὶ δὲ
τεταραγμένως εἰσίππευον εἰς τὴν πόλιν, ἐν δὲ ταῖς
διεξόδοις καὶ τάφροις τοῖς οἰκείοις ὅπλοις περιπίπτοντες
ἐτελεύτων. οἱ δὲ τὴν Καδμείαν φρουροῦντες
ἐκχυθέντες ἐκ τῆς ἀκροπόλεως ἀπήντων
τοῖς Θηβαίοις καὶ τεταραγμένοις ἐπιπεσόντες πολὺν
ἐποίουν φόνον.
13. Τῆς δὲ πόλεως τοῦτον τὸν τρόπον καταλαμβανομένης
πολλαὶ καὶ ποικίλαι περιστάσεις ἐντὸς
τῶν τειχῶν ἐγίνοντο. οἱ μὲν γὰρ Μακεδόνες διὰ
τὴν ὑπερηφανίαν τοῦ κηρύγματος πικρότερον ἢ
πολεμικώτερον προσεφέροντο τοῖς Θηβαίοις καὶ
μετὰ πολλῆς ἀπειλῆς ἐπιφερόμενοι τοῖς ἠτυχηκόσιν
ἀφειδῶς ἀνῄρουν πάντας τοὺς περιτυγχάνοντας.
2οἱ δὲ Θηβαῖοι τὸ φιλελεύθερον τῆς ψυχῆς διαφυλάττοντες
τοσοῦτον ἀπεῖχον τοῦ φιλοζωεῖν ὥστ᾿
ἐν ταῖς ἀπαντήσεσι συμπλέκεσθαι καὶ τὰς παρὰ
τῶν πολεμίων ἐπισπᾶσθαι πληγάς· ἑαλωκυίας γὰρ
τῆς πόλεως οὐδεὶς Θηβαίων ἑωράθη δεηθεὶς τῶν
Μακεδόνων φείσασθαι τοῦ ζῆν οὐδὲ προσέπιπτον


152Book XVII

into the city.1 He quickly carried out the order and 335/4 b.c. the Macedonians slipped through the gate into the city, while the Thebans, having worn down the first assault wave of the Macedonians, stoutly faced the second and still had high hopes of victory. When they knew that a section of the city had been taken, however, they began immediately to withdraw within the walls, but in this operation their cavalry galloped along with the infantry into the city and trampled upon and killed many of their own men; they themselves rode into the city in disorder and, encountering a maze of narrow alleys and trenches, lost their footing and fell and were killed by their own weapons. At the same time the Macedonian garrison in the Cadmeia burst out of the citadel, engaged the Thebans, and attacking them in their confusion made a great slaughter among them.2
13. So while the city was being taken, many and varied were the scenes of destruction within the walls. Enraged by the arrogance of the Theban proclamation, the Macedonians pressed upon them more furiously than is usual in war, and shrieking curses flung themselves on the wretched people, slaying all whom they met without sparing any. The Thebans, for their part, clinging desperately to their forlorn hope of victory, counted their lives as nothing and when they met a foeman, grappled with him and drew his blows upon themselves. In the capture of the city, no Theban was seen begging the Macedonians to spare his life, nor did they in ignoble fashion fall and cling


1Arrian (1. 8. 1), quoting Ptolemy, places this incident at
the beginning of the siege, before any other fighting, and says that Perdiccas acted on his own initiative. He may have tried to repeat the manoeuvre at Halicarnassus (chap. 25. 5). As later, he was presumably in command of one of the six battalions of the phalanx.2Plutarch, Alexander, 11, 5.153