Diodorus of Sicily

δυνάμεως γὰρ ἀξιολόγου κατὰ τὴν πόλιν οὔσης καὶ
βελῶν παντοδαπῶν ἀφθονίας, ἔτι δὲ τείχους πολυτελοῦς
κατεσκευασμένου ῥᾳδίως οἱ πολιορκούμενοι
3περιεγίνοντο. ὁ δὲ Λεωσθένης ἀπογνοὺς τὴν ἐκ
βίας ἅλωσιν τῆς πόλεως τὰς ἀγομένας εἰς ταύτην
ἀγορὰς παρῃρεῖτο, νομίζων ῥᾳδίως τῇ σιτοδείᾳ
καταπολεμήσειν τοὺς ἐγκεκλεισμένους ἐν τῇ πόλει.
κατεσκεύαζε δὲ καὶ τεῖχος καὶ τάφρον ὤρυττεν
μεγάλην καὶ βαθεῖαν, εἴργων τοὺς πολιορκουμένους
ἀπὸ τῆς ἐξόδου.
4Μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα Αἰτωλοὶ μὲν ἀξιώσαντες τὸν
Λεωσθένην διά τινας ἐθνικὰς χρείας κατὰ τὸ παρὸν
ἀπελθεῖν ἐπ᾿ οἴκου πάντες ἐπανῆλθον εἰς τὴν
Αἰτωλίαν· οὕτως δὲ τῶν περὶ Ἀντίπατρον καταπονηθέντων
καὶ τῆς πόλεως κινδυνευούσης ἁλῶναι
διὰ τὴν προσδοκωμένην σιτοδείαν ἡ τύχη τι1 παράδοξον
5ἀπένειμε τοῖς Μακεδόσιν εὐκλήρημα. τοῦ
γὰρ Ἀντιπάτρου τοῖς τὰς τάφρους ὀρύττουσιν ἐπιθεμένου
καὶ συμπλοκῆς γενομένης ὁ2 Λεωσθένης
παραβοηθῶν τοῖς ἰδίοις καὶ πληγεὶς εἰς τὴν κεφαλὴν
λίθῳ παραχρῆμα μὲν ἔπεσεν καὶ λιποψυχήσας εἰς
τὴν παρεμβολὴν ἀπεκομίσθη, τῇ τρίτῃ δ᾿ ἡμέρᾳ
τελευτήσαντος αὐτοῦ καὶ ταφέντος ἡρωικῶς διὰ τὴν
ἐν τῷ πολέμῳ δόξαν ὁ μὲν δῆμος τῶν Ἀθηναίων
τὸν ἐπιτάφιον ἔπαινον εἰπεῖν προσέταξεν Ὑπερείδῃ
τῷ πρωτεύοντι τῶν ῥητόρων τῇ τοῦ λόγου δεινότητι
καὶ τῇ κατὰ τῶν Μακεδόνων ἀλλοτριότητι·
6κατ᾿ ἐκεῖνον γὰρ τὸν καιρὸν ὁ μὲν κορυφαῖος
τῶν Ἀθήνησι ῥητόρων Δημοσθένης ἐπεφεύγει,
καταδεδικασμένος ὡς εἰληφὼς τῶν Ἁρπαλείων


1τι Stephanus: τὸ.2μὲν after ὁ omitted by Dindorf.48Book XVIII

was a considerable force in the city and an abundance 323 b.c. of all sorts of missiles, and the wall, moreover, had been constructed at great expense, easily had the better of the fighting. Leosthenes, giving up hope of capturing the city by storm, shut off all the supplies that were going into it, thinking that he would easily reduce by hunger the forces besieged in the city. He also built a wall and dug a deep, wide ditch, thereby cutting off all escape for the beleaguered troops.
After this the Aetolians all returned to Aetolia, having asked Leosthenes for permission to go home for the present because of some national business. Antipater and his men, however, were nearly exhausted and the city was in danger of being taken because of the anticipated famine, when chance gave the Macedonians an unexpected turn of good fortune. For when Antipater made an attack on the men who were digging the moat and a struggle ensued, Leosthenes, coming to aid his men, was struck on the head by a stone and at once fell and was carried to camp in a swoon.1 On the third day he died and was buried with the honours of a hero because of the glory he had gained in war. The Athenian people caused the funeral oration to be delivered by Hypereides,2
foremost of the orators in eloquence and in hostility toward the Macedonians; for at that time Demosthenes, the chief of the orators of Athens, was in exile, convicted of having taken some of the money


1For a different account of his death see Justin, 13. 5. 12–13.2A considerable part of this oration is extant.49