Diodorus of Sicily
6καὶ τὸ μὲν πρῶτον ἀπροσδοκήτως τοῖς
πολιορκοῦσιν ἐπιθέμενος ἀνεῖλεν αὐτῶν περὶ διακοσίους,
ὕστερον δὲ μεγάλης μάχης γενομένης τόν
τε Μνάσιππον ἀνεῖλε καὶ τῶν ἄλλων οὐκ ὀλίγους·
τέλος δὲ τοὺς πολιορκοῦντας εἰς πολιορκίαν συγκλείσας
7μεγάλων ἐπαίνων ἔτυχεν. τοῦ δὲ περὶ τὴν
Κόρκυραν πολέμου σχεδὸν ἤδη τέλος ἔχοντος
κατέπλευσεν ὁ στόλος τῶν Ἀθηναίων εἰς τὴν Κόρκυραν,
ἔχων στρατηγοὺς Τιμόθεον καὶ Ἰφικράτην.
οὗτοι δὲ τῶν καιρῶν ὑστερηκότες ἄλλο μὲν οὐδὲν
ἔπραξαν μνήμης ἄξιον, τριήρεσι δὲ Σικελικαῖς
περιτυχόντες, ἃς Διονύσιος ἦν ἀπεσταλκὼς Λακεδαιμονίοις
ἐπὶ συμμαχίαν, ὧν ἡγοῦντο Κισσίδης
καὶ Κρίνιππος, αὐτάνδρους εἷλον, οὔσας ἐννέα·
τοὺς δ᾿ ἁλόντας λαφυροπωλήσαντες, καὶ πλείω τῶν
ἑξήκοντα ταλάντων ἀθροίσαντες, ἐμισθοδότησαν
τὴν δύναμιν.
8Ἅμα δὲ τούτοις πραττομένοις κατὰ μὲν τὴν
Κύπρον
Νικοκλῆς ὁ εὐνοῦχος ἐδολοφόνησεν Εὐαγόραν
τὸν βασιλέα καὶ τῆς τῶν Σαλαμινίων βασιλείας
ἐκυρίευσε, κατὰ δὲ τὴν Ἰταλίαν Ῥωμαῖοι πρὸς
Πραινεστίνους παραταξάμενοι καὶ νικήσαντες τοὺς
πλείστους τῶν ἀντιταξαμένων κατέκοψαν.
48. Ἐπ᾿ ἄρχοντος δ᾿ Ἀθήνησιν Ἀστείου Ῥωμαῖοι
κατέστησαν ἀντὶ τῶν ὑπάτων χιλιάρχους ἕξ,
Μάρκον Φούριον καὶ Λεύκιον Φούριον, ἔτι δὲ
Αὖλον Ποστόμιον καὶ Λεύκιον Λοκρήτιον καὶ
Μάρκον Φάβιον καὶ Λεύκιον Ποστόμιον. ἐπὶ δὲ




80Book XV

the besieged. At first in an unexpected attack on 374/3 b.c. the besiegers he slew about two hundred, and later in a great battle slew Mnasippus and not a few others. Finally he encircled and laid siege to the besiegers and won great approval.1 The war to possess Corcyra was practically at an end when the Athenian fleet sailed in with the generals Timotheus2 and Iphicrates. These, having arrived too late for the critical moment, accomplished nothing worth mentioning except that, falling in with some Sicilian triremes3 which Dionysius had dispatched under the command of Cissides and Crinippus to assist his allies the Lacedaemonians, they captured them with their crews, nine ships in all. By selling the captives as booty they collected more than sixty talents, with which they paid their forces.4
While these things were going on, in Cyprus Nicocles the eunuch5 assassinated the king Evagoras and possessed himself of the royal power over the Salaminians; and in Italy the Romans, arrayed in battle against the Praenestini,6 defeated them and slew almost all their opponents.
48. When Asteius was archon at Athens, the 373/2 b.c. Romans elected six military tribunes with consular power, Marcus Furius, Lucius Furius, Aulus Postumius, Lucius Lucretius, Marcus Fabius, and Lucius




1See Xenophon, Hell. 6. 2. 16–26. The year is 372.2Timotheüs is wrongly included. See Cambridge Ancient
History, 6. 77.3Perhaps the occasion mentioned in Book 16. 57. 3. Dionysius also sent presents for Delphi (cp. IG, 22. 103. 9) which was burned (Dittenberger3, 295) in 373.4See also Xenophon, Hell. 6. 2. 27–39 and Polyaenus, 3. 9. 55.5Theopompus (fr. 111) says that Evagoras and his son Pnytagoras were murdered by a eunuch Thrasydaeus. Nicocles, the son and successor of Evagoras, probably had no hand in the murder. See also Aristotle, Politics, 5. 1311 b; Isocrates, Ad Nicoclem (II), Nicocles (III), and Evagoras, 72. Diodorus has abbreviated his source overmuch and made Nicocles the eunuch.6See Livy, 6. 21. 9 ff.81