Diodorus of Sicily

Αἰνιᾶνος διαφθείρας Λητόδωρον,1 ἐπὶ τρισχιλίων
στρατιωτῶν παρὰ τοῖς ἀποστάταις τεταγμένον,
6τοῖς ὅλοις προετέρησε. γινομένης γὰρ τῆς παρατάξεως
καὶ τῆς νίκης ἀμφιδοξουμένης ὁ προδότης
ἐγκαταλιπὼν τοὺς συμμάχους ἀλόγως ἀπῆλθεν ἐπί
τινα λόφον, ἔχων τοὺς2 τρισχιλίους. οἱ δ᾿ ἄλλοι
δόξαντες τούτους πρὸς φυγὴν ὡρμηκέναι διεταράχθησαν
7καὶ τραπέντες ἔφυγον. ὁ δὲ Πίθων νικήσας
τῇ μάχῃ διεκηρύξατο πρὸς τοὺς ἡττημένους,
κελεύων τὰ μὲν ὅπλα καταθέσθαι, αὐτοὺς δὲ τὰ
πιστὰ λαβόντας ἐπὶ τὰς ἰδίας κατοικίας ἀναχωρῆσαι.
8γενομένων δ᾿ ἐπὶ τούτοις ὅρκων καὶ τῶν Ἑλλήνων
ἀναμιχθέντων τοῖς Μακεδόσιν ὁ μὲν Πίθων
περιχαρὴς ἦν, κατὰ νοῦν αὐτῷ προχωρούντων τῶν
πραγμάτων, οἱ δὲ Μακεδόνες μνησθέντες μὲν τῆς
τοῦ Περδίκκου παραγγελίας, οὐδὲν δὲ φροντίσαντες
τῶν γεγενημένων ὅρκων παρεσπόνδησαν τοὺς
9Ἕλληνας. ἀπροσδοκήτως γὰρ αὐτοῖς ἐπιθέμενοι
καὶ λαβόντες ἀφυλάκτους ἅπαντας κατηκόντισαν
καὶ τὰ χρήματα διήρπασαν. ὁ μὲν οὖν Πίθων
διαψευσθεὶς τῶν ἐλπίδων ἀπῆλθε μετὰ τῶν Μακεδόνων
πρὸς τὸν Περδίκκαν. καὶ τὰ μὲν κατὰ τὴν
Ἀσίαν ἐν τούτοις ἦν.
8. Κατὰ δὲ τὴν Εὐρώπην Ῥόδιοι μὲν ἐκβαλόντες
τὴν Μακεδονικὴν φρουρὰν ἠλευθέρωσαν τὴν πόλιν,
Ἀθηναῖοι δὲ πρὸς Ἀντίπατρον πόλεμον ἐξήνεγκαν
τὸν ὀνομασθέντα Λαμιακόν. τούτου δὲ τὰς αἰτίας
ἀναγκαῖόν ἐστι προεκθέσθαι χάριν τοῦ σαφεστέρας
γενέσθαι τὰς ἐν αὐτῷ συντελεσθείσας πράξεις.


1Λητόδωρον Dittenberger, Νικόδωρον Dindorf, Διόδωρον or
Ἀσκληπιόδωρον Niese: Λιπόδωρον RX, Λειπόδωρον F.2τοὺς added by Dindorf.32Book XVIII

Through the agency of a certain Aenianian he corrupted 323 b.c. Letodorus, who had been made a commander of three thousand among the rebels, and won a complete victory. For when the battle was begun and the victory was doubtful, the traitor left his allies without warning and withdrew to a certain hill, taking his three thousand men. The rest, believing that these were bent on flight, were thrown into confusion, turned about, and fled. Pithon, being victorious in the battle, sent a herald to the conquered, ordering them to lay down their arms and to return to their several colonies after receiving pledges. When oaths to this effect had been sworn and the Greeks were interspersed among the Macedonians, Pithon was greatly pleased, seeing that the affair was progressing according to his intentions; but the Macedonians, remembering the orders of Perdiccas and having no regard for the oaths that had been sworn, broke faith with the Greeks. Setting upon them unexpectedly and catching them off their guard, they shot them all down with javelins and seized their possessions as plunder. Pithon then, cheated of his hopes, came back with the Macedonians to Perdiccas. This was the state of affairs in Asia.
8. In Europe the Rhodians drove out their Macedonian garrison and freed their city, and the Athenians began what is called the Lamian War against Antipater.1 It is necessary to set forth the causes of this war in order that the events that took place in it may be made clearer. A short time before his

1For the Lamian War see Arrian, FGrH, 156. 1. 9, 12; Plutarch, Demosthenes, 27, Phocion, 23–26; Hypereides, Funeral Oration, 10–20; Justin, 13. 5; Pausanias, 1. 25. 3–5.33