Diodorus of Sicily
2παρατάξασθαι. τοῦ δ᾿ Ἀγησιλάου προσμαχομένου1
συγκατέβησαν ἐκ τοῦ κατ᾿ ὀλίγον πρὸς τὸν
ἀγῶνα. γενομένης δὲ μάχης ἐπὶ πολὺν χρόνον
ἰσχυρᾶς, τὸ μὲν πρῶτον οἱ περὶ τὸν Ἀγησίλαον
προετέρουν, μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα τῶν ἐκ τῆς πόλεως
Θηβαίων ἐκχυθέντων πανδημεί, θεωρῶν τὸ πλῆθος
τῶν ἐπιρρεόντων ὁ Ἀγησίλαος ἀνεκαλέσατο τῇ
σάλπιγγι τοὺς στρατιώτας ἀπὸ τῆς μάχης. οἱ δὲ
Θηβαῖοι, δόξαντες τότε πρώτως μὴ καταδεεστέρους
ἑαυτοὺς εἶναι Λακεδαιμονίων, τρόπαιόν τε ἔστησαν
καὶ τὸ λοιπὸν κατεθάρρησαν τῆς τῶν Σπαρτιατῶν
δυνάμεως.
3Τὰ μὲν οὖν περὶ τὰς πεζὰς2 δυνάμεις τοιοῦτον
ἔσχε τὸ τέλος· τῶν δὲ ναυτικῶν κατὰ τοὺς αὐτοὺς
καιροὺς ἐγένετο μεγάλη ναυμαχία μεταξὺ Νάξου
καὶ Πάρου διὰ τοιαύτας αἰτίας. Πόλλις ὁ τῶν
Λακεδαιμονίων ναύαρχος, πυθόμενος σίτου πλῆθος
ἐν ὁλκάσι παρακομίζεσθαι τοῖς Ἀθηναίοις, ἐφήδρευε
καὶ παρετήρει τὸν κατάπλουν τῆς κομιζομένης
ἀγορᾶς, διανοούμενος ἐπιθέσθαι ταῖς ὁλκάσιν.
ἃ δὴ πυθόμενος ὁ δῆμος τῶν Ἀθηναίων ἐξέπεμψε
στόλον παραφυλάξοντα τὴν σιτοπομπίαν ὃς3 καὶ
διέπεμψεν εἰς τὸν Πειραιέα τὴν κομιζομένην ἀγοράν.
4μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα Χαβρίας μὲν ὁ τῶν Ἀθηναίων
ναύαρχος μετὰ τοῦ στόλου παντὸς πλεύσας ἐπὶ τὴν
Νάξον συνεστήσατο πολιορκίαν. προσαγαγὼν δὲ
τοῖς τείχεσι μηχανὰς καὶ διὰ τούτων σαλεύσας τὰ
τείχη, σπουδὴν εἰσεφέρετο βίᾳ κρατῆσαι τῆς πόλεως.
ἅμα δὲ τούτοις πραττομένοις Πόλλις ὁ τῶν
Λακεδαιμονίων ναύαρχος κατέπλευσε βοηθήσων
τοῖς Ναξίοις. γενομένης δὲ φιλοτιμίας ἀμφότεροι
συγκατέβησαν εἰς ναυμαχίαν καὶ τὰς ναῦς διατάξαντες
1προσμαχομένου J. G. Schneider: προμαχουμένου.2πεζὰς Dindorf: πεζικὰς.3ὃς added by Reiske.42Book XV

the enemy. As Agesilaüs advanced to the attack, 377/6 b.c. they came out to meet him gradually. A bitter battle raged for a long time, in which at first Agesilaüs’ men prevailed, but later, as the Thebans poured forth in full force from the city, Agesilaüs, beholding the multitude of men streaming down upon him, summoned his soldiers by trumpet to withdraw from the battle. The Thebans, who found themselves now for the first time not inferior to the Lacedaemonians, erected a trophy of victory and thereafter faced the army of the Spartans with confidence.
With regard to the fighting of the land forces, such was the issue. At sea about the same time occurred a great naval battle between Naxos and Paros, of which the cause was as follows. Pollis, the admiral of the Lacedaemonians, learning that a large shipment of grain was on its way to Athens in freighters, lay in wait watching for the grain fleet as it put in to port, intending to attack the freighters. The Athenian people, being informed of this, sent out a convoy to guard the grain in transit, which in fact brought it safe to the Peiraeus. Later Chabrias, the Athenian admiral, with the whole navy sailed to Naxos and laid it under siege. Bringing his siege-engines to bear against the walls, when he had shaken them, he then bent every effort to take the city by storm. While these things were going on, Pollis, the admiral of the Lacedaemonians, sailed into port to assist the Naxians. In eager rivalry both sides engaged in a sea-battle, and forming in line of battle charged




43