Diodorus of Sicily

συνέστησε τοὺς ταραχωδεστάτους, τῷ μὲν λόγῳ
πρὸς τὰς ἐν τῷ πολέμῳ χρείας, τῷ δ᾿ ἔργῳ πρὸς
ἀπώλειαν· κατ᾿ ἰδίαν γὰρ ἐνετείλατο κατ᾿ ὀλίγους
αὐτῶν εἰς τοιαύτας χρείας ἀποστέλλειν ἐν αἷς1
4ἔμελλον ἀπολεῖσθαι. ἐν δὲ τούτοις εἶναι συνέβαινε
καὶ τοὺς Εὐμενῆ παραδόντας, ὥστε τῶν εἰς τὸν
στρατηγὸν παρανομημάτων συντόμως αὐτοῖς ἐπιστῆναι
τιμωρίαν· αἱ γὰρ ἀσεβεῖς χρεῖαι τοῖς μὲν
δυνάσταις διὰ τὴν ἐξουσίαν γίνονται λυσιτελεῖς,
τοῖς δ᾿ ὑπακούσασιν ἰδιώταις μεγάλων κακῶν ὡς
ἐπίπαν αἴτιαι καθίστανται.
5Ὁ δ᾿ οὖν Ἀντίγονος ὁρῶν τὸν Πευκέστην παρὰ
τοῖς Πέρσαις μεγάλης ἀποδοχῆς τυγχάνοντα τὸ
μὲν πρῶτον παρείλετο τὴν σατραπείαν αὐτοῦ. τῶν
δὲ ἐγχωρίων ἀγανακτούντων, ἑνὸς δὲ τῶν ἐπιφανεστάτων
Θεσπίου καὶ παρρησίαν ἀγαγόντος ὡς
οὐχ ὑπακουσομένων Περσῶν ἑτέρῳ, τοῦτον μὲν
ἀπέκτεινεν, Ἀσκληπιόδωρον δὲ κατέστησε τῆς
Περσίδος ὕπαρχον καὶ τοὺς ἱκανοὺς στρατιώτας
παρέδωκεν· Πευκέστην δ᾿ εἰς ἄλλας ἐλπίδας ἀγαγὼν
καὶ κενῶς μετεωρίσας ἐξήγαγεν ἐκ τῆς χώρας.
6ποιουμένου δ᾿ αὐτοῦ τὴν πορείαν ἐπὶ Σούσων
ἀπήντησεν αὐτῷ ἐπὶ τῷ Πασιτίγρι ποταμῷ Ξενόφιλος
ὁ κυριεύων τῶν ἐν Σούσοις χρημάτων,
ἀπεσταλμένος ὑπὸ Σελεύκου πᾶν ποιῆσαι2 τὸ
προστασσόμενον. τοῦτον μὲν οὖν προσδεξάμενος
προσεποιεῖτο τιμᾶν ἐν τοῖς μεγίστοις τῶν φίλων,
εὐλαβούμενος μὴ μετανοήσας πάλιν αὐτὸν ἀποκλείσῃ·
7αὐτὸς δὲ παραλαβὼν τὴν ἐν Σούσοις ἄκραν


1αἷς editors: οἷς.2πᾶν ποιῆσαι editors, ὡς πᾶν ποιήσων Capps: καὶ πᾶν
ποιήσειν F, πᾶν ποιήσειν RX.360Book XIX

the Silver Shields, ostensibly that they might be 316 b.c. useful in the war, but in reality to insure their destruction; for he privately directed the satrap to send a few of them at a time on duties in which they were bound to be killed.1 Among them there were, as it happened, those who had betrayed Eumenes, so that punishment for their treachery to their general came upon them speedily. Unholy acts, in truth, are of advantage to princes because of their power, but to private individuals who have merely obeyed orders they are usually the cause of great evil.
Now Antigonus, perceiving that Peucestes was enjoying great favour among the Persians, first took his satrapy away from him. Then when the Persians were angry, and when Thespius, one of their leading men, even said frankly that the Persians would not obey anyone else, Antigonus had this man killed and set up Asclepiodorus as ruler of Persia, giving him a sufficient number of soldiers. As for Peucestes, Antigonus, after leading him on to hope for other things and filling him with vain expectations, removed him from the country.2 While Antigonus himself was journeying to Susa, he was met at the Pasitigris River by Xenophilus, the supervisor of the treasury at Susa, who had been sent by Seleucus with orders to carry out Antigonus’ every command. Antigonus received him and pretended to honour him among his closest friends, taking care lest he change his mind and shut him out again.3 When he himself had occupied the



1Cp. Plutarch, Eumenes, 19. 2.2Peucestes never again played an important rôle, but he seems to have outlived Antigonus and to have retained, or regained, the favour of Demetrius (Phylarchus, FGrH, 81.12).3Cp. chaps. 17. 3, 18. 1.361