Diodorus of Sicily

ἑαυτόν, προκρίνας τὸν θάνατον τῆς προσδοκηθείσης
αἰχμαλωσίας. οὐ μὴν ἐφάνη γε εὖ
βεβουλευμένος· ἡ γὰρ ναῦς φοροῦ πνεύματος ἐπιλαβομένη
τοῦ δόλωνος ἀρθέντος ἐξέφυγε τὸν
κίνδυνον.
62. Ἀγαθοκλῆς μὲν οὖν οὐδ᾿ ἐλπίδας ἔχων τοῦ
κατὰ θάλατταν περιέσεσθαί ποτε Καρχηδονίων
ἐνίκησε ναυμαχίᾳ παραδόξως καὶ τὸ λοιπὸν θαλασσοκρατῶν
παρείχετο τοῖς ἐμπόροις τὴν ἀσφάλειαν.
διόπερ οἱ Συρακόσιοι, πάντοθεν πρὸς αὐτοὺς κομιζομένης
ἀγορᾶς, ἀντὶ τῆς τῶν ἐπιτηδείων σπάνεως
2ταχέως πάντων ἔσχον δαψίλειαν. ὁ δὲ δυνάστης
μετεωρισθεὶς τῷ γεγονότι προτερήματι Λεπτίνην
ἐξαπέστειλε λεηλατήσοντα τὴν πολεμίαν καὶ μάλιστα
τὴν Ἀκραγαντίνην. ὁ γὰρ Ξενόδοκος διὰ
τὴν γεγενημένην ἧτταν βλασφημούμενος ὑπὸ τῶν
3ἀντιπολιτευομένων ἐστασίαζε πρὸς αὐτούς. παρήγγειλε
μὲν οὖν τῷ Λεπτίνῃ πειρᾶσθαι προκαλέσασθαι
τὸν ἄνδρα πρὸς μάχην1· ῥᾳδίως γὰρ προτερήσειν
ὡς στασιαζούσης δυνάμεως καὶ προηττημένης.
4ὅπερ καὶ συνετελέσθη· ὁ μὲν γὰρ Λεπτίνης ἐμβαλὼν
εἰς τὴν Ἀκραγαντίνην τὴν χώραν ἐδῄου, ὁ δὲ Ξενόδοκος
τὸ μὲν πρῶτον ἡσυχίαν εἶχεν, οὐ νομίζων
αὑτὸν ἀξιόμαχον εἶναι, ὀνειδιζόμενος δὲ ὑπὸ τῶν
πολιτῶν εἰς δειλίαν προήγαγε τὴν στρατιάν, τῷ
μὲν ἀριθμῷ βραχὺ λειπομένην τῶν ἐναντίων, τῇ δ᾿
ἀρετῇ πολὺ καταδεεστέραν οὖσαν, ὡς ἂν τῆς μὲν



1τὴν before μάχην omitted by Hertlein.312Book XX

himself, preferring death to the anticipated captivity. 307 b.c. But in truth he was shown by the event to have judged unwisely; for his ship caught a favouring wind, raised its jury mast1 and fled from the battle.
62. Agathocles, who had no hope of ever getting the better of the Carthaginians on the sea, unexpectedly defeated them in a naval battle, and thereafter he ruled the sea and gave security to his merchants. For this reason the people of Syracuse, goods being brought to them from all sides, in place of scarcity of provisions soon enjoyed an abundance of everything. The tyrant, encouraged by the success that had been won, dispatched Leptines to plunder the country of the enemy and, in particular, that of Acragas. For Xenodocus, vilified by his political opponents because of the defeat he had suffered,2 was at strife with them. Agathocles therefore ordered Leptines to try to entice the man out to a battle; for, he said, it would be easy to defeat him since his army was seditious and had already been overcome. And indeed this was accomplished; for when Leptines entered the territory of Acragas and began plundering the land, Xenodocus at first kept quiet, not believing himself strong enough for battle; but when he was reproached by the citizens for cowardice, he led out his army, which in number fell little short of that of his opponents but in morale was far inferior since the citizen army had been formed


1The δόλων was either a light spar that could be rigged at the prow of the warship, extending forward like a high bowsprit, or a square sail hung on a crossarm at the end of such a spar. We hear of this rig only on Phoenician and Roman craft. Since it could be set up more quickly than the ordinary mast, which was stowed before battle, it seems often to have been used as here. Cp. Livy, 36. 44. 3, 45. 1; 37. 30. 7: Polybius, 16. 15. 2.2Cp. chap. 56. 2.313