Diodorus of Sicily

ἐπῆλθε κρατῶν τῶν ὑπαίθρων, καὶ πέρας, εἰ μὴ
μετεπέμψαντο αὐτὸν οἱ Σπαρτιᾶται διά τινας πολιτικὰς
χρείας, σχεδὸν ἂν καὶ τὴν ὅλην τῶν Περσῶν
βασιλείαν εἰς τοὺς ἐσχάτους κινδύνους κατέστησεν.
4ἦν γὰρ ὁ ἀνὴρ οὗτος δραστικὸς καὶ μετὰ συνέσεως
πολλῆς θρασὺς καὶ παραβόλοις πράξεσι χρώμενος.
διὸ καὶ τότε θεωροῦντες οἱ Σπαρτιᾶται τὸ μέγεθος
τοῦ πολέμου προσδεόμενον ἡγεμόνος ἀξιολόγου,
τοῦτον τοῦ πολέμου παντὸς ἡγεμόνα κατέστησαν.
32. Ὁ δ᾿ Ἀγησίλαος προαγαγὼν1 τὴν δύναμιν,
ἧκεν εἰς τὴν Βοιωτίαν, ἔχων τοὺς σύμπαντας
στρατιώτας πλείους τῶν μυρίων ὀκτακισχιλίων,
ὧν ἦσαν αἱ2 Λακεδαιμονίων πέντε μόραι· τὴν δὲ
μόραν3 ἀναπληροῦσιν ἄνδρες πεντακόσιοι. ὁ δὲ
Σκιρίτης καλούμενος λόχος παρὰ τοῖς Σπαρτιάταις
οὐ συντάττεται μετὰ τῶν ἄλλων, ἀλλ᾿ ἰδίαν ἔχων
σύστασιν μετὰ τοῦ βασιλέως ἵσταται, καὶ παραβοηθεῖ
τοῖς αἰεὶ θλιβομένοις μέρεσι· συνεστὼς δ᾿
ἐξ ἐπιλέκτων ἀνθρώπων μεγάλας ποιεῖται ῥοπὰς
ἐν ταῖς παρατάξεσι καὶ κατὰ τὸ πλεῖστον αἴτιος
γίνεται τῆς νίκης. ἱππεῖς δ᾿ εἶχεν ὁ Ἀγησίλαος
2χιλίους καὶ πεντακοσίους. οὗτος μὲν οὖν παραγενόμενος
εἰς πόλιν Θεσπιάς, φρουρουμένην ὑπὸ
Λακεδαιμονίων, πλησίον ταύτης κατεστρατοπέδευσε
καὶ τοὺς στρατιώτας ἐφ᾿ ἡμέρας τινὰς ἀνελάμβανεν
ἐκ τῆς κακοπαθείας. Ἀθηναῖοι δὲ
πυθόμενοι τὴν τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων παρουσίαν εἰς
τὴν Βοιωτίαν, εὐθὺς ἐβοήθουν εἰς τὰς Θήβας,



1προαγαγὼν Reiske: προσαγαγὼν.2αἱ Vogel: omitted by AJK, οἱ cet.3μόραι . . . μόραν Vogel (cp. Ephorus, fr. 140): μύραι
. . . μύραν P, μοῖραι . . . μοῖραν Vulgate.34Book XV

of Asia,1 mastering the open country, and finally 377/6 b.c. would probably have succeeded, had not the Spartans recalled him because of political affairs, in reducing the whole Persian empire to the direst straits. For he was a man of energy, daring but highly intelligent, engaging in hazardous actions. Accordingly the Spartans, seeing that the magnitude of the war called for a first-rate leader, again appointed him commander of the whole war.
32. Agesilaüs led forth his army and reached Boeotia accompanied by all the soldiers, amounting to more than eighteen thousand, in which were the five divisions of Lacedaemonians. Each division contained five hundred men. The company known as Sciritae2 amongst the Spartans is not drawn up with the rest, but has its own station with the king and it goes to the support of the sections that from time to time are in distress; and since it is composed of picked men, it is an important factor in turning the scale in pitched battles, and generally determines the victory. Agesilaüs also had fifteen hundred cavalry. Passing on then to the city of Thespiae, which was garrisoned by the Lacedaemonians, he encamped near it and for several days rested his men from the hardships of the march. The Athenians, having become aware of the arrival of the Lacedaemonians in Boeotia, immediately went to the assistance of


1See Book 14. 79–80, 83.2A people who lived on the mountainous northern frontier of Laconia. This special corps, considered apparently the cream of the army, formed the vanguard of an advance and the rearguard of a retreat. Thought by some to be light-armed,
though this is doubted by Kromayer-Veith on the strength of this and other passages (p. 39, Heerwesen und Kriegsführung der Griechen und Römer, Munich, 1928). (See Thucydides, 5. 67. 1.)35