Diodorus of Sicily

συμβεβηκὸς καὶ τὴν πόλιν ὁρῶντες ἅπασαν τεθορυβημένην
τοῖς μὲν ἐπὶ τοῦ λιμένος καὶ τῶν τειχῶν
παρήγγειλαν μένειν ἐπὶ τῆς ἰδίας τάξεως καὶ τοὺς
ἔξωθεν, ἂν προσβάλωσιν, ἀμύνασθαι, αὐτοὶ δ᾿
ἔχοντες τὸ τῶν ἐπιλέκτων σύστημα καὶ τοὺς ἀπὸ
τῆς Ἀλεξανδρείας προσφάτως καταπεπλευκότας
στρατιώτας ὥρμησαν ἐπὶ τοὺς ἐντὸς τοῦ τείχους
8παρεισπεπτωκότας. περικαταλαβούσης δ᾿ ἡμέρας
καὶ τοῦ Δημητρίου τὸ σύσσημον ἄραντος οἱ μὲν τῷ
λιμένι προσβαλόντες καὶ τὸ τεῖχος πάντοθεν περιεστρατοπεδευκότες
συνηλάλαξαν, εὐθαρσεῖς ποιοῦντες
τοὺς κατειληφότας μέρος τοῦ περὶ τὸ θέατρον
τόπου, ὁ δὲ κατὰ τὴν πόλιν ὄχλος παίδων καὶ
γυναικῶν ἐν φόβοις ἦν καὶ δάκρυσιν, ὡς τῆς πατρίδος
9κατὰ κράτος ἁλισκομένης. οὐ μὴν ἀλλὰ τοῖς
παρεισπεσοῦσιν ἐντὸς τοῦ τείχους γενομένης μάχης
πρὸς τοὺς Ῥοδίους καὶ πολλῶν παρ᾿ ἀμφοτέροις
πεσόντων τὸ μὲν πρῶτον οὐδέτεροι τῆς ἰδίας τάξεως
ἐξεχώρουν, μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα τῶν μὲν Ῥοδίων ἀεὶ
πλειόνων γινομένων καὶ τὸν κίνδυνον ἑτοίμως ὑπομενόντων,
ὡς ἂν ὑπὲρ πατρίδος καὶ τῶν μεγίστων
ἀγωνιζομένων, τῶν δὲ τοῦ βασιλέως θλιβομένων,
Ἄλκιμος μὲν καὶ Μαντίας οἱ τὴν ἡγεμονίαν ἔχοντες
πολλοῖς περιπεσόντες τραύμασιν ἐτελεύτησαν, τῶν
δ᾿ ἄλλων οἱ πλεῖστοι οἱ μὲν ἐν χειρῶν νόμῳ διεφθάρησαν,
οἱ δ᾿ ἥλωσαν, ὀλίγοι δὲ πρὸς τὸν βασιλέα
φυγόντες διεσώθησαν. πολλοὶ δὲ καὶ τῶν Ῥοδίων
ἀνῃρέθησαν, ἐν οἷς ἦν καὶ ὁ πρύτανις Δαμοτέλης
ἐπ᾿ ἀρετῇ γενόμενος περίβλεπτος.
99. Δημήτριος δὲ τὴν τῆς πόλεως ἅλωσιν ὑπολαβὼν
ἐκ τῶν χειρῶν αὐτοῦ τὴν τύχην ἀφῃρῆσθαι
πάλιν παρεσκευάζετο πρὸς τὴν πολιορκίαν. εἶτα
404Book XX

and seeing that the whole city had been thrown into 304 b.c. confusion, sent orders to those at the harbour and the walls to remain at their own posts and oppose the enemy outside if he should attack; and they themselves, with their contingent of selected men and the soldiers who had recently sailed in from Alexandria, attacked the troops who had got within the walls. When day returned and Demetrius raised the ensign, those who were attacking the port and those who had been stationed about the wall on all sides shouted the battle cry, giving encouragement to the men who had occupied part of the region of the theatre; but in the city the throng of children and women were in fear and tears, thinking that their native city was being taken by storm. Nevertheless, fighting began between those who had made their way within the wall and the Rhodians, and many fell on both sides. At first neither side withdrew from its position; but afterwards, as the Rhodians constantly added to their numbers and were prompt to face danger—as is the way with men fighting for their native land and their most precious things,—and on the other hand the king’s men were in distress, Alcimus and Mantias, their commanders, expired after receiving many wounds, most of the others were killed in hand-to-hand fighting or were captured, and only a few escaped to the king and survived. Many also of the Rhodians were slain, among whom was the president Damoteles, who had won great acclaim for his valour.
99. When Demetrius realized that Fortune had snatched from his hand the capture of the city, he made new preparations for the siege. When his
405