Diodorus of Sicily
3ἀμφισβητεῖν ἡγεμονίας. προσεχώρησε δ᾿ αὐτῷ
καὶ Πολύαρχος, τεταγμένος ἐπί τινος διοικήσεως,
μετὰ στρατιωτῶν πλειόνων ἢ χιλίων. οἱ δὲ διαφυλάττοντες
τὴν πρὸς Ἀντίγονον φιλίαν, ὁρῶντες
ἀκατάσχετον οὖσαν τὴν τοῦ πλήθους ὁρμήν,
συνέφευγον εἰς τὴν ἄκραν, ἧς φύλαξ ἀπεδέδεικτο
4Δίφιλος. ὁ δὲ Σέλευκος συστησάμενος πολιορκίαν
καὶ κατὰ κράτος ἑλὼν τὴν ἄκραν ἐκομίσατο τὰ
φυλαττόμενα σώματα τῶν φίλων καὶ τῶν παίδων,
ὅσοι παρεδόθησαν εἰς φυλακὴν παρ᾿ Ἀντιγόνου
μετὰ τὴν ἐκ Βαβυλῶνος εἰς Αἴγυπτον ἀποχώρησιν.
5ἀπὸ δὲ τούτων γενόμενος στρατιώτας συνήγαγεν
καὶ συναγοράσας ἵππους ἀνεδίδου τοῖς δυναμένοις
χρᾶσθαι. πᾶσι δὲ φιλανθρώπως ὁμιλῶν καὶ καθιστὰς
εἰς ἀγαθὰς ἐλπίδας ἑτοίμους εἶχε καὶ προθύμους
ἐν πάσῃ περιστάσει τοὺς συγκινδυνεύοντας.
Σέλευκος μὲν οὖν τοῦτον τὸν τρόπον ἀνεκτήσατο
τὴν Βαβυλωνίαν.
92. Νικάνορος δὲ τοῦ περὶ Μηδίαν στρατηγοῦ
συναγαγόντος ἐπ᾿ αὐτὸν ἔκ τε Μηδίας καὶ Περσίδος
καὶ τῶν σύνεγγυς τόπων στρατιώτας πεζοὺς μὲν
πλείους τῶν μυρίων ἱππεῖς δὲ περὶ ἑπτακισχιλίους
ὥρμησεν κατὰ σπουδὴν ἀπαντήσων τοῖς πολεμίοις.
2εἶχε δὲ τοὺς σύμπαντας πεζοὺς μὲν πλείους τῶν
τρισχιλίων, ἱππεῖς δὲ τετρακοσίους. διαβὰς δὲ
τὸν Τίγριν ποταμὸν καὶ πυνθανόμενος ὀλίγων ἡμερῶν
ὁδὸν ἀπέχειν τοὺς πολεμίους, ἔκρυψε τοὺς
στρατιώτας ἐν τοῖς πλησίον ἕλεσι, διανοούμενος
3ἀπροσδόκητον ποιήσασθαι τὴν ἐπίθεσιν. ὁ δὲ
Νικάνωρ ἐπειδὴ παραγενηθεὶς ἐπὶ τὸν Τίγριν ποταμὸν
οὐχ ηὕρισκε τοὺς πολεμίους, κατεστρατοπέδευσε
πρός τινι βασιλικῷ σταθμῷ, νομίζων αὐτοὺς
80Book XIX

a bid for supreme power. He was joined also by 312 b.c. Polyarchus, who had been placed in command of a certain district, with more than a thousand soldiers. When those who remained loyal to Antigonus saw that the impulse of the people could not be checked, they took refuge together in the citadel, of which Diphilus had been appointed commander. But Seleucus, by laying siege to the citadel and taking it by storm, recovered the persons of all those of his friends and slaves who had been placed there under guard by the order of Antigonus after Seleucus’ own departure from Babylon into Egypt. When he had finished this, he enlisted soldiers, and, having bought up horses, he distributed them to those who were able to handle them. Associating with all on friendly terms and raising high hopes in all, he kept his fellow adventurers ready and eager under every condition. In this way, then, Seleucus regained Babylonia.
92. But when Nicanor, the general in Media, gathered against him from Media and Persia and the neighbouring lands more than ten thousand foot soldiers and about seven thousand horse, Seleucus set out at full speed to oppose the enemy. He himself had in all more than three thousand foot and four hundred horse. He crossed the Tigris River; and, on hearing that the enemy were a few days’ march distant, he hid his soldiers in the adjacent marshes, intending to make his attack a surprise. When Nicanor arrived at the Tigris River and did not find the enemy, he camped at one of the royal stations,
81