Diodorus of Sicily
14. Τῶν δὲ Θηβαίων ἀνῃρέθησαν μὲν ὑπὲρ τοὺς
ἑξακισχιλίους, αἰχμάλωτα δὲ σώματα συνήχθη
πλείω τῶν τρισμυρίων, χρημάτων δὲ ἄπιστον πλῆθος
διεφορήθη.
Ὁ δὲ βασιλεὺς τοὺς μὲν τελευτήσαντας τῶν Μακεδόνων
ἔθαψε, πλείους ὄντας τῶν πεντακοσίων,
τοὺς δὲ συνέδρους τῶν Ἑλλήνων συναγαγὼν ἐπέτρεψε
τῷ κοινῷ συνεδρίῳ πῶς χρηστέον τῇ πόλει
2τῶν Θηβαίων. προτεθείσης οὖν βουλῆς τῶν ἀλλοτρίως
διακειμένων τοῖς Θηβαίοις τινὲς ἐπεχείρουν
συμβουλεύειν ἀπαραιτήτοις τιμωρίαις δεῖν
περιβαλεῖν αὐτούς, ἀπεδείκνυον δ᾿ αὐτοὺς τὰ τῶν
βαρβάρων πεφρονηκότας κατὰ τῶν Ἑλλήνων· καὶ
γὰρ ἐπὶ Ξέρξου συμμαχοῦντας τοῖς Πέρσαις ἐστρατευκέναι
κατὰ τῆς Ἑλλάδος καὶ μόνους τῶν Ἑλλήνων
ὡς εὐεργέτας τιμᾶσθαι παρὰ τοῖς βασιλεῦσι
τῶν Περσῶν καὶ πρὸ τῶν βασιλέων τοῖς πρεσβεύουσι
3τῶν Θηβαίων τίθεσθαι θρόνους. πολλὰ δὲ
καὶ ἄλλα τοιαῦτα διελθόντες παρώξυναν τὰς τῶν
συνέδρων ψυχὰς κατὰ τῶν Θηβαίων καὶ πέρας
ἐψηφίσαντο τὴν μὲν πόλιν κατασκάψαι, τοὺς δ᾿
αἰχμαλώτους ἀποδόσθαι, τοὺς δὲ φυγάδας τῶν Θηβαίων
ἀγωγίμους ὑπάρχειν ἐξ ἁπάσης τῆς Ἑλλάδος
καὶ μηδένα τῶν Ἑλλήνων ὑποδέχεσθαι Θηβαῖον.
4ὁ δὲ βασιλεὺς ἀκολούθως τῇ τοῦ συνεδρίου γνώμῃ
τὴν μὲν πόλιν κατασκάψας πολὺν ἐπέστησε φόβον
τοῖς ἀφισταμένοις τῶν Ἑλλήνων, τοὺς δ᾿ αἰχμαλώτους
λαφυροπωλήσας ἤθροισεν ἀργυρίου τάλαντα
τετρακόσια καὶ τεσσαράκοντα.
156Book XVII
14. Over six thousand Thebans perished, more than 335/4 b.c. thirty thousand were captured, and the amount of property plundered was unbelievable.1
The king gave burial to the Macedonian dead, more than five hundred in number, and then calling a meeting of the representatives of the Greeks put before the common council the question what should be done with the city of the Thebans. When the discussion was opened, certain men who were hostile to the Thebans began to recommend that they should be visited with the direst penalties, and they pointed out that they had taken the side of the barbarians against the Greeks. For in the time of Xerxes they had actually joined forces with the Persians and campaigned against Greece, and alone of the Greeks were honoured as benefactors by the Persian kings, so that the ambassadors of the Thebans were seated on thrones set in front of the kings. They related many other details of similar tenor and so aroused the feelings of the council against the Thebans that it was finally voted to raze the city, to sell the captives, to outlaw the Theban exiles from all Greece, and to allow no Greek to offer shelter to a Theban. The king, in accordance with the decree of the council, destroyed the city, and so presented possible rebels among the Greeks with a terrible warning. By selling off the prisoners he realized a sum of four hundred and forty talents of silver.2
1The figures of the Theban losses are not elsewhere reported,
and W. W. Tarn (Cambridge Ancient History, 6. 356)
regarded the second as conventional, referring to the figure given by Arrian (2. 24. 5) after the capture of Tyre; but in that case Diodorus (chap. 46. 4) gives 13,000. Diodorus (with Justin) omits the picturesque story of Timocleia, which would not have interested Arrian. It is given by Plutarch (Alexander, 12).2Historiker, no. 137, F 1), but applying to the total wealth
found in the city. This would be a rate of 88 drachmae a
head for 30,000 slaves. Tarn suggests 8000, which would
make the average price 330 drachmae, but there is no real
evidence for the price of slaves at this time (W. L. Westermann,
The Slave Systems of Greek and Roman Antiquity The same figure appears in a fragment of Cleitarchus (Athenaeus, 4. 148 d-f; Jacoby, Fragmente der griechischen (1955), 28). Plutarch (Alexander, 11.6) and Arrian (1. 9. 10) report that Alexander spared the house of Pindar.157