Diodorus of Sicily

εἰς ἀρρωστίαν ἐμπεσὼν ἐτελεύτησε, δυναστεύσας
ἔτη τριάκοντα καὶ ὀκτώ· τὴν δὲ ἀρχὴν διαδεξάμενος
ὁ υἱὸς Διονύσιος ἐτυράννευσεν ἔτη δώδεκα.
74. Οὐκ ἀνοίκειον δ᾿ ἐστὶ τῆς ὑποκειμένης ἱστορίας
διελθεῖν τάς τε αἰτίας τῆς τελευτῆς καὶ τὰ
συμβάντα τούτῳ τῷ δυνάστῃ περὶ τὴν τοῦ βίου
καταστροφήν.1 Διονυσίου τοίνυν δεδιδαχότος Ἀθήνησι
Ληναίοις τραγῳδίαν καὶ νικήσαντος, τῶν ἐν
τῷ χορῷ τις ᾀδόντων2 ὑπολαβὼν τιμηθήσεσθαι
λαμπρῶς ἐὰν πρῶτος ἀπαγγείλῃ τὴν νίκην, διέπλευσεν
εἰς τὴν Κόρινθον. καταλαβὼν δ᾿ ἐκεῖ
ναῦν ἐκπλέουσαν εἰς Σικελίαν καὶ μετεμβὰς3 εἰς
ταύτην, οὐρίοις ἐχρήσατο πνεύμασι, καὶ καταπλεύσας
εἰς Συρακούσας συντόμως ἀπήγγειλε τῷ
2τυράννῳ τὴν νίκην. ὁ δὲ Διονύσιος τοῦτον μὲν
ἐτίμησεν, αὐτὸς δὲ περιχαρὴς ἐγένετο καὶ τοῖς
θεοῖς εὐαγγέλια θύσας πότους καὶ μεγάλας εὐωχίας
ἐπετέλεσεν. ἑστιῶν δὲ λαμπρῶς τοὺς φίλους, καὶ
κατὰ τοὺς πότους φιλοτιμότερον τῇ μέθῃ δοὺς
ἑαυτόν, εἰς ἀρρωστίαν σφοδροτέραν ἐνέπεσε διὰ
3τὸ πλῆθος τῶν ἐμφορηθέντων ὑγρῶν. ἔχων δὲ
παρὰ θεῶν λόγιον τότε4 τελευτήσειν ὅταν τῶν
κρειττόνων περιγένηται, τὸν χρησμὸν ἀνέφερεν ἐπὶ
τοὺς Καρχηδονίους, ὑπολαμβάνων τούτους κρείττους
ἑαυτοῦ εἶναι. διὸ καὶ πρὸς αὐτοὺς πλεονάκις






1τὴν τ. β. καταστροφήν Reiske: τῆς τ. β. καταστροφῆς.2ᾀδόντων Reiske: Vogel: ᾄδων.3μεταβὰς AJKL.4τότε JL: τὸ cet.156Book XV

Dionysius fell sick and died, after ruling as overlord 368/7 b.c. for thirty-eight years. His son Dionysius succeeded and ruled as tyrant twelve years.
74. It is not out of keeping with the present narrative to recount the cause of his death and the events which befell this dynast toward the end of his life. Now Dionysius had produced a tragedy at the Lenaea1 at Athens2 and had won the victory, and one of those who sang in the chorus, supposing that he would be rewarded handsomely if he were the first to give news of the victory, set sail to Corinth. There, finding a ship bound for Sicily, he transferred to it, and obtaining favouring winds, speedily landed at Syracuse and gave the tyrant news of the victory. Dionysius did reward him, and was himself so overjoyed that he sacrificed to the gods for the good tidings and instituted a drinking bout and great feasts. As he entertained his friends lavishly and during the bout applied himself overzealously to drink, he fell violently ill from the quantity of liquor he had consumed. Now he had an oracle the gods had given him that he should die when he had conquered “his betters,” but he interpreted the oracle as referring to the Carthaginians, assuming that these were “his betters.” So in the wars that he had many times


1The “Wine Press Festival” of January or February
at which both comedies and tragedies were presented. By
unanimous consent (see Niese, P.-W. Realencyclopädie, 5.
901 top for references) the poetry of Dionysius was wretched and boring, but he never ceased to aspire. For one humiliating experience see Book 14. 109, See also Book 15. 6. The name of the play presented on this occasion was the Ransom of Hector (Nauck, Trag. gr. fr2, 794).2It is to be noted that Athens was now, through Sparta, an ally of Dionysius I. (Xenophon, Hell. 7. 1. 28–29.) Athens honoured Dionysius and his sons with public praises and crowns in 369/8. See Hicks and Hill, Greek Historical Inscriptions2, 108. For the formal alliance see ibid. 112. See also Bury, Cambridge Ancient History, 6. 134 and 132.157