Diodorus of Sicily

ἡγεμονίαις τεταγμένων, ἐν ἐγκλήμασιν ὄντες καὶ
φοβούμενοι περὶ σφῶν αὐτῶν, συνεπιθέμενοι τῷ
καιρῷ στάσιν οὐ τὴν τυχοῦσαν ἐξέκαυσαν. παντὸς
δὲ τοῦ στρατεύματος μισοπονηροῦντος ἕκαστοι τὰς
πανοπλίας ἀνελάμβανον ἐπὶ τὴν τοῦ φονεύσαντος
τιμωρίαν· καὶ πέρας τὸ πλῆθος ᾤετο δεῖν Ἀρχάγαθον
ἀναιρεῖσθαι, μὴ ἐκδιδόντος δὲ τὸν υἱὸν Ἀγαθοκλέους
αὐτὸν ἀντ᾿ ἐκείνου τὴν τιμωρίαν ὑπέχειν.
8ἀπῄτουν δὲ καὶ τοὺς μισθοὺς τοὺς ὀφειλομένους
καὶ στρατηγοὺς ᾑροῦντο τοὺς ἀφηγησομένους τοῦ
στρατοπέδου καὶ τὸ τελευταῖον τὰ τείχη κατελαμβάνοντό
τινες τοῦ Τύνητος καὶ πανταχόθεν φυλακαῖς
περιέλαβον τοὺς δυνάστας.
34. Οἱ δὲ Καρχηδόνιοι γνόντες τὴν παρὰ τοῖς
πολεμίοις στάσιν ἔπεμψάν τινας ἀξιοῦντες μεταβάλλεσθαι
καὶ τούς τε μισθοὺς μείζους καὶ δωρεὰς
ἀξιολόγους δώσειν ἐπηγγέλλοντο. πολλοὶ μὲν οὖν
τῶν ἡγεμόνων ἀπάξειν πρὸς αὐτοὺς τὴν στρατιὰν
2ἐπηγγείλαντο· ὁ δ᾿ Ἀγαθοκλῆς ὁρῶν τὴν σωτηρίαν
ἐπὶ ῥοπῆς κειμένην καὶ φοβούμενος μὴ τοῖς πολεμίοις
παραδοθεὶς μεθ᾿ ὕβρεως καταστρέψῃ τὸν
βίον, ὑπέλαβε κρεῖττον εἶναι, κἂν δέῃ τι πάσχειν,
3ὑπὸ τῶν στρατιωτῶν ἀποθανεῖν. διόπερ ἀποθέμενος
τὴν πορφύραν καὶ μεταλαβὼν ἰδιωτικὴν καὶ
ταπεινὴν ἐσθῆτα παρῆλθεν εἰς τὸ μέσον. σιωπῆς
οὖν γενομένης διὰ τὸ παράδοξον καὶ πολλῶν γενομένων
τῶν συνδραμόντων διεξῆλθε λόγους οἰκείους
τῆς περιστάσεως καὶ τῶν προκατεργασθεισῶν1 αὐτῷ
πράξεων ἀναμνήσας ἔφησεν ἕτοιμος εἶναι τελευτᾶν
εἰ τοῦτο δόξει συμφέρειν τοῖς συστρατευομένοις·
4οὐδέποτε γὰρ αὐτὸν δειλίᾳ συνεσχημένον ὑπομεῖναί

1προκατεργασθεισῶν Dindorf: προκατεργασθέντων.230Book XX

had been placed in command, as they also were subject 309 b.c. to accusation and feared for themselves, turned the crisis to their own advantage and kindled no inconsiderable sedition. When the whole army was full of indignation, the troops severally donned full armour to punish the murderer; and finally the mob made up its mind that Archagathus should be put to death, and that, if Agathocles did not surrender his son, he himself should pay the penalty in his place. And they also kept demanding the pay that was due them, and they elected generals to lead the army; and finally some of them seized the walls of Tunis and surrounded the princes with guards on every side.
34. The Carthaginians, on learning of the discord among the enemy, sent men to them urging them to change sides, and promised to give them greater pay and noteworthy bonuses.1 And indeed many of the leaders did agree to take the army over to them; but Agathocles, seeing that his safety was in the balance and fearing that, if he should be delivered to the enemy, he would end his life amid insults, decided that it was better, if he had to suffer, to die at the hands of his own men. Therefore, putting aside the purple and donning the humble garb of a private citizen, he came out into the middle of the crowd. Silence fell because his action was unexpected, and when a crowd had run together, he delivered a speech suitable to the critical situation. After recalling his earlier achievements, he said that he was ready to die if that should seem best for his fellow soldiers; for never had he, constrained by

1Most of Agathocles’ soldiers were mercenaries, cp. chaps. 11. 1; 33. 8.231