Diodorus of Sicily

ἠναγκάσθησαν ἀναδέξασθαι μόνοι τὸν πρὸς Λακεδαιμονίους
πόλεμον· οὐδεμιᾷ γὰρ ἐξῆν πόλει συμμαχῆσαι
διὰ τὸ πάσας συντεθεῖσθαι1 τὴν κοινὴν
2εἰρήνην. οἱ δὲ Λακεδαιμόνιοι, μονωθέντων τῶν
Θηβαίων, ἔκριναν πολεμεῖν αὐτοῖς καὶ τὰς Θήβας
ἐξανδραποδίσασθαι. φανερᾶς δὲ οὔσης τῆς τῶν
Λακεδαιμονίων παρασκευῆς, καὶ τῶν Θηβαίων
ἐρήμων ὄντων συμμάχων, ἅπαντες ὑπελάμβανον
αὐτοὺς ῥᾳδίως ὑπὸ τῶν Σπαρτιατῶν καταπολεμηθήσεσθαι.2
3διόπερ οἱ μὲν εὐνοϊκῶς ἔχοντες3 τῶν
Ἑλλήνων πρὸς τοὺς Θηβαίους συνήλγουν αὐτοῖς
ἐπὶ ταῖς προσδοκωμέναις συμφοραῖς, οἱ δ᾿ ἀλλοτρίως
ἔχοντες περιχαρεῖς ἦσαν, ὡς αὐτίκα μάλα
τῶν Θηβαίων ἐξανδραποδισθησομένων. τέλος δ᾿
οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι πολλὴν δύναμιν παρασκευασάμενοι
παρέδωκαν αὐτὴν Κλεομβρότῳ τῷ βασιλεῖ,
καὶ πρῶτον μὲν προαπέστειλαν πρέσβεις εἰς Θήβας,
προστάττοντες ἁπάσας τὰς ἐν τῇ Βοιωτίᾳ πόλεις
ἐᾶν αὐτονόμους, Πλαταιὰς δὲ καὶ Θεσπιὰς οἰκίζειν
καὶ τὴν χώραν τοῖς πρότερον γεγονόσι κυρίοις
4ἀποκαταστῆσαι. ἀποκριναμένων δὲ τῶν Θηβαίων,
ὡς οὔτ᾿ αὐτοὶ πολυπραγμονοῦσιν οὐδὲν4 τῶν κατὰ
τὴν Λακωνικὴν οὔτ᾿5 ἐκείνοις ἅπτεσθαι προσήκει6
τῶν7 τῆς Βοιωτίας· γενομένων δὲ τοιούτων τῶν
ἀποκρίσεων οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι τὸν Κλεόμβροτον
εὐθὺς ἐξέπεμψαν μετὰ τῆς δυνάμεως ἐπὶ τὰς Θήβας·
οἱ δὲ τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων σύμμαχοι προθύμως
εἶχον εἰς τὸν πόλεμον, ἐλπίζοντες μήτ᾿ ἀγῶνα




1συντεθεῖσθαι Reiske: συντίθεσθαι.2Suggested by Vogel, ἂν after ῥᾳδίως Hertlein and Madvig:
καταπολεμηθῆναι.3οἱ μὲν εὐνοϊκῶς ἔχοντες Dindorf, Vogel: εὐνοϊκῶς ἐχόντων.4οὐδὲν added by Vogel, τι by Dindorf.5οὔτ᾿ PAFJKL, οὕτως οὔτ᾿ cet.6προσήκει] προσήκειν PAFHJK.7τῶν added by Capps.94Book XV

forced to undertake alone the war with the Lacedaemonians; 371/0 b.c. for there was no city that could legally join them, because all had agreed to the general peace. The Lacedaemonians, since the Thebans were isolated, determined to fight them and reduce Thebes to complete slavery. And since the Lacedaemonians were making their preparations without concealment and the Thebans were destitute of allies, everyone assumed that they would easily be defeated by the Spartans. Accordingly some of the Greeks who were friendly to the Thebans sympathized with them at the prospect of defeat, while others who were at odds with them were overjoyed at the thought that Thebes would in a trice be reduced to utter slavery. Finally the Lacedaemonians, their huge army ready, gave command of it to Cleombrotus their king,1 and first of all sent envoys ahead to Thebes, directing the Thebans to permit all of the Boeotian cities to be independent, to people Plataeae and Thespiae,2 and to restore the land to its former owners. When the Thebans replied that they never meddled with affairs in Laconia and the Spartans had no right to touch those of Boeotia, such being the tenor of their answers, the Lacedaemonians sent Cleombrotus forth immediately with his army against Thebes; and the Spartan allies were eager for the war, confident that there would be no contest or






1Cleombrotus was already in Phocis (Cary, Cambridge Ancient History, 6. 80). He was sent there in 375/4 (Xenophon, Hell. 6. 1. 1, 2. 1, 4. 2). Beloch (32. 2. 236–237) thinks he was sent out afresh in 371.2See chap. 46. 6.95