Diodorus of Sicily

καὶ βαθείαις τάφροις διελάμβανον τὸν
τόπον· ταχὺ δὲ τῶν ἔργων συντελουμένων διά τε
τὴν πολυχειρίαν καὶ τὰς προθυμίας τῶν ἀνδρῶν,
ἔφθασαν τοὺς Βοιωτοὺς πάντα1 τόπον ὀχυρώσαντες.
4ὁ δ᾿ Ἐπαμεινώνδας ἥκων μετὰ τῆς δυνάμεως
ἐπεσκέψατο, καὶ κατανοήσας εὐεφοδώτατον εἶναι
τόπον καθ᾿ ὃν οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι παρεφύλαττον, τὸ
μὲν πρῶτον προεκαλεῖτο τοὺς πολεμίους εἰς παράταξιν,
σχεδὸν τριπλασίους ὄντας τοῖς πλήθεσιν,
οὐδενὸς δὲ τολμῶντος ἐκτὸς τοῦ τειχίσματος προελθεῖν,2
ἀλλ᾿ ἀπὸ τοῦ χαρακώματος ἀμυνομένων
5ἁπάντων, προσῆγε τὴν βίαν τοῖς πολεμίοις. κατὰ
πάντα μὲν οὖν τὸν τόπον ἐγίνοντο προσβολαὶ καρτεραί,
μάλιστα δὲ κατὰ Λακεδαιμονίους, εὐεφόδων
ὄντων καὶ δυσφυλάκτων τῶν τόπων. μεγάλης δὲ
φιλοτιμίας γενομένης παρ᾿ ἀμφοτέροις, Ἐπαμεινώνδας
ἔχων μεθ᾿ ἑαυτοῦ τοὺς ἀρίστους τῶν
Θηβαίων μόγις ἐβιάσατο τοὺς Λακεδαιμονίους·
διακόψας δὲ τὴν φυλακὴν αὐτῶν καὶ τὴν δύναμιν
διαγαγὼν παρῆλθεν εἰς τὴν Πελοπόννησον, διαπραξάμενος
ἔργον οὐδὲν τῶν προκατειργασμένων
καταδεέστερον.
69. Εὐθὺ δὲ ἐπὶ Τροιζῆνα καὶ Ἐπίδαυρον πορευθεὶς
τὴν μὲν χώραν ἐδῄωσε, τῶν δὲ πόλεων
οὐκ ἐδυνήθη κρατῆσαι διὰ τὸ φρουρὰς ἔχειν ἀξιολόγους,
Σικυῶνα δὲ καὶ Φλιοῦντα3 καί τινας ἄλλας4
πόλεις καταπληξάμενος προσηγάγετο. στρατεύσας
δ᾿ ἐπὶ Κόρινθον, καὶ τῶν Κορινθίων ἐπεξελθόντων
νικήσας μάχῃ, τούτους μὲν ἐντὸς τῶν τειχῶν συνεδίωξε,




1πάντα] πάντα τὸν Dindorf.2So Vogel, following P: παρελθεῖν.3Φαιοῦντα MSS. corrected by Palmer.4ἄλλας added by Dindorf (cp. chaps. 71. 4 and 75. 2).142Book XV

with palisades and deep trenches, and since the task 369/8 b.c. was quickly completed owing to the large number of men and their enthusiasm, they had every spot fortified before the Boeotians arrived. Epameinondas came with his army, inspected the fortifications, and, perceiving that there was a spot very easy of access where the Lacedaemonians were on guard, first challenged the enemy to come forth to a pitched battle, though they were almost three times his number, then when not a man dared to advance beyond the fortified line, but all remained on the defensive in their palisaded camp, he launched a violent attack upon them. Accordingly, throughout the whole area heavy assaults were made, but particularly against the Lacedaemonians, for their terrain was easily assailed and difficult to defend. Great rivalry arose between the two armies, and Epameinondas, who had with him the bravest of the Thebans, with great effort forced back the Lacedaemonians, and, cutting through their defence and bringing his army through, passed into the Peloponnese, thereby accomplishing a feat no whit inferior to his former mighty deeds.
69. Having proceeded straightway to Troezên and Epidaurus, he ravaged the countryside but could not seize the cities, for they had garrisons of considerable strength, yet Sicyon,1 Phlius,2 and certain other cities he so intimidated as to bring them over to his side. When he invaded Corinth, and the Corinthians sallied forth to meet him, he defeated them in battle, and drove them all back inside their walls, but when the


1Fighting for Sicyon is indicated in Polyaenus, 5. 16. 3 and Pausanias, 6. 3. 3. That the Boeotians obtained it is stated in Xenophon, Hell. 7. 2. 11; 3. 2, 4.2According to Xenophon, ibid. 2. 5–9, Phlius remained true to Sparta.143