Diodorus of Sicily

προσόδων οὐκ ἔφησεν ὀφείλειν ὑπὲρ ταύτης τῆς
χώρας ὑπέχειν εὐθύνας, ἣν Μακεδόνες αὐτῷ δεδώκασι
διὰ τὰς γεγενημένας ἐξ αὐτοῦ χρείας
4Ἀλεξάνδρου ζῶντος. τῆς δὲ διαφορᾶς καθ᾿ ἡμέραν
αὐξομένης ὁ Σέλευκος ἀναλογιζόμενος τὰ
Πίθωνι συμβάντα περιδεὴς ἦν μήποτε προφάσεως
λαβόμενος ὁ Ἀντίγονος ἀνελεῖν αὐτὸν ἐπιχειρήσῃ·
ἐῴκει γὰρ τοὺς ἐν ἀξιώμασι τῶν ἀνδρῶν
ὄντας καὶ δυναμένους πραγμάτων ἀντιλαμβάνεσθαι
5πάντας σπεύδειν ἐκ ποδῶν ἀπαλλάσσειν. ταῦτ᾿ οὖν
εὐλαβηθεὶς ἐξεπήδησεν μετὰ πεντήκονθ᾿ ἱππέων,
διανοούμενος εἰς Αἴγυπτον ἀποχωρεῖν πρὸς Πτολεμαῖον·
διεβεβόητο γὰρ ἡ τούτου χρηστότης καὶ
τὸ πρὸς τοὺς καταφυγόντας ἐπ᾿ αὐτὸν ἐκτενὲς καὶ
6φιλάνθρωπον. ὁ δ᾿ Ἀντίγονος ἀκούσας περιχαρὴς
ἦν ἐπὶ τῷ δοκεῖν αὐτὸς μὲν μὴ συνηναγκάσθαι
προσενεγκεῖν τὰς χεῖρας ἀνδρὶ φίλῳ καὶ
συνηγωνισμένῳ προθύμως, τὸν Σέλευκον δ᾿ αὐτὸν
αὑτοῦ καταγνόντα φυγὴν παραδεδωκέναι τὴν σατραπείαν
7χωρὶς ἀγώνων καὶ κινδύνων. μετὰ δὲ
ταῦτα προσελθόντων αὐτῷ τῶν Χαλδαίων καὶ
προλεγόντων ὡς, εἰ τὸν Σέλευκον ἐκ τῶν χειρῶν
ἀφήσει, συμβήσεται τήν τ᾿ Ἀσίαν πᾶσαν ὑποχείριον
γενέσθαι καὶ αὐτὸν Ἀντίγονον ἐν τῇ πρὸς ἐκεῖνον
παρατάξει καταστρέψειν τὸν βίον, μεταμεληθεὶς
τοῖς πεπραγμένοις ἐξέπεμψε τοὺς διώξοντας· οἳ
μέχρι τινὸς ἐπακολουθήσαντες ἐπανῆλθον ἄπρακτοι.
8ὁ δ᾿ Ἀντίγονος ἐν τοῖς ἄλλοις καταφρονεῖν εἰωθὼς
τῶν τοιούτων προρρήσεων οὐ μετρίως ἐκινήθη τότε,


382Book XIX

an accounting for the revenues, Seleucus answered 316 b.c. that he was not bound to undergo a public investigation of his administration of this country which the Macedonians had given him in recognition of his services rendered while Alexander was alive.1 As the dispute grew more serious each day, Seleucus, reasoning from the fate of Pithon,2 feared that Antigonus would some day seize a pretext and undertake to destroy him; for Antigonus seemed eager to put out of the way all of his associates who were of high rank and were capable of claiming a share in the government. Therefore to avoid this, he escaped with fifty horsemen, intending to retire into Egypt to Ptolemy; for word had spread abroad of Ptolemy’s kindness and of his cordiality and friendliness toward those who fled to him.3 When Antigonus learned of the flight, he was pleased, since it seemed that he himself had been spared the necessity of laying violent hands upon a man who had been his friend and had actively co-operated with him, and that Seleucus, by condemning himself to exile, had surrendered his satrapy without struggle or danger. But then the Chaldean astrologers came to him and foretold that if ever he let Seleucus escape from his hands, the consequence would be that all Asia would become subject to Seleucus, and that Antigonus himself would lose his life in a battle against him. At this, Antigonus repented his former course and sent men to pursue Seleucus, but they, after tracking him for a certain distance, returned with their mission unaccomplished. Although Antigonus was accustomed to despise prophecies of this kind on other occasions, he was not a little troubled at this time, being disturbed


1He had been made satrap of Babylonia by Antipater at
Triparadeisus (Book 18. 39. 6).2Cp. chap. 46. 1–4.3Cp. Book 18. 14. 1. 28. 5, 33. 3.383