Diodorus of Sicily

παρ᾿ ἀμφοτέροις ἐσήμαινον τὸ πολεμικόν, οἱ δ᾿
ἄνδρες μετὰ πολλῆς βοῆς ἀλλήλοις ἐπεφέροντο.
2καὶ πρῶτον τὰ δρεπανηφόρα τῶν ἁρμάτων ἀπὸ
κράτους ἐλαυνόμενα πολλὴν ἔκπληξιν καὶ φόβον
τοῖς Μακεδόσιν ἐπέστησεν· καὶ γὰρ Μαζαῖος ὁ τῶν
ἱππέων ἡγούμενος πυκναῖς ταῖς εἴλαις σὺν τοῖς
δρεπανηφόροις ἐπήλαυνε, καταπληκτικωτέραν ποιῶν
3τὴν ἐπιφορὰν τῶν δρεπανηφόρων. τῆς δὲ φάλαγγος
συνασπιζούσης καὶ κατὰ τὰς τοῦ βασιλέως παραγγελίας
ταῖς σαρίσαις πάντων τυπτόντων τὰς
4ἀσπίδας συνέβαινε ψόφον πολὺν γίνεσθαι. διόπερ
τὰ πολλὰ τῶν ἁρμάτων πτυρομένων τῶν ἵππων
ἐστρέφετο καὶ τὴν ῥύμην ἀκατάσχετον ποιοῦντα
πρὸς τοὺς ἰδίους βιαίως ἀνέστρεφε. τῶν δ᾿ ἄλλων
προσπεσόντων τῇ φάλαγγι καὶ τῶν Μακεδόνων ποιούντων
ἀξιόλογα διαστήματα διὰ τούτων φερόμενα1
τὰ μὲν συνηκοντίσθη, τὰ δὲ διεξέπεσεν, ἔνια δὲ
τῇ βίᾳ τῆς ῥύμης φερόμενα καὶ ταῖς τῶν σιδήρων
ἀκμαῖς ἐνεργῶς χρησάμενα πολλὰς καὶ ποικίλας
5διαθέσεις θανάτων ἀπειργάζετο. τοιαύτη γὰρ
ἦν ἡ ὀξύτης καὶ βία τῶν κεχαλκευμένων πρὸς
ἀπώλειαν ὅπλων ὥστε πολλῶν μὲν βραχίονας σὺν
αὐταῖς ταῖς ἀσπίσιν ἀποκόπτεσθαι, οὐκ ὀλίγων δὲ
τραχήλους παρασύρεσθαι καὶ τὰς κεφαλὰς πίπτειν
ἐπὶ τὴν γῆν βλεπόντων ἔτι τῶν ὀμμάτων καὶ
τῆς τοῦ προσώπου διαθέσεως διαφυλαττομένης,
ἐνίων δὲ τὰς πλευρὰς ἐπικαιρίοις τομαῖς ἀναρήττεσθαι
καὶ θανάτους ὀξεῖς ἐπιφέρεσθαι.2
1τὰ φερόμενα codd.; corrected by Fischer.2ἀναρηττόντων and ἐπιφερόντων codd.; corrected by Wesseling. The manuscript readings are explained and defended by R. Laqueur, Hermes, 86 (1958), 259 f.284Book XVII

each other, the trumpeters on both sides sounded the 331/0 b.c. attack and the troops charged each other with a loud shout. First the scythed chariots swung into action at full gallop and created great alarm and terror among the Macedonians,1 especially since Mazaeus2 in command of the cavalry made their attack more frightening by supporting it with his dense squadrons of horse. As the phalanx joined shields, however, all beat upon their shields with their spears as the king had commanded and a great din arose. As the horses shied off, most of the chariots were turned about and bore hard with irresistible impact against their own ranks. Others continued on against the Macedonian lines, but as the soldiers opened wide gaps in their ranks the chariots were channelled through these. In some instances the horses were killed by javelin casts and in others they rode through and escaped, but some of them, using the full force of their momentum and applying their steel blades actively, wrought death among the Macedonians in many and various forms. Such was the keenness and the force of the scythes ingeniously contrived to do harm that they severed the arms of many, shields and all, and in no small number of cases they cut through necks and sent heads tumbling to the ground with the eyes still open and the expression of the countenance unchanged, and in other cases they sliced through ribs with mortal gashes and inflicted a quick death.3
1Curtius, 4. 15. 3; Arrian, 3. 13. 5.2Mazaeus appears below (chap. 59. 5) in command of the Persian right wing, not the left.3Curtius, 4. 15. 14–17. Arrian is not interested in such descriptions.285