Diodorus of Sicily

ἐλαττωμάτων ὁ μὲν Δημήτριος ἀπεκόμισε τὰς
μηχανὰς εἰς τὸν ἴδιον λιμένα καὶ τὰ πεπονηκότα
τῶν πλοίων καὶ μηχανῶν ἐπεσκεύασεν, οἱ δὲ Ῥόδιοι
τοὺς μὲν τελευτήσαντας τῶν πολιτῶν ἔθαψαν,
τὰ δὲ ὅπλα τῶν πολεμίων καὶ τὰ ἀκροστόλια τοῖς
θεοῖς ἀνέθηκαν, τὰ δὲ διὰ τῶν πετροβόλων πεπτωκότα
τῶν τειχῶν ἀνῳκοδόμουν.
88. Δημήτριος δὲ περὶ τὴν ἐπισκευὴν τῶν μηχανῶν
καὶ τῶν πλοίων ἡμέρας ἑπτὰ γενόμενος καὶ
πάντα τὰ πρὸς τὴν πολιορκίαν παρασκευασάμενος
πάλιν ἐπέπλευσε τῷ λιμένι· πᾶσα γὰρ ἦν ἡ σπουδὴ
περὶ τὸ κρατῆσαι τούτου καὶ τῆς σιτοπομπείας
2ἀποκλεῖσαι τοὺς κατὰ τὴν πόλιν. γενόμενος δ᾿
ἐντὸς βέλους τοῖς μὲν πυρφόροις πολλοῖς οὖσιν εἰς
τὰ διωρμισμένα1 πλοῖα τῶν Ῥοδίων ἐνέβαλε, τοῖς
δὲ πετροβόλοις τὰ τείχη διέσεισε, τοῖς δ᾿ ὀξυβελέσι
τὰ φαινόμενα τῶν σωμάτων κατετίτρωσκε.
3συνεχοῦς οὖν καὶ καταπληκτικῆς γενομένης τῆς
προσβολῆς οἱ μὲν παρὰ τοῖς Ῥοδίοις ναύκληροι
διαγωνιάσαντες περὶ τῶν πλοίων κατέσβεσαν τοὺς
πυρφόρους, οἱ δὲ πρυτάνεις κινδυνεύοντος ἁλῶναι
τοῦ λιμένος παρεκάλεσαν τοὺς ἀρίστους τῶν
πολιτῶν τὸν ὑπὲρ τῆς κοινῆς σωτηρίας ὑπομεῖναι
4κίνδυνον. πολλῶν οὖν προθύμως ὑπακουόντων
τρεῖς ναῦς τὰς κρατίστας ἐπλήρωσαν ἐπιλέκτων
ἀνδρῶν, οἷς παρήγγειλαν πειρᾶσθαι τοῖς ἐμβόλοις
βυθίσαι τὰ πλοῖα τὰ τὰς μηχανὰς κομίζοντα τῶν
5πολεμίων. οὗτοι μὲν οὖν, καίπερ πολλῶν ἐπ᾿
αὐτοὺς φερομένων βελῶν ὠσάμενοι τὸ μὲν πρῶτον
τὸν σεσιδηρωμένον χάρακα διέσπασαν, τοῖς δὲ
1διωρμισμένα Fischer: διωρισμένα.372Book XX

fought from the outside, Demetrius withdrew his 305 b.c. engines of war to his own harbour1 and repaired the ships and engines that had been damaged; and the Rhodians buried those of their citizens who had perished, dedicated to the gods the arms of the enemy and the beaks of the ships, and rebuilt the parts of the wall that had been overthrown by the ballistae.
88. After Demetrius had spent seven days on the repair of his engines and ships and had made all his preparations for the siege, he again attacked the harbour; for his whole effort centred upon capturing this and shutting off the people of the city from their grain supplies. When he was within range, with the fire-arrows, of which he had many, he made an attack on the ships of the Rhodians that lay at anchor, with his ballistae he shook the walls, and with his catapults he cut down any who showed themselves. Then when the attack had become continuous and terrifying, the Rhodian ship-captains, after a fierce struggle to save their ships, put out the fire-arrows, and the magistrates, since the harbour was in danger of being taken, summoned the noblest citizens to undergo the perils of war for the sake of the common safety. When many responded with alacrity, they manned the three staunchest ships with picked men, whom they instructed to try to sink with their rams the ships that carried the engines of the enemy. These men, accordingly, pushed forward although missiles in large numbers were speeding against them; and at first they broke through the iron studded boom, and then by delivering repeated blows with



1Cp. chap. 83. 4.373