Diodorus of Sicily

πολλάκις δυνάμεων ἀφηγησάμενον, ἐπὶ τὸ
δεῖπνον παραλαβὼν ἐδολοφόνησεν, ἐγκαλέσαι μὲν
ἁπλῶς οὐδ᾿ ὁτιοῦν ἔχων, ἐκ ποδῶν δὲ ποιήσασθαι
σπεύδων1 δραστικὸν ἄνδρα καὶ δυνάμενον ἐφεδρεῦσαι
5τοῖς κακῶς προϊσταμένοις τῆς ἡγεμονίας. διαβοηθείσης
δὲ τῆς πράξεως εὐθὺς οἵ τε φυγάδες συνέτρεχον
ἐπ᾿ αὐτὸν καὶ πάντες οἱ λοιποὶ διετέθησαν
ἀλλοτρίως καὶ τὸ μὲν πρῶτον ἀπέστησαν αὐτὸν τῆς
στρατηγίας, μετ᾿ ὀλίγον δὲ καὶ βάλλειν τοῖς λίθοις
ἐπεχείρησαν· διόπερ φοβηθεὶς τὴν τοῦ πλήθους
ὁρμὴν νυκτὸς ἔφυγε καὶ λαθὼν διῆρεν εἰς τὴν
6Λακωνικήν. τούτου δ᾿ ἀπαλλαγέντος Ταραντῖνοι
μὲν ἀπεσταλκότες εἰς Σικελίαν τὸν στόλον μετεπέμψαντο,
Ἀκραγαντῖνοι δὲ καὶ Γελῷοι καὶ Μεσσήνιοι
κατέλυσαν τὸν πρὸς Ἀγαθοκλέα πόλεμον,
μεσιτεύσαντος τὰς συνθήκας Ἀμίλκου τοῦ Καρχηδονίου.
7ἦσαν δὲ τὰ κεφάλαια τῶν συντεθέντων
τοιάδε, τῶν Ἑλληνίδων πόλεων τῶν κατὰ Σικελίαν
Ἡράκλειαν μὲν καὶ Σελινοῦντα καὶ πρὸς ταύταις
Ἱμέραν ὑπὸ Καρχηδονίοις τετάχθαι, καθὰ καὶ
προϋπῆρχον, τὰς δ᾿ ἄλλας πάσας αὐτονόμους εἶναι,
τὴν ἡγεμονίαν ἐχόντων Συρακοσίων.
72. Μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα Ἀγαθοκλῆς ὁρῶν ἔρημον
οὖσαν τὴν Σικελίαν στρατοπέδων πολεμίων ἀδεῶς
προσήγετο τὰς πόλεις καὶ τὰ χωρία. ταχὺ δὲ πολλῶν
ἐγκρατὴς γενόμενος ἰσχυρὰν κατεσκευάσατο
τὴν δυναστείαν· καὶ γὰρ συμμάχων πλῆθος καὶ
προσόδους ἁδρὰς καὶ στρατόπεδον ἀξιόλογον περιεποιήσατο.



1σπεύδων added by Fischer, cp. chap. 55. 4.26Book XIX


exiles and had often commanded armies, and treacherously 314 b.c.killed him, not having any charge whatever to bring against him and yet being eager to put out of the way a man who was accustomed to act and who was capable of keeping under surveillance those who misused positions of leadership. When this deed became known, the exiles at once began to join forces against Acrotatus, and all the rest were alienated from him. First they removed him from his generalship, and soon afterwards they attempted to stone him, whereupon, terrified by the popular uprising, he took flight by night and sailed secretly to Laconia. After his departure the Tarentines, who had sent their fleet to Sicily, recalled it; and the peoples of Acragas, Gela, and Messenê1 brought their war against Agathocles to an end, Hamilear2 the Carthaginian acting as mediator in making the treaty. The chief points of the agreement were as follows: of the Greek towns in Sicily, Heraelea, Selinus, and Himera were to be subject to the Carthaginians as they had been before, and all the others were to be autonomous under the hegemony of Syracuse.
72. Afterwards,3 however, when Agathocles perceived that Sicily was clear of hostile armies, he began unhampered to subject the cities and strongholds to himself. Mastering many of them quickly, he made his power secure; in fact, he built up for himself a host of allies, ample revenues, and a


1But in chap. 102. 1 we are told that Messenê was
excluded from the peace.2He had previously shown himself favourable to Agathocles (Justin, 22. 2. 6). He is possibly to be identified with the Hamilcar who had fought against Timoleon (Plutarch, Timoleon, 25).3It is probable that the events narrated in this paragraph belong, at least in part, to the following year, in the account of which Sicily is not mentioned.27