Diodorus of Sicily

καὶ τῆς σωτηρίας ἀπογινωσκομένης συνδραμόντες
εἰς ἐκκλησίαν νυκτὸς ἐψηφίσαντο παραδοῦναι
τὴν ἀκρόπολιν καὶ σφᾶς αὐτοὺς τοῖς Συρακοσίοις
3ἅμ᾿ ἡμέρᾳ. ἤδη δὲ τῆς νυκτὸς ληγούσης οἱ μὲν
μισθοφόροι κήρυκας ἐξέπεμπον πρὸς τοὺς Συρακοσίους
περὶ τῆς διαλύσεως, ὁ δὲ Νύψιος διαφαινούσης
ἤδη τῆς ἡμέρας κατέπλευσε μετὰ τοῦ στόλου
καὶ καθωρμίσθη περὶ τὴν Ἀρέθουσαν. διόπερ τῆς
ἐνδείας παραχρῆμα μεταβαλούσης εἰς πολλὴν δαψίλειαν
τῶν ἐπιτηδείων ὁ μὲν στρατηγὸς Νύψιος
ἐκβιβάσας τοὺς στρατιώτας, κοινὴν ἐκκλησίαν
συναγαγὼν καὶ διαλεχθεὶς οἰκείως τοῖς παροῦσι καιροῖς,
προθύμους κατεσκεύασε πρὸς τοὺς μέλλοντας
κινδύνους. ἡ μὲν οὖν ἀκρόπολις ἤδη παραδιδομένη
τοῖς Συρακοσίοις τὸν εἰρημένον τρόπον ἀνελπίστως
4διεφυλάχθη, οἱ δὲ Συρακόσιοι πληρώσαντες ἁπάσας
τὰς τριήρεις ἐπέπλευσαν τοῖς πολεμίοις ἔτι περὶ
τὴν ἐξαίρεσιν τῆς ἀγορᾶς διατρίβουσιν. ἀπροσδοκήτου
δὲ τῆς ἐφόδου γενομένης καὶ τῶν κατὰ
τὴν ἀκρόπολιν μισθοφόρων τεθορυβημένως ἀντιταχθέντων
ταῖς πολεμίαις1 τριήρεσιν, ἐγένετο ναυμαχία
καθ᾿ ἣν οἱ Συρακόσιοι προετέρησαν, καὶ
τινὰς μὲν τῶν νεῶν κατέδυσαν, τινῶν δ᾿ ἐγκρατεῖς
κατέστησαν, τὰς δὲ λοιπὰς πρὸς τὴν γῆν κατεδίωξαν.
5μετεωρισθέντες δ᾿ ἐπὶ τῷ προτερήματι τοῖς
μὲν θεοῖς μεγαλοπρεπῶς ἔθυσαν ἐπινίκια, αὐτοὶ
δ᾿ εἰς εὐωχίας καὶ πότους ἐκτραπέντες, καταφρονοῦντες
τῶν ἡττημένων ῥᾳθύμως εἶχον τὰ περὶ τὰς
φυλακάς.
19. Νύψιος δ᾿ ὁ τῶν μισθοφόρων στρατηγὸς ἀναλαβεῖν
καὶ ἀναμαχέσασθαι βουλόμενος τὴν ἧτταν
νυκτὸς ἐκτεταγμένῃ τῇ δυνάμει παραδόξως προσέπεσε
1So Dindorf: πολεμικαῖς.288Book XVI

necessity and they despaired of saving their lives, they 356/5 b.c. came together in an assembly at night and voted to surrender the citadel and themselves to the Syracusans at dawn. Night was just drawing to a close as the mercenaries sent heralds to the Syracusans to make terms, but, as dawn was just breaking, Nypsius sailed in with his fleet and anchored off Arethusa.1 Consequently, now that the scarcity had suddenly changed into a great abundance of supplies, the general Nypsius, after disembarking his soldiers, held a joint assembly, presented arguments suitable to the occasion and won the support of the men to meet the perils in store. Now the acropolis which was already on the point of being given over to the Syracusans was unexpectedly preserved in the aforesaid manner, but the Syracusans, manning all their triremes, sailed against the enemy while they were still occupied in unloading the supplies. Since the attack was unexpected and the mercenaries in the citadel could only be drawn up in confused fashion against the enemy triremes, a naval battle took place in which the Syracusans had the superiority, in fact they sank some of the ships, gained possession of others, and pursued the remnant to the shore. Elated by their success they offered magnificent sacrifice to the gods in honour of the victory, and, turning to banqueting and drink, with contempt for the men they had defeated, were negligent about their guards.
19. Nypsius, the commander of the mercenaries, wishing to renew the battle and retrieve the defeat, with his army which had been marshalled during the



1A fountain on the island of Ortygia on the slope toward the Great Harbour.289