Diodorus of Sicily

τοῦ φυτοῦ, τῆς δ᾿ ἐξ αὐτοῦ χρείας εἰς φάρμακα
τοῖς ἰατροῖς καθ᾿ ὑπερβολὴν εὐθετούσης.
99. Τὴν δ᾿ ἐκπίπτουσαν ἄσφαλτον οἱ περιοικοῦντες
ἐξ ἀμφοτέρων τῶν μερῶν τὴν λίμνην διαρπάζουσι
πολεμικῶς διακείμενοι πρὸς ἀλλήλους, ἄνευ
πλοίων ἰδιαζόντως τὴν κομιδὴν ποιούμενοι. παρασκευασάμενοι γὰρ δέσμας καλάμων εὐμεγέθεις
ἐμβάλλουσιν εἰς τὴν λίμνην· ἐπὶ δὲ τούτων ἐπικάθηνται
οὐ πλείω τριῶν, ὧν1 δύο μὲν ἔχοντες
προσδεδεμένας πλάτας κωπηλατοῦσιν, εἷς δὲ φορῶν
τόξα τοὺς προσπλέοντας ἐκ τοῦ πέραν ἢ βιάζεσθαι
2τολμῶντας ἀμύνεται. ὅταν δὲ πλησίον γένωνται
τῆς ἀσφάλτου, πελέκεις ἔχοντες ἐπιπηδῶσι καὶ καθάπερ
μαλακῆς πέτρας ἀποκόπτοντες γεμίζουσι
τὴν δέσμην, εἶτα ἀποπλέουσιν εἰς τοὐπίσω. ἂν δέ
τις αὐτῶν ἀποπέσῃ τῆς δέσμης διαλυθείσης μὴ
δυνάμενος νεῖν, οὐ καταδύεται καθάπερ ἐν τοῖς ἄλλοις
ὕδασιν, ἀλλὰ ἐπινήχεται τοῖς ἐπισταμένοις
3ὁμοίως. φύσει γὰρ τοῦτο τὸ ὑγρὸν παραδέχεται
βάρος ὃ συμβαίνει μετέχειν αὐξήσεως ἢ πνεύματος,
ἔξω τῶν στερεῶν, ἃ τὴν πυκνότητα δοκεῖ παραπλησίαν
ἔχειν ἀργύρῳ καὶ χρυσῷ καὶ μολύβδῳ καὶ
τοῖς ὁμοίοις· καὶ ταῦτα μὲν πολὺ βραδύτερον
καταφέρεται τῶν αὐτῶν2 ἐν ταῖς ἄλλαις λίμναις
ῥιπτουμένων. ταύτην δ᾿ ἔχοντες οἱ βάρβαροι πρόσοδον
ἀπάγουσι τὴν ἄσφαλτον εἰς τὴν Αἴγυπτον
καὶ πωλοῦσιν εἰς τὰς ταριχείας τῶν νεκρῶν· μὴ
μιγνυμένης γὰρ ταύτης τοῖς λοιποῖς ἀρώμασιν οὐ
δυνατὸν γενέσθαι τὴν τῶν σωμάτων φυλακὴν
πολυχρόνιον.
100. Ὁ δ᾿ Ἀντίγονος, ἐπανελθόντος τοῦ Δημητρίου
καὶ τὰ κατὰ μέρος τῶν πεπραγμένων
1ὧν added by Schaefer.2αὐτῶν added by Capps.102Book XIX

found, and its use as a drug is very important to 312 b.c. physicians.
99. When the asphalt has been ejected, the people who live about the sea on both sides carry it off like plunder of war since they are hostile to each other, making the collection without boats in a peculiar fashion. They make ready large bundles of reeds and cast them into the sea. On these not more than three men take their places, two of whom row with oars, which are lashed on, but one carries a bow and repels any who sail against them from the other shore or who venture to interfere with them. When they have come near the asphalt they jump upon it with axes and, just as if it were soft stone, they cut out pieces and load them on the raft, after which they sail back. If the raft comes to pieces and one of them who does not know how to swim falls off, he does not sink as he would in other waters, but stays afloat as well as do those who do know. For this liquid by its nature supports heavy bodies that have the power of growth or of breathing, except for solid ones that seem to have a density like that of silver, gold, lead, and the like; and even these sink much more slowly than do these same bodies if they are cast into other lakes. The barbarians who enjoy this source of income take the asphalt to Egypt and sell it for the embalming of the dead; for unless this is mixed with the other aromatic ingredients, the preservation of the bodies cannot be permanent.
100. Antigonus, when Demetrius returned and made a detailed report of what he had done, rebuked



103