Diodorus of Sicily

καὶ τὰς ἴσας νύκτας ἐκ διαδοχῆς τὰς προσβολὰς
7ποιούμενος. τὸ μὲν οὖν πρῶτον οἱ βάρβαροι διὰ
τὰς τῶν τόπων ὑπεροχὰς προετέρουν καὶ πολλοὺς
ἀνῄρουν τῶν προπετῶς βιαζομένων· τοῦ δὲ χώματος
συντελεσθέντος καὶ τῶν ὀξυβελῶν καταπελτῶν καὶ
τῶν ἄλλων ὀργάνων ἐπισταθέντων, πρὸς δὲ τούτοις
τοῦ βασιλέως φανεροῦ καθεστῶτος ὡς οὐκ ἀποστήσεται
τῆς πολιορκίας οἱ μὲν Ἰνδοὶ κατεπλάγησαν,
ὁ δ᾿ Ἀλέξανδρος ἐμφρόνως προϊδόμενος τὸ μέλλον
ἐξέλιπεν1 τὴν ἐν τῇ παρόδῳ καταλελειμμένην φυλακήν,
διδοὺς ἔξοδον τοῖς βουλομένοις ἐκ τῆς πέτρας
ἀναχωρεῖν. οἱ δὲ βάρβαροι φοβηθέντες τάς τε
τῶν Μακεδόνων ἀρετὰς καὶ τὴν τοῦ βασιλέως
φιλοτιμίαν νυκτὸς ἐξέλιπον τὴν πέτραν.
86. Ὁ δ᾿ Ἀλέξανδρος τοῖς κενοῖς2 τοῦ πολέμου
καταστρατηγήσας τοὺς Ἰνδοὺς χωρὶς κινδύνου
ἐκυρίευσε τῆς πέτρας. καὶ τῷ μὲν ὁδηγήσαντι τὰς
ὡμολογημένας δωρεὰς ἀπέδωκεν, αὐτὸς δὲ ἀνέζευξε
μετὰ τῆς δυνάμεως.
2Καθ᾿ ὃν καιρὸν Ἀφρίκης3 τις Ἰνδός, ἔχων μὲν
στρατιώτας δισμυρίους, ἐλέφαντας δὲ πεντεκαίδεκα,4
διέτριβε περὶ τὸν τόπον. τοῦτον δέ τινες
ἀνελόντες καὶ τὴν κεφαλὴν αὐτοῦ πρὸς Ἀλέξανδρον
ἐνέγκαντες διὰ ταύτης τῆς εὐεργεσίας περιεποιήσαντο
3τὰς ἰδίας σωτηρίας. ὁ δὲ βασιλεὺς τούτους



1Probably a slip for ἀπήγαγεν or the like.2καινοῖς given by a late hand in R; the expression is proverbial
(Book 21. 2. 3), cp. Aristotle, Eth. Nic. 3. 8. 6.
1116 b 7; Curtius, 4. 13. 5; 7. 11. 25.3The name is perhaps to be corrected into Αἰρίκης, as
Anspach suggested, to accord with the Erices of Curtius
(8. 12. 1).4ἑπτακαίδεκα F.368Book XVII

days and seven nights with relays of troops.1 At 327/6 b.c. first the defenders had the advantage because of holding the higher ground, and they killed many of those who attacked rashly. As the embankment was finished, however, and the dart-throwing catapults and other engines were emplaced, and the king also made it evident that he would not break off the siege, the Indians were alarmed, and Alexander, craftily anticipating what would happen, removed the guard which had been left in the path, allowing those who wished to withdraw from the rock. In fear of the Macedonian fighting qualities and the king’s determination, the Indians left the rock under cover of darkness.
86. So Alexander employed the false alarms of war to outgeneral the Indians and to gain possession of the “rock” without further fighting. He gave the promised reward to his guide and marched off with his army.2
About this time, a certain Indian named Aphrices with twenty thousand troops and fifteen elephants was encamped in the vicinity.3 Some of his followers killed him and cut off his head and brought it to Alexander, and saved their own lives by this favour. The king took them into his service, and rounded up





1Arrian, 4. 29. 7–30. 1.2According to Sir Aurel Stein’s discoveries (p. 365, note 2). the ravine which Alexander filled up lay at the top of the ridge, so that both features of Diodorus’s account, the secret path and the regular siege operations, were actually present. The third feature of the story, the deception to induce the Indians to withdraw, is less easy to explain.3In Curtius (8. 12. 1) he is said to have blocked Alexander’s advance.369