Diodorus of Sicily

κέρας πᾶν ἐξέταξε τοὺς κρατίστους τῶν ἐλεφάντων
τριάκοντα, ποιήσας1 ἐπικάμπιον, καὶ τὰ διαστήματα
τούτων συνεπλήρωσε τοῖς ψιλοῖς τάγμασιν
ἐπιλέκτοις· τῶν δ᾿ ἄλλων θηρίων τὰ πλείω μὲν
τῆς φάλαγγος προέστησεν, ὀλίγα δὲ μετὰ τῶν ἱππέων
7τῶν ἐν τοῖς εὐωνύμοις μέρεσι. τοῦτον δὲ
τὸν τρόπον ἐκτάξας τὸ στρατόπεδον κατέβαινεν
ἐπὶ τοὺς πολεμίους, λοξὴν ποιήσας τὴν τάξιν· τὸ
μὲν γὰρ δεξιὸν κέρας, ᾧ μάλιστα ἐπίστευεν, προεβάλετο,
τὸ δ᾿ ἕτερον ὑπεστείλατο, διεγνωκὼς ᾧ
μὲν φυγομαχεῖν, ᾧ δὲ διαγωνίζεσθαι.2
30. Ἐπεὶ δὲ σύνεγγυς ἀλλήλων ἐγένετο τὰ
στρατόπεδα καὶ τὸ σύσσημον ἤρθη παρ᾿ ἀμφοτέροις,
ἐπηλάλαξαν μὲν αἱ δυνάμεις ἐπαλλὰξ πλεονάκις,
ἐσήμηναν δ᾿ οἱ σαλπιγκταὶ τὸ πολεμικόν.
πρῶτοι δ᾿ οἱ μετὰ Πίθωνος ἱππεῖς, στερεὸν μὲν
οὐδὲν οὐδ᾿ ἀξιόλογον ἔχοντες πρόφραγμα περὶ αὐτούς,
ὑπερέχοντες δὲ τῶν ἀντιτεταγμένων τῷ τε
πλήθει καὶ ταῖς ἐλαφρότησιν, ἐπειρῶντο χρήσασθαι
2τοῖς ἰδίοις προτερήμασι. τὸ μὲν γὰρ κατὰ στόμα
διακινδυνεύειν πρὸς ἐλέφαντας οὐκ ἀσφαλὲς ἐνόμιζον,
περιιππεύσαντες δὲ τὸ κέρας καὶ πλαγίοις
ἐμβαλόντες πυκνοῖς τοῖς βέλεσι κατετίτρωσκον,
αὐτοὶ μὲν διὰ τὰς ἐλαφρότητας οὐδὲν πάσχοντες,
μεγάλα δὲ βλάπτοντες τοὺς διὰ τὰ βάρη μήτ᾿
ἐκδιῶξαι δυναμένους μήτ᾿ ἀναχωρεῖν ὅταν καιρὸς
3παραγγείλῃ. Εὐμενὴς δ᾿ ὁρῶν πιεζούμενον τὸ κέρας
τῷ πλήθει τῶν ἀφιπποτοξοτῶν μετεπέμψατο
παρ᾿ Εὐδάμου τοῦ τὸ λαιὸν κέρας ἔχοντος τοὺς
4ἐλαφροτάτους τῶν ἱππέων, ἐξαγαγὼν δὲ ἐπὶ κέρας


1δ᾿ after ποιήσας deleted by Dindorf.2δὲ διαγωνίζεσθαι Fischer: δ᾿ ἀγωνίζεσθαι.310Book XIX

drew up the strongest thirty of the elephants, making 317 b.c. a curved line, and he filled the intervals between them with selected light armed men. Most of the other elephants he placed before the phalanx, but a few were with the cavalry on the left wing. When he had drawn up the army in this fashion, he advanced down the hill against the enemy keeping an oblique front, for he thrust forward the right wing, in which he had most confidence, and held the left back, having determined to avoid battle with the one and to decide the contest with the other.
30. When the armies were close to each other and the signal had been raised in each of them, the troops shouted the battle-cry alternately several times and the trumpeters gave the signal for battle. First Pithon’s cavalry, who had no stability or any advance-guard worth mentioning yet were superior to those arrayed against them in numbers and in mobility, began trying to make use of their own advantages. They did not consider it safe to make a frontal attack against elephants, yet by riding out around the wing and making an attack on the flanks, they kept inflicting wounds with repeated flights of arrows, suffering no harm themselves because of their mobility but causing great damage to the beasts, which because of their weight could neither pursue nor retire when the occasion demanded. When Eumenes, however, observed that the wing was hard pressed by the multitude of mounted archers, he summoned the most lightly equipped of his cavalry from Eudamus, who had the left wing. Leading the whole squadron in a flanking movement, he made an attack upon his
311