Diodorus of Sicily

πόλεμον μεγάλων στρατοπέδων καὶ παρασκευῆς οὐ
τῆς τυχούσης προσδεόμενον.
16. Ἅμα δὲ τούτοις πραττομένοις Ἄτταλος καὶ
Πολέμων καὶ Δόκιμος, ἔτι δὲ Ἀντίπατρος καὶ
Φιλώτας, οἱ μετὰ τῆς Ἀλκέτου δυνάμεως ἁλόντες
ἡγεμόνες, ἐφυλάττοντο μὲν ἔν τινι φρουρίῳ καθ᾿
ὑπερβολὴν ὀχυρῷ, ἀκούσαντες δὲ τοὺς περὶ τὸν
Ἀντίγονον εἰς τὰς ἄνω σατραπείας ποιεῖσθαι τὴν
πορείαν, νομίζοντες εὔθετον ἔχειν καιρόν, ἔπεισάν
τινας τῶν τηρούντων αὐτοὺς λῦσαι, κυριεύσαντες
δὲ ὅπλων ἐπέθεντο τῇ φυλακῇ περὶ μέσας νύκτας.
αὐτοὶ μὲν οὖν ὀκτὼ τὸν ἀριθμὸν ὄντες, τηρούμενοι
δὲ ὑπὸ στρατιωτῶν τετρακοσίων, διαφέροντες δὲ
ταῖς τόλμαις καὶ ταῖς εὐχειρίαις διὰ τὴν μετ᾿
Ἀλεξάνδρου στρατείαν, Ξενοπείθη μὲν τὸν φρούραρχον
συναρπάσαντες ὑπὲρ τὸ τεῖχος ἔρριψαν,
σταδιαῖον ἐχούσης τῆς πέτρας ὕψος, τῶν δ᾿ ἄλλων
τοὺς μὲν κατασφάξαντες, τοὺς δὲ ἐκβαλόντες ἐνεπύρισαν
2τὰς οἰκίας. τῶν δ᾿ ἔξωθεν καραδοκούντων
προσελάβοντο τὸν ἀριθμὸν εἰς πεντήκοντα. τοῦ δὲ
φρουρίου σίτου τε πλῆθος καὶ τῶν ἄλλων ἐπιτηδείων
ἔχοντος ἐβουλεύοντο πότερον χρὴ μένειν καὶ
χρῆσθαι τῇ τῶν τόπων ὀχυρότητι καραδοκοῦντας
τὴν παρ᾿ Εὐμενοῦς βοήθειαν ἢ φυγόντας τὴν ταχίστην
ἀλᾶσθαι κατὰ τὴν χώραν καιροτηροῦντας τὰς
3μεταβολάς. γιγνομένης δὲ πλείονος ἀντιλογίας
Δόκιμος μὲν ἐκχωρεῖν συνεβούλευεν, οἱ δὲ περὶ τὸν
Ἄτταλον οὐκ ἔφασαν δυνήσεσθαι κακοπαθεῖν διὰ
τὴν ἐν τοῖς δεσμοῖς γενομένην κακουχίαν. τούτων
δὲ πρὸς ἀλλήλους διισταμένων ἔφθασαν ἐκ τῶν


272Book XIX

for he perceived that the war called for large armies 317 b.c. and for no ordinary preparation.
16. While these things were happening, Attalus, Polemon, and Docimus, together with Antipater and Philotas, the commanders who had been captured along with the army of Alcetas, were being kept under guard in a certain exceedingly strong fortress1; but when they heard that Antigonus was leading his expedition into the upper satrapies, believing that they had a favourable opportunity, they persuaded certain of their custodians to release them, and then, gaining possession of arms, they set upon the guard at about midnight. They themselves numbered only eight and were guarded by four hundred soldiers, but they excelled in daring and dexterity, thanks to their service with Alexander. They laid violent hands upon Xenopeithes, the captain of the garrison, and threw him from the wall at a point where the cliff was six hundred feet high; and then, after slaughtering some of the remaining guards and casting the others down, they set fire to the buildings. From those who had been standing aside to observe the outcome they increased their number to fifty. Since the stronghold held a large amount of grain and other provisions, they took counsel together whether they ought to remain and take advantage of the strength of the position, awaiting the aid to be expected from Eumenes, or should flee as quickly as possible and move about the country while waiting for a change in the situation. There was a considerable argument, for Docimus advised flight while Attalus declared that he would not be able to endure hardship because of the bad physical condition that had been caused by his imprisonment. But while they were disputing
1Cp. Book 18. 45. 3–4.273