Diodorus of Sicily

στρατοπέδου· διήνυσε γὰρ ἕως Γαμάργων τῆς
Μηδίας, οὔσης τῆς χώρας ὑπὸ Πίθωνα καὶ δυναμένης
μεγάλαις δυνάμεσι πρὸς διατροφὴν δαψιλῶς
3ἅπαντα χορηγῆσαι. Εὐμενὴς δὲ διὰ τῶν κατασκόπων
πυθόμενος τὴν ἀναχώρησιν τῶν περὶ Ἀντίγονον
τοῦ μὲν διώκειν ἀπέστη διὰ τὸ καὶ τοὺς
ἰδίους στρατιώτας ἐν ἀσιτίᾳ καὶ κακοπαθείαις
μεγάλαις γεγονέναι, περὶ δὲ τὴν ἀναίρεσιν τῶν
τετελευτηκότων γενόμενος ἐπεμελήθη τῆς ταφῆς
μεγαλοπρεπῶς. ἔνθα δὴ συνέβη γενέσθαι πρᾶγμα
παράδοξον καὶ πολὺ τῶν παρ᾿ Ἕλλησι νομίμων
ἐξηλλαγμένον.
33. Κητεὺς γὰρ ὁ τῶν ἐκ τῆς Ἰνδικῆς ἀπηντηκότων
στρατηγὸς ἀνῃρέθη μὲν ἐν τῇ μάχῃ λαμπρῶς
ἀγωνισάμενος, ἀπέλιπε δὲ δύο γυναῖκας συνακολουθούσας
ἐν τῷ στρατοπέδῳ, τὴν μὲν νεόγαμον,
τὴν δὲ ὀλίγοις ἔτεσι πρότερον συνοικήσασαν, ἀμφοτέρας
δὲ φιλοστόργως πρὸς αὐτὸν διακειμένας.
2ὄντος δὲ παλαιοῦ νόμου παρὰ τοῖς Ἰνδοῖς τοὺς
γαμοῦντας καὶ τὰς γαμουμένας παρθένους μὴ διὰ
τῆς τῶν γονέων κρίσεως ποιεῖσθαι τὸν γάμον, ἀλλὰ
πείσαντας ἀλλήλους, τὸν μὲν ἔμπροσθεν χρόνον τῆς
μνηστείας γενομένης διὰ νεωτέρων ταῖς ἡλικίαις
ὡς ἐπὶ πολὺ συνέβαινε διαπίπτειν τὰς κρίσεις καὶ
ταχὺ μεταμελομένων ἀμφοτέρων πολλὰς τῶν γυναικῶν
διαφθείρεσθαι καὶ δι᾿ ἀκρασίαν φιλοστοργεῖν
ἑτέρους, τέλος δὲ μὴ δυναμένας εὐσχημόνως ἀπολιπεῖν
τοὺς ἐξ ἀρχῆς προκριθέντας διὰ φαρμάκων
ἀναιρεῖν τοὺς συνοικοῦντας, καὶ τὴν χώραν δ᾿ οὐκ
ὀλίγας ἀφορμὰς αὐταῖς δοῦναι, πολλὰς καὶ ποικίλας
φέρουσαν φθαρτικὰς δυνάμεις, ἐξ ὧν ἐνίας
προσχρωσθείσας μόνον τοῖς ἐδέσμασιν ἢ ποτηρίοις
318Book XIX

an unplundered country in which to refresh his soldiers 317 b.c. He went, indeed, as far as Gamarga1 in Media, a land that was subject to Pithon and that was able to supply great armies abundantly with everything needed for their support. When Eumenes learned through scouts of the departure of Antigonus, he refrained from following him because his own soldiers also had lacked food and had suffered great hardship; but he attended to the taking up of the dead and saw to it that they received a magnificent burial. Then an event took place that was amazing and very different from Greek custom.
33. Ceteus, the general of the soldiers who had come from India, was killed in the battle after fighting brilliantly, but he left two wives who had accompanied him in the army, one of them a bride, the other married to him some years before, but both of them loving him deeply. It is an ancient custom among the Indians that the men who marry and the maidens who are married do not do so as a result of the decision of their parents but by mutual persuasion. Formerly, since the wooing was done by persons who were too young, it often happened that, the choice turning out badly, both would quickly regret their act, and that many wives were first seduced, then through wantonness gave their love to other men, and finally, not being able without disgrace to leave the mates whom they had first selected, would kill their husbands by poison. The country, indeed, furnished no few means for this, since it produced many and varied deadly poisons, some of which when merely spread upon the food or

1Probably identical with Gadamala (chap. 37.1). Neither the location nor the correct form of the name is certain.319