Diodorus of Sicily

πεντακόσια, ναῦς δὲ μακρὰς πεντήκοντα,
κατέπλευσε τῆς Ἀσίας εἰς τὰς ὀνομαζομένας
Λεύκας. εἰς δὲ ταύτην τὴν πόλιν μεταπεμψάμενος
πολλοὺς τῶν ἀφεστηκότων ἡγεμόνας, τούτους μὲν
συλλαβὼν καὶ δήσας ἀνέπεμψε πρὸς Ἀρταξέρξην,
αὐτὸς δὲ ἀποστάτης γενόμενος ταῖς ἐκ τῆς προδοσίας
δωρεαῖς διελύσατο τὰ πρὸς τὸν βασιλέα.
2κατὰ δὲ τὴν Αἴγυπτον Ταχὼς ὁ βασιλεὺς κατασκευασάμενος
τὰ πρὸς τὸν πόλεμον διακοσίας μὲν
τριήρεις εἶχε πολυτελῶς κεκοσμημένας, μισθοφόρους
δ᾿ ἐπιλέκτους ἐκ τῆς Ἑλλάδος μυρίους, χωρὶς
δὲ τούτων πεζοὺς στρατιώτας Αἰγυπτίους ὀκτακισμυρίους.
καὶ τῶν μὲν μισθοφόρων τὴν ἡγεμονίαν
παρέδωκεν Ἀγησιλάῳ τῷ Σπαρτιάτῃ,
ἀπεσταλμένῳ μὲν ὑπὸ Λακεδαιμονίων ἐπὶ συμμαχίαν
μεθ᾿ ὁπλιτῶν χιλίων, δυναμένῳ δ᾿ ἡγεῖσθαι
στρατιωτῶν καὶ δι᾿ ἀνδρείαν καὶ στρατηγικὴν
3σύνεσιν τεθαυμασμένῳ· τοῦ δὲ ναυτικοῦ τὴν στρατηγίαν
ἐνεχείρισε Χαβρίᾳ τῷ Ἀθηναίῳ, δημοσίᾳ
μὲν ὑπὸ τῆς πατρίδος οὐκ ἀπεσταλμένῳ, ἰδίᾳ δὲ
ὑπὸ τοῦ βασιλέως συστρατεύειν πεπεισμένῳ. αὐτὸς
δὲ τῶν Αἰγυπτίων ἔχων τὴν1 ἡγεμονίαν καὶ
στρατηγὸς ὢν ἁπάσης τῆς δυνάμεως,2 Ἀγησιλάῳ
μὲν συμβουλεύσαντι μένειν ἐπὶ τῆς Αἰγύπτου καὶ
διὰ τῶν στρατηγῶν τὸν πόλεμον διοικεῖν οὐ προσέσχε
καλῶς συμβουλεύοντι. τῆς γὰρ δυνάμεως





1ἅπασαν τὴν MSS.; Reiske deletes ἅπασαν.2So F1J: ἡγεμονίας cet.210Book XV

talents of silver and fifty warships, and sailed to Asia 362/1 b.c. to the city named Leucae.1 To this city he summoned many leaders of the insurgents. These he arrested and sent in irons to Artaxerxes, and, though he himself had been an insurgent, by the favours that he conferred through his betrayal, he made his peace with the King. In Egypt King Tachôs, having completed his preparations for the war, now had two hundred triremes expensively adorned, ten thousand chosen mercenaries from Greece, and besides these eighty thousand Egyptian infantry. He gave the command of the mercenaries to the Spartan Agesi-laiis,2 who had been dispatched by the Lacedaemonians with a thousand hoplites to fight as an ally, being a man capable of leading troops and highly regarded for his courage and for his shrewdness in the art of war. The command of the naval contingent he entrusted to Chabrias3 the Athenian, who had not been sent officially by his country, but had been privately prevailed upon by the king to join the expedition. The king himself, having command of the Egyptians and being general of the whole army, gave no heed to the advice of Agesilaüs to remain in Egypt and conduct the war through the agency of his generals, though the advice was sound. In fact when


1On a promontory at the mouth of the Hermus River (see
chap. 18. 2 and 4).2Agesilaüs could have come to Egypt only after the battle
of Mantineia, accordingly in the autumn of 362 or in the following spring. The campaign was probably in the summer of 361. After the revolt against Tachôs, he supported Nectanebôs in his struggle against the Mendesian pretender (Plutarch, Agesilaüs, 37–38) and in the course Of the winter (Xenophon, Agesilaüs, 2. 31. 1; Plutarch, op. cit. 40) left Egypt (end of 361 or beginning of 360). He died on the return journey to Sparta.3Chabrias had been general 363/2 (IG, 22 1. 111) and could have come as a private commander in the late summer of 362 at the earliest. For his former service in Egypt see chap. 29. 2–4.211