Diodorus of Sicily

καταπεφρονηκότως καὶ ἀτάκτως τὴν ἐπάνοδον
ἐποιοῦντο. οἱ δ᾿ Ἀβδηρῖται πανδημεὶ στρατεύσαντες
ἐπ᾿ αὐτοὺς1 σποράδην καὶ ἀτάκτως τὴν ἐπάνοδον
ποιουμένους πλείους τῶν δισχιλίων ἀνεῖλον.
3οἱ δὲ βάρβαροι παροξυνθέντες ἐπὶ τοῖς συμβεβηκόσι,
καὶ βουλόμενοι τοὺς Ἀβδηρίτας τιμωρήσασθαι,
πάλιν ἐνέβαλον αὐτῶν εἰς τὴν χώραν.
οἱ δὲ προνενικηκότες ἐπαρθέντες τῷ προτερήματι,
καὶ τῶν πλησιοχώρων Θρᾳκῶν συμμαχίαν ἀποστειλάντων
αὐτοῖς, παρετάξαντο τοῖς βαρβάροις
4γενομένης δὲ μάχης ἰσχυρᾶς, καὶ τῶν Θρᾳκῶν
μεταβαλομένων ἄφνω, μονωθέντες οἱ Ἀβδηρῖται
καὶ κυκλωθέντες ὑπὸ τοῦ πλήθους τῶν βαρβάρων
σχεδὸν ἅπαντες οἱ τῆς μάχης μετεσχηκότες κατ
εκόπησαν. τηλικαύτῃ δὲ συμφορᾷ τῶν Ἀβδηριτῶν
περιπεπτωκότων καὶ μελλόντων πολιορκεῖσθαι,
Χαβρίας ὁ Ἀθηναῖος ἐπιφανεὶς μετὰ δυνάμεως
ἐξείλατο τῶν κινδύνων τοὺς Ἀβδηρίτας, καὶ τοὺς
μὲν βαρβάρους ἐξήλασεν ἐκ τῆς χώρας, ἐν δὲ τῇ
πόλει φρουρὰν ἀξιόλογον καταλιπὼν αὐτὸς ὑπό
5τινων ἐδολοφονήθη. Τιμόθεος δὲ παραλαβὼν τὴν
ναυαρχίαν καὶ πλεύσας εἰς τὴν Κεφαλληνίαν, τάς
τ᾿ ἐν αὐτῇ πόλεις2 προσηγάγετο καὶ τὰς κατὰ τὴν
Ἀκαρνανίαν ὁμοίως ἔπεισεν ἀποκλῖναι πρὸς Ἀθηναίους.
Ἀλκέταν τε τὸν Μολοττῶν βασιλέα φίλον
κατασκευάσας, καὶ καθόλου τὰς χώρας τὰς3 τῶν
περὶ τοὺς τόπους ἐκείνους πόλεων ἐξιδιοποιησάμενος,
ἐνίκησε ναυμαχίᾳ τοὺς Λακεδαιμονίους περὶ

1καὶ after αὐτοὺς deleted by Reiske.2τ᾿ ἐν αὐτῇ πόλεις Reiske: τε ναῦς τῇ πόλει.3χώρας τὰς] πόλεις τὰς PAFK; πλείστας Dindorf.48Book XV

making their way homeward in a contemptuous and 376/5 b.c. disorderly fashion when the inhabitants of Abdera took the field in full force against them and slew more than two thousand of them as they straggled in disorder homewards.1 The barbarians then, enraged at what had happened and wishing to avenge themselves upon the Abderites, again invaded their land. The victors in the earlier conflict, being elated by their success and aided by the presence of the Thracians of the neighbouring region, who had sent out a body of men to assist them, drew up their lines opposite to the barbarians. A stubborn battle took place, and since the Thracians suddenly changed sides, the Abderites, now left to fight alone and surrounded by the superior number of the barbarians, were butchered almost to a man, as many as took part in the fight. But just after the Abderites had suffered so great a disaster and were on the point of being besieged, Chabrias the Athenian suddenly appeared with troops and snatched them out of their perils. He drove the barbarians from the country, and, after leaving a considerable garrison in the city, was himself assassinated by certain persons.2 Timotheüs succeeded him as admiral, sailed to Cephallenia, won over the cities there, and likewise persuaded the cities of Acarnania to come over to Athens. After he had made a friend of Alcetas, king of the Molossians, and, speaking generally, had won over the areas belonging to the cities of those regions, he defeated the Lacedaemonians





1See Aeneas Tacticus, 15. 8–10.2Demosthenes, Nepos, and Diodorus himself (Book 16. 7. 3) state that Chabrias died eighteen years later at Chios.49