Diodorus of Sicily

ὑπεροχὴν τοῦ βασιλέως τὸ μὲν πρῶτον ἀπέστειλαν
πρὸς τὸν Δημήτριον, φήσαντες συμπολεμήσειν
Ἀντιγόνῳ πρὸς Πτολεμαῖον· ὡς δ᾿ ἐκεῖνος ὁμήρους
ἑκατὸν ᾔτει τοὺς ἐπιφανεστάτους καὶ τοῖς λιμέσι
δέχεσθαι τὸν στόλον προσέταττεν, ὑπολαβόντες
ἐπιβουλεύειν αὐτὸν τῇ πόλει, τὰ πρὸς πόλεμον
4παρεσκευάζοντο. Δημήτριος δὲ πᾶσαν τὴν δύναμιν
ἀθροίσας εἰς τὸν ἐν Λωρύμοις1 λιμένα στόλον ἐξήρτυε
πρὸς τὸν ἐπίπλουν τὸν ἐπὶ τὴν Ῥόδον. εἶχε
δὲ ναῦς μακρὰς μὲν παντοίας μεγέθει διακοσίας,
ὑπηρετικὰ δὲ πλείω τῶν ἑκατὸν ἑβδομήκοντα· ἐν
δὲ τούτοις ἐκομίζοντο στρατιῶται βραχὺ λειπόμενοι
τῶν τετρακισμυρίων σὺν ἱππεῦσι καὶ τοῖς συμμαχοῦσι
πειραταῖς. ὑπῆρχε δὲ καὶ βελῶν παντοίων
πλῆθος καὶ πάντων τῶν πρὸς πολιορκίαν χρησίμων
5μεγάλη παρασκευή. χωρὶς δὲ τούτων ἰδιωτικὰ
πόρια συνηκολούθει τῶν ταῖς ἀγοραῖς χρωμένων
βραχὺ λειπόμενα τῶν χιλίων· πολλὰ γὰρ ἔτη τῆς
χώρας τῆς Ῥοδίων ἀπορθήτου γεγενημένης συνέρρει
πανταχόθεν πλῆθος τῶν εἰωθότων ὠφελείας
ἰδίας ἡγεῖσθαι τὰ τῶν πολεμουμένων ἀτυχήματα.
83. Ὁ μὲν οὖν Δημήτριος ὥσπερ εἴς τινα ναυμαχίαν
ἐκτάξας τὸν στόλον καταπληκτικῶς προηγεῖσθαι
μὲν ἐποίησε τὰς μακρὰς ναῦς, ἐχούσας
ἐπὶ ταῖς πρῴραις τοὺς τρισπιθάμους τῶν ὀξυβελῶν,
ἐπακολουθεῖν δὲ τὰς στρατιωτικὰς καὶ τὰς ἱππηγοὺς
ῥυμουλκουμένας ὑπὸ τῶν ταῖς εἰρεσίαις χρωμένων,
1Λωρύμοις Palmer, cp. Book 17. 83. 7: Ἐλωρύμνοις.358Book XX

frightened by the superior power of the king that at 305 b.c. first they sent to Demetrius, saying that they would join Antigonus in the war with Ptolemy, but when Demetrius demanded as hostages a hundred of the noblest citizens and ordered also that his fleet should be received in their harbours, concluding that he was plotting against the city, they made ready for war. Demetrius, gathering all his forces in the harbour at Loryma,1 made his fleet ready for the attack on Rhodes. He had two hundred warships of all sizes and more than one hundred and seventy auxiliary vessels; on these were transported not quite forty thousand soldiers besides the cavalry and the pirates who were his allies. There was also an ample supply of ordnance of all sorts and a large provision of all the things necessary for a siege. In addition there accompanied him almost a thousand privately owned ships, which belonged to those who were engaged in trade; for since the land of the Rhodians had been un-plundered for many years, there had gathered together from all quarters a host of those who were accustomed to consider the misfortunes of men at war a means of enriching themselves.
83. And so Demetrius, having drawn up his fleet as if for a naval battle in a way to inspire panic, sent forward his warships, which had on their prows the catapults for bolts three spans in length2; and he had the transports for men and horses follow, towed by the ships that used oarsmen; and last of all came




1Loryma is in Caria about twenty miles distant from Rhodes.2For the use of catapults on ships cp. Tarn, Hellenistic Military and Naval Developments, 120–121.359