Diodorus of Sicily

καὶ παρακελευόμενοι τὴν ταχίστην διαβιβάζειν τὰς
2δυνάμεις εἰς τὴν Ἀσίαν. διόπερ ἀναγκαῖον ἡγησάμενος
ὑπάρχειν ὁ βασιλεὺς τὸ πείθεσθαι τῷ πατρί,
πρὸς μὲν Κάσανδρον διαλύσεις ἐποιήσατο, συνθέμενος
εἶναι κυρίας τὰς συνθήκας, ἐὰν ὦσιν εὐάρεστοι
τῷ πατρί, ἀκριβῶς μὲν εἰδὼς οὐ προσδεξόμενον
αὐτὸν διὰ τὸ κεκρικέναι πάντως διὰ τῶν ὅπλων
ἐπιθεῖναι τέλος τῷ συμβάντι πολέμῳ, βουλόμενος
δὲ τὴν ἐκ τῆς Ἑλλάδος ἀποχώρησιν εὐσχήμονα
ποιήσασθαι καὶ μὴ φυγῇ παραπλησίαν· ἐγέγραπτο
γὰρ ἐν ταῖς συνθήκαις πρὸς τοῖς ἄλλοις καὶ τὸ τὰς
Ἑλληνίδας πόλεις ἐλευθέρας ὑπάρχειν, οὐ τὰς κατὰ
τὴν Ἑλλάδα μόνον, ἀλλὰ καὶ τὰς κατὰ τὴν Ἀσίαν.
3μετὰ δὲ ταῦθ᾿ ὁ Δημήτριος παρασκευασάμενος
πόρια πρὸς τὴν παρακομιδὴν τῶν τε στρατιωτῶν
καὶ τῆς ἀποσκευῆς ἀνήχθη παντὶ τῷ στόλῳ καὶ
κομισθεὶς διὰ νήσων κατέπλευσεν εἰς Ἔφεσον.
ἐκβιβάσας δὲ τὴν δύναμιν καὶ στρατοπεδεύσας
πλησίον τῶν τειχῶν ἠνάγκασε τὴν πόλιν εἰς τὴν
προϋπάρχουσαν ἀποκαταστῆναι τάξιν καὶ τὴν μὲν
ὑπὸ Πρεπελάου τοῦ Λυσιμάχου στρατηγοῦ παρεισαχθεῖσαν
φρουρὰν ἀφῆκεν ὑπόσπονδον, ἰδίαν δὲ
φυλακὴν εἰς τὴν ἄκραν καταστήσας παρῆλθεν εἰς
Ἑλλήσποντον. καὶ Λαμψακηνοὺς μὲν καὶ Παριανούς,
ἔτι δὲ τῶν ἄλλων τῶν μεταβεβλημένων
πόλεών τινας ἀνεκτήσατο, ἐπὶ δὲ τὸ στόμα τοῦ
Πόντου παραγενόμενος πρὸς τῷ Χαλκηδονίων1 ἱερῷ
στρατοπεδείαν περιεβάλετο καὶ τοὺς φυλάξοντας
τὸν τόπον ἀπέλιπε στρατιώτας πεζοὺς μὲν τρισχιλίους,
ναῦς δὲ μακρὰς τριάκοντα· τὴν δ᾿ ἄλλην
1Χαλκηδονίων Fischer (in apparatus; cp. Books 18. 72. 4; 19. 60. 3): Καλχηδονίων RX, Καρχηδονίων F.438Book XX

father and bidding him take his army across into Asia 302 b.c. as swiftly as possible. Since he regarded obedience to his father’s orders as obligatory, the king came to terms with Cassander, making the condition that the agreements should be valid only if they were acceptable to his father; for although he very well knew that his father would not accept them since he had definitely made up his mind to bring to an end by force of arms the war which had set in, yet Demetrius wished to make his withdrawal from Greece appear respectable and not like a flight. Indeed, it was written among other conditions in the agreement that the Greek cities were to be free, not only those of Greece but also those of Asia. Then Demetrius, after preparing ships for the transportation of the soldiers and the equipment, set sail with his whole fleet and, going through the islands, put in at Ephesus. Disembarking his army and camping near the walls, he forced the city to return to its former status; then he dismissed on terms the garrison that had been introduced by Prepelaüs, the general of Lysimachus, and after stationing his own garrison on the acropolis, he went on to the Hellespont. He also recovered Lampsacus and Parium, likewise some of the other cities that had changed sides; and when he arrived at the entrance of the Pontus, he constructed a camp beside the shrine of the Chalcedonians1 and left to guard the region three thousand foot-soldiers and thirty warships. Then he sent the rest of the



1The shrine of the Chalcedonians may be identical with the place on the shore of the Pontus called Hieron, Book 19. 73. 6.439