Diodorus of Sicily

αὐτοῦ Ῥωξάνην, ἵνα μηδεὶς ᾖ διάδοχος τῆς βασιλείας·
κατὰ δὲ τὸ παρὸν θεωρῆσαι βουλόμενος τοὺς
τῶν πολλῶν λόγους, τίνες ἔσονται περὶ τῆς Ὀλυμπιάδος
ἀναιρέσεως, ἅμα δ᾿ οὐδὲν πεπυσμένος τῶν
περὶ Ἀντίγονον, τὴν μὲν Ῥωξάνην μετὰ τοῦ παιδὸς
εἰς φυλακὴν παρέδωκε, μεταγαγὼν εἰς τὴν ἄκραν
τὴν ἐν Ἀμφιπόλει, τάξας τε ἐπ᾿ αὐτῆς Γλαυκίαν
τινὰ τῶν πιστευομένων· ἀπέσπασε δὲ καὶ τοὺς
εἰωθότας παῖδας συντρέφεσθαι καὶ τὴν ἀγωγὴν
οὐκέτι βασιλικήν, ἀλλ᾿ ἰδιώτου τοῦ τυχόντος οἰκείαν
5ἐκέλευε γίνεσθαι. μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα βασιλικῶς ἤδη
διεξάγων τὰ κατὰ τὴν ἀρχὴν Εὐρυδίκην μὲν καὶ
Φίλιππον τοὺς βασιλεῖς, ἔτι δὲ Κύνναν, ἣν ἀνεῖλεν
Ἀλκέτας, ἔθαψεν ἐν Αἰγαιαῖς, καθάπερ ἔθος ἦν τοῖς
βασιλεῦσι. τιμήσας δὲ τοὺς τετελευτηκότας ἐπιταφίοις
ἀγῶσι κατέγραφε τῶν Μακεδόνων τοὺς εὐθέτους,
διεγνωκὼς εἰς Πελοπόννησον στρατεύειν.
6τούτου δὲ περὶ ταῦτ᾿ ὄντος Πολυπέρχων ἐτύγχανε
μὲν πολιορκούμενος ἐν Ἀζωρίῳ1 τῆς Περραιβίας,
ἀκούσας δὲ τὴν Ὀλυμπιάδος τελευτὴν καὶ
τελέως ἀπελπίσας τὰ κατὰ Μακεδονίαν ἐξεπήδησεν
ἐκ τῆς πόλεως μετ᾿ ὀλίγων, πορευθεὶς δὲ
ἐκ τῆς Θεσσαλίας καὶ παραλαβὼν τοὺς περὶ τὸν
Αἰακίδην ἀπεχώρησεν εἰς τὴν Αἰτωλίαν, ὑπολαβὼν
ἀσφαλέστατα καραδοκήσειν ἐνταῦθα τὰς τῶν




1Ἀζωρίῳ Fischer, Ἀζώρῳ Wesseling: ἐν ναξίῳ RX, ἐν
ξιώρῳ F.372Book XIX

there might be no successor to the kingdom; but for 316 b.c. the present, since he wished to observe what the common people would say about the slaying of Olympias and since he had no news of Antigonus’ success, he placed Roxanê and the child in custody, transferring them to the citadel of Amphipolis,1 in command of which he placed Glaucias, one of his most trusted henchmen. Also he took away the pages who, according to custom, were being brought up as companions of the boy, and he ordered that he should no longer have royal treatment but only such as was proper for any ordinary person of private station. After this, already conducting himself as a king in administering the affairs of the realm, he buried Eurydicê and Philip, the queen and king, and also Cynna, whom Alcetas had slain, in Aegae as was the royal custom.2 After honouring the dead with funeral games, he enrolled those of the Macedonians who were fit for military service, for he had decided to make a campaign into the Peloponnesus. While Cassander was engaged with these matters, Polyperchon was being besieged in Azorius3 in Perrhaebia, but on hearing of the death of Olympias he finally, despairing of success in Macedonia, escaped from the city with a few followers. Leaving Thessaly and taking over the troops led by Aeacides,4 he withdrew into Aetolia, believing that he could wait there with greatest safety and observe the changes in the situation;



1Cp. Justin, 14. 6. 13.2For the death of Eurydicê and Philip cp. chap. 11; and
for their burial cp. Diyllus, FGrH, 73. 1. By burying the previous rulers, Cassander was, in effect, claiming the throne for himself (cp. W. W. Tarn in Cambridge Ancient History, 6. 482, and the importance attached to the burial of Alexander in Book 18. 28-29). Cynna was the mother of Eurydicê.3Azorius, or Azorus, was a town in northern Thessaly.4For Aeacides, king of the Molossians, cp. chap. 11. 2.373