Diodorus of Sicily

αὔξησιν. ἐν γὰρ τῇ τῶν φυγάδων κατηλύσει,1 καθ᾿
ἣν ἀνεκτήσαντο τὴν Καδμείαν, ὡμολογημένως
ἅπαντες τούτῳ τὸ πρωτεῖον τοῦ κατορθώματος
ἀπονέμουσιν. τὴν δ᾿ εὐημερίαν ταύτην συνέβη
πάντων τῶν ὕστερον γενομένων ἀγαθῶν αἰτίαν
2γενέσθαι. ἐν δὲ τῇ περὶ Τεγύραν2 μάχῃ μόνος
Πελοπίδας τῶν βοιωταρχῶν ἐνίκησε τοὺς Λακεδαιμονίους,
πλεῖστον3 ἰσχύοντας τῶν Ἑλλήνων, ὅτε
διὰ τὸ μέγεθος τῆς νίκης πρῶτον ἔστησαν Θηβαῖοι
τρόπαιον κατὰ Λακεδαιμονίων. κατὰ δὲ τὴν ἐν
Λεύκτροις μάχην ἡγήσατο τοῦ ἱεροῦ λόχου, μεθ᾿
οὗ προεμβαλὼν τοῖς Σπαρτιάταις ἀρχηγὸς ἐγένετο
τῆς νίκης. ἐν δὲ ταῖς ἐπὶ Λακεδαίμονα στρατείαις
ἑπτὰ μὲν ἡγήσατο μυριάδων, πρὸς αὐτῇ δὲ τῇ
Σπάρτῃ τρόπαιον ἔστησε κατὰ τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων
τῶν πάντα τὸν πρὸ τοῦ4 χρόνον ἀπορθήτων γεγενημένων.
3πρὸς δὲ τὸν Περσῶν βασιλέα πρεσβεύσας
ἐν ταῖς κοιναῖς ὁμολογίαις τὴν Μεσσήνην κατ᾿
ἰδίαν παρέλαβεν, ἣν ἀνάστατον οὖσαν ἔτη τριακόσια
Θηβαῖοι πάλιν ἀποκατέστησαν. ἐπὶ τελευτῆς δὲ
διαγωνισάμενος πρὸς Ἀλέξανδρον ἔχοντα πολλαπλασίονα5
δύναμιν οὐ μόνον ἐπιφανῶς ἐνίκησεν,
ἀλλὰ καὶ τὸν θάνατον ἔσχεν ἐπ᾿ ἀρετῇ περιβόητον.
4πρὸς δὲ τοὺς πολίτας οὕτω καλῶς6 διετέθη, ὥστε








1So Reiske: καταλήψει.2Τεγύραν Stephanus (cp. Plutarch, Pelopidas, 16 f.), Dindorf,
Bekker: Τεγέαν MSS., Vogel.3πλεῖστον Hertlein: πλείους PA, πλεῖον cet.4τοῦ Dindorf, Vogel: τούτου.5πολλαπλασίονα Dindorf: πολλαπλάσιον.6ἀγωνισάμενος after καλῶς deleted by Vogel; καλῶς ἀγ.
placed after ἐνίκησεν (above) by Reiske, after περιβόητον by
Dindorf, Bekker.176Book XV

rise of Thebes. For in the matter of the return of the 364/3 b.c. refugees,1 whereby he recaptured the Cadmeia, all men agree in attributing to him the principal credit for its success. And it turned out that this piece of good fortune was the cause of all the subsequent happy events. In the battle by Tegyra,2 Pelopidas alone of the boeotarchs won victory over the Lacedaemonians, the most powerful of the Greeks, the first occasion when on account of the importance of the victory the Thebans erected a trophy over the Lacedaemonians. In the battle of Leuctra he commanded the Sacred Band,3 with which he charged the Spartans first and thus was the primary cause of the victory. In the campaigns about Lacedaemon, he commanded seventy thousand men, and in the very territory of Sparta erected a trophy of victory over the Lacedaemonians, who never in all previous time had seen their land plundered.4 As ambassador to the Persian King he took Messenê under his personal charge in the general settlement, and though for three hundred years it had been stripped of inhabitants, the Thebans established it again.5 At the end of his life, in the contest with Alexander who had an army far outnumbering his, he not only gained a glorious victory, but also met his death with a courage that made it renowned.6 In his relations with his fellow citizens






1But Diodorus does not mention Pelopidas in his account (chaps. 25, 26) of retaking the Cadmeia. (For this see Plutarch, Pelopidas, 7–12.)2A village of Boeotia near Orchomenus. The battle of Tegyra is described by Plutarch (see critical notes) as a “sort of prelude” to that of Leuctra and one of Pelopidas’ most glorious exploits.3See Plutarch, Pelopidas, 18; 20. 2; 23. 2, 4. Nepos, Pelopidas, 4. 2.4See chaps. 62. 4 if. and notes.5See Plutarch, Pelopidas, 30. 5; Xenophon, Hell. 7. 1. 35-36.6See chap. 80 and notes.177