Diodorus of Sicily

τῶν νεωτέρων ὁρμησάντων ἐπὶ τὸ λιθοβολῆσαι τὸν
ἄνθρωπον οὗτος μὲν διὰ τῶν ἀρχόντων ἐκκλαπεὶς1
καὶ καταφυγὼν εἰς τὸ τοῦ Ἡρακλέους ἱερὸν
διέφυγε τὴν τιμωρίαν διὰ τὴν ἱκεσίαν, οἱ δὲ Τύριοι
δεισιδαιμονήσαντες χρυσαῖς σειραῖς προσέδησαν τὸ
τοῦ Ἀπόλλωνος ξόανον τῇ βάσει, ἐμποδίζοντες, ὡς
ᾤοντο, τοῦ θεοῦ τὸν ἐκ τῆς πόλεως χωρισμόν.
42. Μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα οἱ μὲν Τύριοι τὴν αὔξησιν
τοῦ χώματος εὐλαβηθέντες ἐπλήρωσαν πολλὰ τῶν
ἐλαττόνων σκαφῶν ὀξυβελῶν τε καὶ καταπελτῶν
καὶ τοξοτῶν καὶ σφενδονητῶν ἀνδρῶν καὶ προσπλεύσαντες
τοῖς ἐργαζομένοις τὸ χῶμα πολλοὺς
2μὲν κατέτρωσαν, οὐκ ὀλίγους δὲ ἀπέκτειναν· εἰς
ἀνόπλους γὰρ καὶ πυκνοὺς πολλῶν καὶ παντοίων
βελῶν φερομένων οὐδεὶς ἡμάρτανεν, ἑτοίμων καὶ
ἀφυλάκτων τῶν σκοπῶν κειμένων. συνέβαινε γὰρ
οὐ μόνον κατὰ πρόσωπον τὰ φερόμενα βέλη προσπίπτειν,
ἀλλὰ καὶ πρὸς τὰ νῶτα τῶν ἀντιπροσώπων
ὄντων ἐν στενῷ χώματι διικνεῖσθαι καὶ μηδένα
δύνασθαι διαφυλάξασθαι τοὺς ἐξ ἀμφοτέρων τῶν
μερῶν κατατιτρώσκοντας.
3Ὁ δ᾿ Ἀλέξανδρος τὸ παράλογον τῆς συμφορᾶς
βουλόμενος ὀξέως διορθώσασθαι, πληρώσας πάσας
τὰς ναῦς καὶ καθηγούμενος αὐτὸς ἔπλει κατὰ
σπουδὴν ἐπὶ τὸν λιμένα τῶν Τυρίων καὶ τὴν ἐπάνοδον
4τῶν Φοινίκων ὑπετέμνετο. οἱ δὲ βάρβαροι
φοβηθέντες μήποτε κυριεύσας τῶν λιμένων καταλάβηται
τὴν πόλιν ἔρημον οὖσαν στρατιωτῶν, κατὰ
πολλὴν σπουδὴν ἀνέπλεον εἰς τὴν Τύρον. ἀμφοτέρων
δὲ διὰ τὴν ὑπερβολὴν τῆς φιλοτιμίας ταῖς

1So Hertlein (cp. Books 12. 27. 3; 19. 75. 2): κλαπεὶς.236Book XVII

Alexander, and some of the younger citizens set out 332/1 b.c. to stone him; he was, however, spirited away by the magistrates and took refuge in the temple of Heracles, where as a suppliant he escaped the people’s wrath, but the Tyrians were so credulous that they tied the image of Apollo to its base with golden cords, preventing, as they thought, the god from leaving the city.1
42. Now the Tyrians were alarmed at the advance of the mole, and they equipped many small vessels with both light and heavy catapults2 together with archers and slingers, and, attacking the workers on the mole, wounded many and killed not a few. As missiles of all sorts in large numbers rained upon unarmed and densely packed men, no soldier missed his mark since the targets were exposed and unsuspecting. The missiles struck not only from the front but also from the back, as men were working on both sides of a rather narrow structure and no one could protect himself from those who shot from two directions.
Alexander moved immediately to rectify what threatened to be a shocking disaster, and manning all his ships3 and taking personal command of them, made with all speed for the harbour of Tyre to cut off the retreat of the Phoenicians. They in turn were terrified lest he seize the harbour and capture the city while it was empty of soldiers, and rowed back to Tyre as fast as they could. Both fleets plied their oars at a fast stroke in a fury of determination, and



1Curtius, 4. 3. 22; Plutarch, Alexander, 24. 3–4,2Probably the oxybeleis were armed with heavy wooden arrows or quarrels, while the catapeltae threw balls of stone.3Alexander was by now in possession of the fleets of the other Phoenician cities (Arrian, 2. 20. 7).237