Diodorus of Sicily

σταδίοις ἀπὸ τῆς γῆς ἀποσαλεύειν, ἅμα πολλοῖς
περιεχόμενοι δεινοῖς· τοῦ μὲν γὰρ κλύδωνος ῥηγνυμένου
τραχύτερον1 ἐκινδύνευον αὔτανδρα τὰ σκάφη
συγκλυσθῆναι, τῆς δὲ γῆς οὔσης ἀπροσορμίστου
καὶ πολεμίας οὔτε ναῦς ἀκινδύνως ἦν προσπλεῖν
οὔτε τοὺς ἄνδρας προσνήξασθαι, τὸ δὲ μέγιστον,
ἐλελοίπει τὸ εἰς πότον αὐτοῖς ὕδωρ, εἰς τοιαύτην
τε σπάνιν κατεκλείσθησαν ὥστε εἰ μάν ἡμέραν ὁ
χειμὼν ἐπέμεινεν, πάντες ἂν τῷ δίψει διεφθάρησαν.
4ἐν ἀθυμίᾳ δ᾿ ὄντων ἁπάντων καὶ προσδοκωμένης
ἤδη τῆς ἀπωλείας τὸ μὲν πνεῦμα κατέπαυσεν, ἡ
δὲ μετ᾿ Ἀντιγόνου δύναμις καταντήσασα πλησίον
5τοῦ στόλου κατεστρατοπέδευσεν. ἐκβάντες οὖν ἐκ
τῶν σκαφῶν καὶ προσαναλαβόντες ἑαυτοὺς ἐν τῇ
στρατοπεδείᾳ προσέμενον τῶν νεῶν τὰς ἀποσπασθείσας.
διεφθάρη δ᾿ ἐν τούτῳ τῷ σάλῳ τρία σκάφη
τῶν πεντηρικῶν, ἐξ ὧν ἔνιοι τῶν ἀνδρῶν διενήξαντο
πρὸς τὴν γῆς. ἔπειτα Ἀντίγονος μὲν προαγαγὼν
τὴν δύναμιν πλησίον τοῦ Νείλου κατεστρατοπέδευσεν,
ἀπέχων δύο σταδίους τοῦ ποταμοῦ.
75. Πτολεμαῖος δὲ προκατειληφὼς τοὺς εὐκαιροτάτους
τόπους ἀσφαλέσι φυλακαῖς ἀπέστειλέν
τινας ἐν τοῖς κοντωτοῖς, παρακελευσάμενος προσπλεῖν
πλησίον τῆς ἐκβάσεως καὶ κηρύττειν ὅτι
δώσει τοῖς μεταβαλομένοις ἀπ᾿ Ἀντιγόνου, τῶν
μὲν ἰδιωτῶν ἑκάστοις δύο μνᾶς, τοῖς δ᾿ ἐφ᾿ ἡγεμονίας
2τεταγμένοις τάλαντον. γενομένων οὖν τῶν
κηρυγμάτων τοιούτων ἐνέπεσέ τις ὁρμὴ πρὸς μετάθεσιν
τοῖς μετ᾿ Ἀντιγόνου μισθοφόροις, ἐν οἷς καὶ
τῶν ἡγεμόνων πλείους ῥέπειν2 συνέβαινε δι᾿ αἰτίας
1τραχύτερον Rhodoman: ταχύτερον.2ῥέπειν Capps. <προθύμους> εἶναι Fischer: εἶναι.340Book XX

of about two stades1 from the land, where they were 306 b.c. at once encompassed by many dangers; for since the surf was breaking rather heavily, there was danger that the ships would founder with their crews, and since the shore was harbourless and in enemy hands, the ships could neither approach without danger, nor could the men swim ashore, and what was worst of all, the water for drinking had given out and they were reduced to such straits that, if the storm had continued for a single day more, all would have perished of thirst. When all were in despair and already expecting death, the wind fell, and the army of Antigonus came up and camped near the fleet. They therefore left the ships and recuperated in the camp while waiting for those vessels that had become separated. In this exposure to the waves three of the quinqueremes were lost, but some of the men from these swam to the shore. Then Antigonus led his army nearer to the Nile and camped at a distance of two stades1 from the river.
75. Ptolemy, who had occupied in advance the most strategic points with trustworthy garrisons, sent men in small boats, ordering them to approach the landing-place and proclaim that he would pay a premium to any who deserted Antigonus, two minae to each of the ordinary soldiers and one talent to each man who had been assigned to a position of command. When proclamations to that effect had been made, an urge to change sides fell upon the mercenaries of Antigonus, and it transpired that many even of their officers were inclined for one reason or another




1A little less than ¼ mile.341