Diodorus of Sicily

καὶ μεγάλα κατεσκευάσθη κατ᾿ ἐκείνους τοὺς
χρόνους ἀναθήματα, ἐν μὲν ταῖς Συρακούσσαις ὁ
κατὰ τὴν Νῆσον οἶκος ὁ ἑξηκοντάκλινος ὀνομαζόμενος,
τῶν κατὰ τὴν Σικελίαν ἔργων ὑπεραίρων
τῷ μεγέθει καὶ τῇ κατασκευῇ, ὃν κατεσκεύασε μὲν
Ἀγαθοκλῆς ὁ δυνάστης, διὰ δὲ τὸ βάρος τῶν
ἔργων ὑπεραίρων τοὺς τῶν θεῶν ναοὺς ἐπισημασίας
ἔτυχεν ὑπὸ τοῦ δαιμονίου κεραυνωθείς, οἵ τε παρὰ
τὸν μικρὸν λιμένα πύργοι, τὰς μὲν ἐπιγραφὰς
ἔχοντες ἐξ ἑτερογενῶν λίθων, σημαίνοντες1 δὲ τὴν
τοῦ κατασκευάσαντος αὐτοὺς προσηγορίαν Ἀγαθοκλέους,
ὁμοίως δὲ τούτοις μικρὸν ὕστερον ὑπὸ
Ἱέρωνος τοῦ βασιλέως τό τε κατὰ τὴν ἀγορὰν
Ὀλυμπιεῖον καὶ ὁ πλησίον τοῦ θεάτρου βωμός, τὸ
μὲν μῆκος ὢν σταδίου, τὸ δ᾿ ὕψος καὶ πλάτος ἔχων
τούτῳ κατὰ λόγον.
3Ἐν δὲ ταῖς ἐλάττοσι πόλεσιν, ἐν αἷς ἡ τῶν
Ἀγυριναίων καταριθμεῖται, μετασχοῦσα τῆς τότε
κληρουχίας διὰ τὴν προειρημένην ἐκ τῶν καρπῶν
εὐπορίαν, θέατρον μὲν κατεσκεύασε μετὰ τὸ τῶν
Συρακοσίων κάλλιστον τῶν κατὰ Σικελίαν, θεῶν
τε ναοὺς καὶ βουλευτήριον καὶ ἀγοράν, ἔτι δὲ
πύργων ἀξιολόγους κατασκευὰς καὶ τάφους2 πυραμίδων
πολλῶν καὶ μεγάλων διαφόρων ταῖς φιλοτεχνίαις.
84. Ἐπ᾿ ἄρχοντος δ᾿ Ἀθήνησι Χαρώνδου τὴν ὕπατον
ἀρχὴν διεδέξαντο Λεύκιος Αἰμίλιος καὶ Γάιος
Πλώτιος. ἐπὶ δὲ τούτων Φίλιππος ὁ βασιλεὺς
τοὺς πλείστους τῶν Ἑλλήνων εἰς φιλίαν προηγμένος




1So MSS.: σημαινούσας Fischer.2<κατὰ> τάφους Madvig.70Book XVI

large constructions were completed in that period. 339/8 b.c. There was, first, the structure in Syracuse on the Island called the “Hall of the Sixty Couches,” which surpassed all the other buildings of Sicily in size and grandeur.1 This was built by Agathocles the despot, and since, in its pretentiousness, it went beyond the temples of the gods, so it received a mark of Heaven’s displeasure in being struck by lightning. Then there were the towers along the shore of the Little Harbour with their mosaic inscriptions of varicoloured stones, proclaiming the name of their founder, Agathocles. Comparable to these but a little later, in the time of Hiero the king, there was built the Olympieium in the market and the altar beside the theatre, a stade in length and proportionally high and broad.2
Among the lesser cities is to be reckoned Agyrium, but since it shared in the increase of settlers due to this agricultural prosperity, it built the finest theatre in Sicily after that of Syracuse, together with temples of the gods, a council chamber, and a market. There were also memorable towers, as well as pyramidal monuments of architectural distinction marking graves, many and great.
84. When Charondes was archon at Athens, Lucius 338/7 b.c. Aemilius and Gaius Plautius succeeded to the consulship.3 In this year, Philip the king, having won most of the Greeks over to friendship with him, was



1This was a large banqueting hall. Cp. the tent of one hundred couches employed by Alexander the Great (Book 17. 16. 4).2These monuments are mentioned by Cicero, In Verrem, 2. 4. 53.3Chaerondes was archon at Athens from July 338 to June 337 b.c. The consuls of 341 b.c. were L. Aemilius Mamercinus Privernas and C. Plautius Venno (Broughton, 1. 134).71