Diodorus of Sicily

κατοικοῦντες ἐκ γενετῆς αὔξουσι μέχρι γήρως καὶ
τὸ τρίχωμα πεπιλωμένον ἐῶσι, τὸ δὲ χρῶμα1 διὰ
τὴν τοῦ ἡλίου θερμότητα κατακεκαυμένον ἔχουσι
5καὶ δορὰς θηρίων περιβέβληνται. σιτοῦνται δὲ τὰ
ἐκβαλλόμενα κήτη σαρκοφαγοῦντες καὶ τὰς οἰκήσεις
κατασκευάζουσι τοὺς μὲν τοίχους . . .2 ἀνοικοδομοῦντες,
τὰς δ᾿ ὀροφὰς ἐκ τῶν τοῦ κήτους
πλευρῶν, ἐξ ὧν ὀκτωκαιδεκαπήχεις δοκοὶ κατηρτίζοντο·
ἀντὶ δὲ τῶν κεράμων ταῖς φολίσι τῶν ζῴων
τὰς στέγας κατεκάλυπτον.
6Ὁ δὲ Ἀλέξανδρος διελθὼν τοῦτο τὸ ἔθνος ἐπιπόνως
διὰ σπάνιν τροφῆς ἐνέβαλεν εἰς χώραν
ἔρημον καὶ πάντων τῶν εἰς τὸ ζῆν χρησίμων σπανίζουσαν.
πολλῶν δὲ διὰ τὴν ἔνδειαν διαφθειρομένων
ἥ τε δύναμις τῶν Μακεδόνων ἠθύμησεν καὶ
ὁ Ἀλέξανδρος ἐνέπεσεν οὐκ εἰς τὴν τυχοῦσαν
λύπην τε καὶ φροντίδα· δεινὸν γὰρ ἐφαίνετο τοὺς
ἀρετῇ καὶ τοῖς ὅπλοις ἅπαντας ὑπερβαλομένους ἐν
ἐρήμῳ χώρᾳ πάντων σπανίζοντας ἀκλεῶς ἀπόλλυσθαι.
7διόπερ εὐζώνους ἄνδρας ἐξέπεμψεν εἰς τὴν
Παρθυαίαν καὶ Δραγγινὴν καὶ Ἀρίαν3 καὶ τὰς ἄλλας
τὰς πλησιοχώρους τῇ ἐρήμῳ, προστάξας ταχέως
ἀγαγεῖν ἐπὶ τὰς ἐμβολὰς τῆς Καρμανίας δρομάδας
καμήλους καὶ τὰ νωτοφορεῖν εἰωθότα τῶν φορτίων,1
1τρίχωμα RX.2Fischer suggests ἐκ κόγχων; cp. Arrian, 6. 23. 3.3Spelled Ἀρεία in chap. 78. 1.424Book XVII

of their fingers and toes grow from birth to old age. 326/5 b.c. They also let their hair remain matted like felt. Their colour is burned black by the heat of the sun, and they clothe themselves in the skins of beasts. They subsist by eating the flesh of stranded whales. They build up the walls of their houses from . . .1 and construct roofs with whale’s ribs, which furnish them rafters eighteen cubits in length.2 In the place of tiles, they covered their roofs with the scales of these beasts.3
Alexander passed through this territory with difficulty because of the shortage of provisions and entered a region which was desert, and lacking in everything which could be used to sustain life.4 Many died of hunger. The army of the Macedonians was disheartened, and Alexander sank into no ordinary grief and anxiety. It seemed a dreadful thing that they who had excelled all in fighting ability and in equipment for war should perish ingloriously from lack of food in a desert country. He determined, therefore, to send out swift messengers into Parthyaea and Dranginê and Areia and the other areas bordering on the desert, ordering these to bring quickly to the gates of Carmania racing camels and other animals trained to carry burdens, loading them 








1Arrian’s account (6. 23. 3) states that the walls were made of shells (critical note 2), but Diodorus seems to be thinking only of materials secured from whales. All of these anecdotes probably derive from Nearchus (cp. Strabo, 15. 2. 2. 720).2Twenty-seven feet. Cp. Arrian, Indica, 30. 8.3Whales, of course, do not have scales.4Curtius, 9. 10. 8–17; Justin, 12. 10. 7; Arrian, 6. 23. 4–26. 5: Strabo, 15, 2. 5–6. 721–722.425