Diodorus of Sicily

μὲν τοῖς λόγοις ἐστὶν ὀξύς, ἐν δὲ τοῖς ἔργοις βραδύς.
ὁ δὲ Φαρνάβαζος ἀπεκρίθη, διότι τῶν μὲν λόγων
3αὐτὸς κύριός ἐστι, τῶν δ᾿ ἔργων ὁ βασιλεύς. τῆς
δὲ τῶν Περσῶν δυνάμεως ἀθροισθείσης εἰς πόλιν
Ἄκην, ἠριθμήθησαν τῶν μὲν βαρβάρων εἴκοσι μυριάδες,
ὧν ἦρχε Φαρνάβαζος1· τῶν δὲ μισθοφόρων
Ἑλλήνων Ἰφικράτης ἡγεῖτο δισμυρίων. καὶ ναῦς
ἠριθμήθησαν τριήρεις μὲν τριακόσιαι, τριακόντοροι
δὲ διακόσιαι· τῶν δὲ τὴν ἀγορὰν καὶ τὴν ἄλλην
4παρασκευὴν κομιζουσῶν πολὺς ἦν ἀριθμός. ἀρχομένου
δὲ τοῦ θέρους ἀνέζευξαν οἱ τοῦ βασιλέως
στρατηγοὶ μετὰ πάσης τῆς δυνάμεως, καὶ τοῦ
στόλου συμπαραπλέοντος2 προῆγον ἐπὶ τὴν Αἴγυπτον.
ὡς δ᾿ ἧκον πλησίον τοῦ Νείλου, κατέλαβον
τοὺς Αἰγυπτίους φανερῶς παρεσκευασμένους τὰ
5πρὸς τὸν πόλεμον. ὁ γὰρ Φαρνάβαζος βραδεῖαν
τὴν στρατείαν ἐποιεῖτο, καὶ πολὺν χρόνον ἐδεδώκει
τοῖς πολεμίοις εἰς τὴν παρασκευήν. ὡς ἐπίπαν
γὰρ οἱ τῶν Περσῶν στρατηγοί, τῶν ὅλων οὐκ
ὄντες αὐτοκράτορες, περὶ πάντων ἀναφέρουσι τῷ
βασιλεῖ, καὶ προσαναμένουσι τὰς περὶ ἑκάστων3
ἀποκρίσεις.
42. Ὁ δὲ τῶν Αἰγυπτίων βασιλεὺς Νεκτάνεβις
ἐπυνθάνετο μὲν τὸ μέγεθος τῶν Περσικῶν δυνάμεων,
ἐθάρρει δὲ μάλιστα μὲν τῇ τῆς χώρας ὀχυρότητι,
δυσπροσίτου παντελῶς οὔσης τῆς Αἰγύπτου,
ἔπειτα καὶ τῷ πεφράχθαι καλῶς πάσας εἰσβολὰς
2τάς τε ἀπὸ γῆς καὶ τὰς ἀπὸ θαλάττης. ἑπτὰ
στόμασι γὰρ τοῦ4 Νείλου τὰς εἰς τὸ Αἰγύπτιον



1Φαρνάβαζας Wesseling: ἀρτάβαζος.2συμπαραπλέοντος Wurm: συμπαρόντος.3ἑκάστων Reiske: ἕκαστον.4στόμασι γὰρ τοῦ Reiske: στόμασι· τοῦ γὰρ.62Book XV

anyone so quick in speech could be so dilatory in 374/3 b.c. action. Pharnabazus replied that it was because he was master of his words but the King was master of his actions. When the Persian army had assembled at the city of Acê1 it numbered two hundred thousand barbarians under the command of Pharnabazus and twenty thousand2 Greek mercenaries led by Iphicrates. The triremes numbered three hundred and the thirty-oared vessels two hundred. The number of those conveying food and other supplies was great. At the beginning of the summer3 the King’s generals broke camp with the entire army, and accompanied by the fleet sailing along the coast proceeded to Egypt. When they came near the Nile they found that the Egyptians had manifestly completed their preparations for the war. For Pharnabazus marched slowly and had given plenty of time for the enemy to prepare. Indeed it is the usual custom for the Persian commanders, not being independent in the general conduct of war, to refer all matters to the King and await his replies concerning every detail.
42. The Egyptian king Nectanebôs learned the size of the Persian armies, but was emboldened, chiefly by the strength of the country, for Egypt is extremely difficult of approach, and secondly by the fact that all points of invasion from land or sea had been carefully blocked. For the Nile empties into the Egyptian





1Later St. Jean d’Acre, or simply Acre.212.000 in Nepos, l.c.3Spring 373 just before Nile flood (chap. 43. 4). In the autumn Iphicrates was again in Athens where he was elected general (chap. 43. 5–6).63