Diodorus of Sicily
8διὰ τὴν τοῦ κρατοῦντος ἐπιείκειαν. ὁ δὲ Σωπείθης
μετὰ πολλῆς προθυμίας τὴν μὲν δύναμιν ἅπασαν
ἐπί τινας ἡμέρας λαμπρῶς εἱστίασε.
92. Τῷ δ᾿ Ἀλεξάνδρῳ πολλὰ καὶ μεγάλα δῶρα
παραστήσας κύνας ἔδωκεν ἑκατὸν καὶ πεντήκοντα
τοῖς μεγέθεσι καὶ ταῖς ἀλκαῖς καὶ τοῖς ἄλλοις προτερήμασι
θαυμαζομένους, οὓς ἔφασαν ταῖς τίγρεσιν
2ἐπιμεμῖχθαι. βουλόμενος δὲ τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον διὰ
τῶν ἔργων λαβεῖν πεῖραν τῆς τῶν κυνῶν ἀρετῆς
εἰσήγαγεν εἴς τι περίφραγμα λέοντα τέλειον καὶ
τῶν δοθέντων κυνῶν δύο τοὺς εὐτελεστάτους προέβαλε
τῷ λέοντι· τούτων δὲ κατισχυομένων ὑπὸ
3τοῦ θηρίου δύο ἑτέρους ἀφῆκεν. τῶν δὲ τεττάρων
περιγινομένων τοῦ λέοντος πεμφθείς τις ὑπ᾿ αὐτοῦ
μετὰ μαχαίρας ἀφῄρει τὸ δεξιὸν σκέλος ἑνὸς τῶν
κυνῶν. τοῦ δὲ βασιλέως ἀναβοήσαντος καὶ τῶν
σωματοφυλάκων προσδραμόντων καὶ τῆς τοῦ Ἰνδοῦ
χειρὸς ἐπιλαβομένων ὁ μὲν Σωπείθης τρεῖς ἀντὶ
τούτου δώσειν ἐπηγγείλατο, ὁ δὲ κυνηγὸς ἐπιλαβόμενος
τοῦ σκέλους ἔτεμνεν ἡσυχῇ κατ᾿ ὀλίγον. ὁ
δὲ κύων οὔτε κλαγγὴν οὔτε μυγμὸν προέμενος,
ἀλλὰ τοὺς ὀδόντας ἐμπεπρικὼς ἔμενεν ἕως ὅτου
γενόμενος ἔξαιμος ἐναπέθανε τῷ θηρίῳ.
93. Ἅμα δὲ τούτοις πραττομένοις ἧκεν Ἡφαιστίων
μετὰ τῆς συναπεσταλμένης δυνάμεως πολλὴν
τῆς Ἰνδικῆς καταπεπολεμηκώς. τοῦτον μὲν
οὖν διὰ τὰς ἀνδραγαθίας ἐπῄνεσεν· αὐτὸς δὲ εἰς
τὴν Φηγέως δυναστείαν ἐμβαλὼν καὶ τῶν ἐγχωρίων
ἀσμένως τὴν τῶν Μακεδόνων παρουσίαν προσδεξαμένων
καὶ τοῦ Φηγέως μετὰ δώρων πολλῶν
386Book XVII

through the kindness of the conqueror. Sopeithes 326/5 b.c. with great goodwill feasted the whole army bountifully for several days.
92. To Alexander he presented many impressive gifts, among them one hundred and fifty dogs remarkable for their size and courage and other good qualities.1 People said that they had a strain of tiger blood. He wanted Alexander to test their mettle in action, and he brought into a ring a full grown lion and two of the poorest of the dogs. He set these on the lion, and when they were having a hard time of it he released two others to assist them. The four were getting the upper hand over the lion when Sopeithes sent in a man with a scimitar who hacked at the right leg of one of the dogs. At this Alexander shouted out indignantly and the guards rushed up and seized the arm of the Indian, but Sopeithes said that he would give him three other dogs for that one, and the handler, taking a firm grip on the leg, severed it slowly. The dog, in the meanwhile, uttered neither yelp nor whimper, but continued with his teeth clamped shut until, fainting with loss of blood, he died on top of the lion.
93. While all this was going on, Hephaestion returned with his army from his mission, having conquered a big piece of India.2 Alexander commended him for his successes, then invaded the kingdom of Phegeus where the inhabitants cheerfully accepted the appearance of the Macedonians.3 Phegeus himself met the king with many gifts and Alexander confirmed



1Curtius. 9. 1. 31–33; Strabo, 15. 1. 31. 700. These Indian dogs were famous (Herodotus, 1. 192; 7. 187; cp. Real-Encyclopädie, 8 (1913), 2545).2Continued from chap. 91. 2; Curtius, 9. 1. 35.3Curtius, 9.1. 36.387