Diodorus of Sicily

τὴν μὲν πόλιν1 ἑλὼν ἐξηνδραποδίσατο, τὴν δὲ χώραν
2ἐλεηλάτησεν. ὁμοίως δὲ τὸ καλούμενον Τριόπιον
ἐκπολιορκήσας εἰς τρισχιλίους ἔλαβεν αἰχμαλώτους.
καθ᾿ ὃν δὴ χρόνον οἱ μὲν ἀπὸ τῆς χώρας βάρβαροι
συνδραμόντες ἐπέθεντο νυκτὸς τῇ στρατοπεδείᾳ καὶ
μάχης γενομένης ἀνεῖλον τῶν μετὰ Κλεωνύμου
πλείους τῶν διακοσίων, ἐζώγρησαν δὲ περὶ χιλίους.
3ἅμα δὲ τῷ κινδύνῳ τούτῳ χειμὼν ἐπιγενόμενος
εἴκοσι τῶν νεῶν διέφθειρε πλησίον ὁρμουσῶν τῆς
παρεμβολῆς. ὁ δὲ Κλεώνυμος δυσὶν ἐλαττώμασι
τηλικούτοις περιπεσὼν ἀπέπλευσε μετὰ τῆς δυνάμεως
εἰς τὴν Κόρκυραν.
106. Τοῦ δ᾿ ἐνιαυσίου χρόνου διεληλυθότος Ἀθήνησι
μὲν ἦν ἄρχων Νικοκλῆς, ἐν Ῥώμῃ δὲ τὴν
ὕπατον ἀρχὴν διεδέξαντο Μάρκος Λίβιος καὶ
Μάρκος Αἰμίλιος. ἐπὶ δὲ τούτων Κάσανδρος ὁ
Μακεδόνων βασιλεὺς ὁρῶν τὴν δύναμιν τῶν Ἑλλήνων
αὐξομένην καὶ πάντα τὸν πόλεμον ἐπὶ τὴν
Μακεδονίαν συνιστάμενον περίφοβος ἦν ὑπὲρ τοῦ
2μέλλοντος. διόπερ ἐξέπεμψε πρεσβευτὰς πρὸς
Ἀντίγονον εἰς τὴν Ἀσίαν, ἀξιῶν διαλύσασθαι πρὸς
αὐτόν. ἀποκριναμένου δ᾿ ἐκείνου διότι μίαν γινώσκει
διάλυσιν, ἐὰν ὁ Κάσανδρος ἐπιτρέπῃ τὰ
καθ᾿ αὑτόν, καταπλαγεὶς Λυσίμαχον ἐκ τῆς Θρᾴκης



1The name of the city seems to have been lost.422Book XX

the city,1 sold its people into slavery, and plundered 303 b.c. the countryside. He likewise took by siege the city called Triopium,2 capturing about three thousand prisoners. But at this very time the barbarians throughout the region came together and attacked his camp by night, and in the battle that took place they slew more than two hundred of Cleonymus’ men and made prisoners about a thousand. A storm rising at the time of the battle destroyed twenty of the ships that lay at anchor near his encampment. Having met with two such disasters, Cleonymus sailed away to Corcyra with his army.3
106. When this year had passed, Nicocles was 302 b.c. archon in Athens, and in Rome Marcus Livius and Marcus Aemilius received the consulship.4 While these held office, Cassander, the king of the Macedonians, on seeing that the power of the Greeks5 was increasing and that the whole war was directed against Macedonia, became much alarmed about the future. He therefore sent envoys into Asia to Antigonus, asking him to come to terms with him. But when Antigonus replied that he recognized only one basis for a settlement—Cassander’s surrender of whatever he possessed,—Cassander was alarmed and summoned Lysimachus from Thrace to take concerted





1The context (if, indeed, Tarentines above is right) suggests
that the city is Tarentum; but no enslavement of its
population is known, and it is most probable that some city
name has fallen out. Cleonymus’ raid upon Thuriae (Livy, 10. 2. 1), an otherwise unknown city on the east coast of the Bay of Tarentum, belongs in the next year.2The exact site is not known.3There is nothing more about Cleonymus in what remains of Diodorus. For his further adventures cp. Livy 10. 2.4Nicocles was archon in 302/1. Livy, 10. 1. 7, gives the consuls of 302 b.c. as M. Livius Denter and Aemilius (without praenomen).5i.e. the alliance under Demetrius Poliorcetes. The narrative is continued from chap. 103. 7. Cp. Justin, 15.2.15; Orosius, 3. 23. 41.423