Diodorus of Sicily

τὴν πόλιν συγκατέκαυσε τοὺς πλείστους· τῶν
δ᾿ ἐγχωρίων τῶν ὑπολειπομένων εἰς τρισχιλίους
συμφυγόντας εἰς τὴν ἀκρόπολιν καὶ μεθ᾿ ἱκετηριῶν
δεηθέντας ἀπέλυσεν.
97. Αὐτὸς δὲ πάλιν μετὰ τῶν φίλων ἐμβὰς εἰς
τὰς ναῦς διὰ τοῦ ποταμοῦ τὸν πλοῦν ἐποιεῖτο μέχρι
τῆς συμβολῆς τῶν προειρημένων ποταμῶν καὶ τοῦ
Ἰνδοῦ. μεγάλων δὲ ῥείθρων εἰς ἕνα τόπον συρραττόντων
ἴλιγγες πολλαὶ καὶ φοβεραὶ συνίσταντο
καὶ τὰ σκάφη συστρέφουσαι διέφθειρον. τῆς δὲ
τοῦ ῥεύματος βίας ὀξείας καὶ σφοδρᾶς οὔσης καὶ
τῆς τῶν κυβερνητῶν τέχνης κατισχυομένης δύο μὲν
μακραὶ ναῦς κατέδυσαν, τῶν δὲ ἄλλων πλοίων οὐκ
2ὀλίγα πρὸς τὴν γῆν ἐξέπεσε. τῆς δὲ ναυαρχίδος
καταρράκτῃ μεγάλῳ περιπεσούσης ὁ βασιλεὺς εἰς
τὸν ἔσχατον ἦλθε κίνδυνον. διὸ καὶ τοῦ θανάτου
πρὸ ὀφθαλμῶν ὄντος ὁ μὲν Ἀλέξανδρος ἀποθέμενος
τὴν ἐσθῆτα γυμνῷ1 τῷ σώματι τῆς ἐνδεχομένης
ἀντείχετο βοηθείας, οἱ δὲ φίλοι παρενήχοντο,
σπεύδοντες ὑποδέξασθαι περιτρεπομένης τῆς νεὼς
3τὸν βασιλέα. πολλῆς δὲ ταραχῆς περὶ τὴν ναῦν
οὔσης καὶ τῶν μὲν ἀνδρῶν ἀντιταττομένων τῇ τοῦ
ῥεύματος βίᾳ, τοῦ δὲ ποταμοῦ κατισχύοντος πᾶσαν
ἀνθρωπίνην ἐπίνοιάν τε καὶ δύναμιν μόγις ὁ Ἀλέξανδρος
μετὰ τῶν νεῶν εἰς τὴν γῆν ἐξέπεσεν.
σωθεὶς δὲ παραδόξως τοῖς θεοῖς ἔθυσεν ὡς μεγίστους



1γυμνὸς F.398Book XVII

and burned up most of the inhabitants with it.1 The 326/5 b.c. remaining natives to the number of three thousand had fled to the citadel, whence they appealed for mercy with suppliant branches. Alexander pardoned them.
97. Again he embarked with his Friends upon the ships and continued his voyage down the river until he came to the confluence of the rivers named above with the Indus.2 As these mighty streams flowed together, many dangerous eddies were created and these, making the ships collide with each other, caused much damage. The current was swift and violent and overcame the skill of the helmsmen. Two of the galleys were sunk and not a few of the other vessels ran aground. The flagship was swept into a great cataract and the king was brought into extreme danger. With death staring him in the face, Alexander flung off his clothing and leaping into the water naked saved himself as best he could.3 His Friends swam with him, concerned to help the king to safety now that his ship was foundering. Aboard the ship itself there was wild confusion. The crew struggled against the might of the water but the river was superior to all human skill and power. Nevertheless, Alexander and the ships4 with him got safely ashore with difficulty. Thus narrowly escaping, he sacrificed to the gods as having come through mortal



1Curtius, 9. 4. 6–7, stating that the Indians burned themselves
up to avoid subjection.2Both Curtius (9. 4. 8–14) and Arrian (6. 4. 4–5. 4) speak of the confluence of the Hydaspes and the Acesines, rightly. The Indus joins the system much further to the south.3Plutarch, Alexander, 58. 4, reported that Alexander could not swim.4This is the manuscript reading, possibly a mistake for νέων, “young men,” or νεόντων, “swimmers.” This last is the suggestion of Professor Post.399