Diodorus of Sicily

Ἑλλήνων πλείους τῶν πεντακοσίων, τῶν δὲ Μακεδόνων
ἑκατὸν καὶ τριάκοντα.
6Τῇ δ᾿ ὑστεραίᾳ Μένων μὲν καὶ Ἀντίφιλος οἱ τῶν
Ἑλλήνων ἡγεμόνες συνεδρεύσαντες ἐβουλεύσαντο
πότερον ἀναμείναντες τοὺς ἀπὸ τῶν πόλεων συμμάχους
καὶ καταστάντες ἀξιόμαχοι περὶ τῶν ὅλων
διακρίνωνται1 ἢ τῷ παρόντι καιρῷ συνείξαντες
πρεσβεύωνται περὶ διαλύσεως. ἔδοξεν οὖν ἀποστέλλειν
κήρυκας περὶ τῆς τοῦ πολέμου καταλύσεως.
7πραξάντων δ᾿ αὐτῶν τὸ δόξαν ἀπεκρίθησαν
οἱ περὶ τὸν Ἀντίπατρον κατὰ πόλεις πρεσβεύειν·
οὐδενὶ γὰρ τρόπῳ κοινὴν σύλλυσιν ποιήσεσθαι.
τῶν δὲ Ἑλλήνων οὐ προσδεχομένων τὰς κατὰ
πόλιν διαλύσεις οἱ μὲν περὶ τὸν Ἀντίπατρον καὶ
Κρατερὸν ἐπολιόρκουν τὰς περὶ Θετταλίαν2 πόλεις
καὶ κατὰ κράτος ᾕρουν, μὴ δυναμένων τῶν Ἑλλήνων
βοηθεῖν. διὸ καὶ τῶν πόλεων περιφόβων
οὐσῶν καὶ κατ᾿ ἰδίαν ἑκάστης πρεσβευούσης περὶ
διαλύσεως πάσαις συγχωρῶν τὴν εἰρήνην ἐπιεικῶς
8προσεφέρετο. διόπερ ἐμπεσούσης ὁρμῆς εἰς τὰς
πόλεις ἰδίᾳ πορίζεσθαι τὴν σωτηρίαν ταχὺ πᾶσαι
τῆς εἰρήνης ἔτυχον. οἱ δ᾿ ἀλλοτριώτατα διακείμενοι
πρὸς τοὺς Μακεδόνας Αἰτωλοὶ καὶ Ἀθηναῖοι,
συμμάχων ὄντες ἔρημοι, μετὰ τῶν ἰδίων στρατηγῶν
ἐβουλεύοντο περὶ τοῦ πολέμου.
18. Ἀντίπατρος δὲ διὰ ταύτης τῆς στρατηγίας
διαλύσας τὸ σύστημα τῶν Ἑλλήνων ἤγαγε τὴν
δύναμιν πᾶσαν ἐπὶ τοὺς Ἀθηναίους. ὁ δὲ δῆμος
ἐρημωθεὶς τῆς τῶν συμμάχων βοηθείας ἐν ἀπορίᾳ
πολλῇ καθειστήκει· πάντων δὲ καταφερομένων ἐπὶ

1διακρίνωνται Wesseling: διακρίνονται.2περὶ Θετταλίαν Dindorf, ἐπὶ Θετταλίας Fischer: ἐπὶ Θετταλίαν.62Book XVIII

were killed in the battle, and one hundred and thirty 322 b.c. of the Macedonians.1
On the next day Menon and Antiphilus, the leaders of the Greeks, came together and took counsel whether they should wait for the allies from the cities and then, when they were in position to fight on equal terms, seek a final decision, or, yielding to the present situation, should send envoys to seek a truce. They decided to dispatch heralds to treat for peace. These carried out their orders, but Antipater answered that the cities must negotiate separately, for he would by no means make a mass settlement. Since the Greeks refused to agree to peace terms city by city, Antipater and Craterus began to lay siege to the cities in Thessaly and to take them by storm, since the Greeks could not send aid to them. When the cities were thus badly frightened and each on its own account began to send envoys about a settlement, Antipater came to terms with all of them, granting them peace on easy terms. This resulted in a movement among the cities to secure their safety separately, and all quickly obtained terms of peace; but those who were most hostile to the Macedonians, the Aetolians and the Athenians, deserted by their allies, took counsel about the war with their own generals.
18. Antipater, after he had destroyed the alliance of the Greeks by this device, led all his forces against the Athenians. The people, bereft of the aid of their allies, were in great perplexity. All turned to



1Dinsmoor (Archons of Athens in the Hellenistic Age, 329) places the Battle of Crannon on September 5, 322 b.c.63