Diodorus of Sicily

προσεῖχε διὰ τὸ τοὺς βασιλεῖς καὶ τὸν ἐπιμελητὴν
αὐτῶν Πολυπέρχοντα, ἔτι δὲ Ὀλυμπιάδα τὴν
Ἀλεξάνδρου μητέρα γεγραφέναι πάντα ὑπηρετεῖν
Εὐμενεῖ, ὡς ὄντι τῆς βασιλείας αὐτοκράτορι στρατηγῷ.
3μάλιστα δ᾿ Ἀντιγόνῳ δυσηρέστει τότε τὰ
περὶ τὴν Εὐμενοῦς προαγωγὴν καὶ τὸ μέγεθος τῆς
περὶ αὐτὸν συνισταμένης ἐξουσίας· ὑπελάμβανε γὰρ
ὑπὸ τοῦ Πολυπέρχοντος τοῦτον ἑαυτῷ κατασκευάζεσθαι
μέγιστον ἀντίπαλον ἀποστάτῃ γεγονότι τῆς
4βασιλείας. διόπερ κρίνας ἐπιβουλὴν συστήσασθαι
κατ᾿ αὐτοῦ προεχειρίσατο τῶν φίλων Φιλώταν καὶ
τούτῳ μὲν ἔδωκεν ἐπιστολὴν γεγραμμένην πρός τε
τοὺς ἀργυράσπιδας καὶ τοὺς ἄλλους τοὺς μετ᾿
Εὐμενοῦς Μακεδόνας, συνεξέπεμψε δὲ αὐτῷ καὶ
ἄλλους τριάκοντα Μακεδόνας τῶν περιέργων καὶ
λάλων, οἷς ἦν προστεταγμένον κατ᾿ ἰδίαν ἐντυχεῖν
τοῖς ἡγεμόσι τῶν ἀργυρασπίδων Ἀντιγένει καὶ
Τευτάμῳ καὶ διὰ τούτων συστήσασθαί τινα κατ᾿
Εὐμενοῦς ἐπιβουλήν, δωρεάς τε μεγάλας ἐπαγγελλομένους1
καὶ σατραπείας μείζονας, ὁμοίως δὲ καὶ
τῶν ἀργυρασπίδων τοῖς γνωριζομένοις καὶ πολίταις
ἐντυγχάνειν καὶ διαφθείρειν δωρεαῖς πρὸς τὴν κατ᾿
5Εὐμενοῦς ἐπιβουλήν. τῶν μὲν οὖν ἄλλων οὐδένα
πεῖσαι κατίσχυσαν, Τεύταμος δὲ ὁ τῶν ἀργυρασπίδων
ἡγεμὼν διαφθαρεὶς ἐπεβάλετο καὶ τὸν
συνάρχοντα Ἀντιγένην πεῖσαι κοινωνῆσαι τῆς
6πράξεως. ὁ δ᾿ Ἀντιγένης, συνέσει καὶ πίστεως
βεβαιότητι διαφέρων, οὐ μόνον ἀντεῖπεν, ἀλλὰ
καὶ μετέπεισε τὸν προδιεφθαρμένον. ἐδίδαξε γὰρ
αὐτὸν συμφέρειν ζῆν τὸν Εὐμενῆ μᾶλλον ἢ τὸν
7Ἀντίγονον· ἐκεῖνον μὲν γὰρ εἰς πλεῖον ἰσχύσαντα

1ἐπαγγελλομένους Reiske: ἐπαγγελλόμενος.182Book XVIII

because the kings and Polyperchon their guardian 318 b.c. and also Olympias, the mother of Alexander, had written to them that they should serve Eumenes in every way, since he was the commander-in-chief of the kingdom. Antigonus in particular was displeased with the advancement of Eumenes and the magnitude of the power that was being concentrated in him; for he assumed that Eumenes was being made ready by Polyperchon as the strongest antagonist of himself now that he had become a rebel against the monarchy. Deciding, therefore, to organize a plot against Eumenes, he selected Philotas, one of his friends, and gave him a letter that he had written to the Silver Shields and to the other Macedonians with Eumenes. With him he also sent thirty other Macedonians, meddlesome and talkative persons, whom he instructed to meet separately with Anti-genes and Teutamus, the commanders of the Silver Shields, and through them to organize some plot against Eumenes by promising great gifts and greater satrapies. Antigonus also told them to get in touch with their acquaintances and fellow citizens among the Silver Shields and secure their support for the plot against Eumenes by corrupting them with bribes. Now although they were unable to persuade any others, Teutamus, the leader of the Silver Shields, was bribed and undertook to persuade his fellow commander, Antigenes, to share in the enterprise. Antigenes, however, who was a man of great shrewdness and trustworthiness, not only argued against this, but he even won back the man who had been bribed; for he showed him that it was to his advantage that Eumenes rather than Antigonus should remain alive. The latter, indeed, if he became more
183