Diodorus of Sicily
4εὐθὺς οὖν οἱ Βοιωτοὶ τὴν δύναμιν ἐξῆγον,
προσλαβόμενοι συμμάχους Λοκρούς τε καὶ Φωκεῖς.
οὗτοι μὲν οὖν προῆγον ἐπὶ τὴν Πελοπόννησον,
βοιωταρχούντων Ἐπαμεινώνδου καὶ Πελοπίδου·
τούτοις γὰρ οἱ ἄλλοι βοιωτάρχαι παρεκεχωρήκεισαν
ἑκουσίως τῆς στρατηγίας διά τε τὴν σύνεσιν καὶ
5τὴν ἀνδρείαν τῶν ἀνδρῶν. ὡς δὲ κατήντησαν ἐπὶ
τὴν Ἀρκαδίαν, ἧκον πρὸς αὐτοὺς πανδημεὶ οἵ τε
Ἀρκάδες καὶ Ἠλεῖοι καὶ Ἀργεῖοι καὶ οἱ ἄλλοι
σύμμαχοι πάντες. ἀθροισθέντων δὲ πλειόνων ἢ
πεντακισμυρίων,1 οἱ μὲν ἡγεμόνες αὐτῶν συνεδρεύσαντες
ἔγνωσαν ἐπ᾿ αὐτὴν βαδίζειν τὴν Σπάρτην
καὶ πᾶσαν τὴν Λακωνικὴν πορθῆσαι.
63. Οἱ δὲ Λακεδαιμόνιοι, πολλοὺς μὲν ἀποβεβληκότες
τῶν νέων ἐν τῇ περὶ Λεῦκτρα συμφορᾷ,
οὐκ ὀλίγους δ᾿ ἐν ταῖς ἄλλαις ἥτταις ἀπολωλεκότες,
καὶ τὸ σύνολον εἰς ὀλίγους πολιτικοὺς στρατιώτας
ὑπὸ τῆς τύχης συγκεκλεισμένοι, πρὸς δὲ τούτοις
τῶν συμμάχων τῶν μὲν ἀφεστηκότων, τῶν δὲ διὰ
τὰς ὁμοίας αἰτίας ὀλιγανδρούντων, εἰς πολλὴν ἀμηχανίαν
ἔπιπτον. διόπερ ἠναγκάζοντο καταφεύγειν
ἐπὶ τὴν τῶν Ἀθηναίων βοήθειαν, οἷς τριάκοντα μὲν
τυράννους ἐν τοῖς ἔμπροσθεν χρόνοις ἐπέστησαν,
τὰ δὲ τείχη τῆς πόλεως ἐκώλυσαν ἀνοικοδομεῖν,2
ἐπεβάλοντο δὲ καὶ τὴν πόλιν ἄρδην ἀναιροῦντες τὴν
2Ἀττικὴν ποιῆσαι μηλόβοτον. ἀλλὰ γὰρ οὐδὲν
ἰσχυρότερόν ἐστιν ἀνάγκης καὶ τύχης, δι᾿ ὧν ἐβιάσθησαν




1πεντακισμυρίων] ἑπτακισμυρίων Wesseling (cp. Plutarch,
Pelopidas, 24. 2 and Agesilaüs, 31. 1).2ἀνοικοδομεῖν Hertlein: οἰκοδομεῖν.124Book XV

the Boeotians led out their army, taking some Locrians 369/8 b.c. and Phocians along as allies. Now these men advanced against the Peloponnese under the boeotarchs Epameinondas and Pelopidas, for the other boeotarchs had willingly relinquished the command to these in recognition of their shrewdness in the art of war and their courage. When they reached Arcadia, the Arcadians, Eleians, Argives,and all the other allies joined them in full force. And when more than fifty thousand had gathered, their leaders sitting in council decided to march upon Sparta itself and lay waste all Laconia.
63. As for the Lacedaemonians, since they had cast away many of their young men in the disaster at Leuctra and in their other defeats had lost not a few, and were, taking all together, restricted by the blows of fortune to but few citizen soldiers, and, furthermore, since some of their allies had seceded and others were experiencing a shortage of men for reasons similar to their own, they sank into a state of great weakness. Hence they were compelled to have recourse to the aid of the Athenians, the very people over whom they had once set up thirty tyrants,1 whom they had forbidden to rebuild the walls of their city, whose city they had aimed utterly to destroy, and whose territory, Attica, they wished to turn into a sheep-walk. Yet, after all, nothing is stronger than necessity and fate, which compelled the Lacedaemonians to

1The Thirty were instituted as the governing board at
Athens by Lysander after the capture of the city (404 b.c.) following the defeat of Aegospotami. Though Sparta’ s allies wished to destroy Athens utterly, Sparta herself would not allow such drastic punishment, but did demand the dismantling of the walls, which were torn down by the Athenian populace to the accompaniment of flute music. Though forbidden to rebuild, when, after the victory of Cnidus (394 b.c.), Conon returned to Athens, the people once again built the walls.125