Diodorus of Sicily

διοδεύοντος ἄξενα καὶ ἀνεπίβατα πάντα τὰ μέρη
τῆς χώρας ὑπῆρχεν.
6Ἀλλ᾿ ὅμως ὁ βασιλεὺς τούτων ἁπάντων ἀντιπραττόντων
τῇ στρατιᾷ τῇ συνήθει τόλμῃ καὶ
καρτερίᾳ τῶν Μακεδόνων περιεγίνετο τῆς τοπικῆς
7δυστραπελείας. διὸ δὴ πολλοὶ τῶν στρατιωτῶν καὶ
τῶν ἐκτὸς τῆς τάξεως συνακολουθούντων ἐξαδυνατοῦντες
ἀπελείποντο· ἔνιοι δὲ διὰ τὴν τῆς χιόνος
ἀνταύγειαν καὶ σκληρότητα τῆς ἀναβαλλομένης ἀνακλάσεως
8ἐφθείροντο τὴν ὅρασιν.1 σαφὲς δ᾿ οὐδὲν
ἐκ διαστήματος ἦν ἰδεῖν, ἀλλὰ μόνῳ τῷ καπνῷ
δηλουμένων τῶν κωμῶν ἐλάμβανον οἱ Μακεδόνες
οὗ κατοικοῦσιν ἐφιστάμενοι. τούτῳ δὲ τῷ τρόπῳ
τῶν κωμῶν ἁλισκομένων, καὶ τῶν στρατιωτῶν τῷ
πλήθει τῆς ὠφελείας διορθουμένων τὴν κακοπάθειαν
ταχὺ πάντων τῶν ἐγχωρίων ὁ βασιλεὺς ἐκυρίευσεν.
83. Μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα παρελθὼν πλησίον τοῦ Καυκάσου
κατεστρατοπέδευσεν, ὅ τινες Παροπάνισον
ὄρος προσαγορεύουσι. τὸ δ᾿ ὄρος τοῦτο κατὰ
πλάτος διελθὼν ἐν ἡμέραις ἑκκαίδεκα πόλιν ἔκτισε
κατὰ τὴν εἰσβολὴν τὴν φέρουσαν εἰς τὴν Μηδικήν,
ἣν ὠνόμασεν Ἀλεξάνδρειαν. κατὰ δὲ μέσον τὸν
Καύκασον ἔστι πέτρα δέκα σταδίων ἔχουσα τὴν
περίμετρον, τεττάρων δὲ σταδίων τὸ ὕψος, ἐν ᾗ
καὶ τὸ Προμηθέως σπήλαιον ἐδείκνυθ᾿ ὑπὸ τῶν

1τὴν ὅρασιν added by Fischer. The sense seems to require
it.356Book XVII

and all parts of the country are unvisited and inaccessible.1 328/7 b.c.
The king, nevertheless, in spite of all those obstacles confronting the army, exercised the customary boldness and hardihood of the Macedonians and surmounted the difficulties of the region. Many of the soldiers and of the camp followers became exhausted and were left behind. Some too because of the glare of the snow and the hard brilliance of the reflected light lost their sight. Nothing could be seen clearly from a distance. It was only as the villages were revealed by their smoke that the Macedonians discovered where the dwellings were, even when they were standing right on top of them. By this method the villages were taken and the soldiers recovered from their hardships amidst a plenty of provisions. Before long the king made himself master of all the population.2
83. Now in his advance Alexander encamped near the Caucasus, which some call Mt. Paropanisum.3 In sixteen days he marched across this range from side to side, and founded a city in the pass which leads down to Media,4 calling it Alexandria. In the midst of the Caucasus there is a “rock”5 ten furlongs in perimeter and four furlongs in height, in which the cave of Prometheus was pointed out by the natives,





1Curtius, also (7. 3. 10–11), mentions burying the plants to protect them and the absence of animals and birds.2Alexander wintered there in 330/29 (Strabo, 15. 2. 10).3Curtius, 7. 3. 19–23; Arrian, 3. 28. 4. The Hindu Kush, which the ancients tended to confuse with the Caucasus (Arrian, 5. 3. 1–4; Strabo, 11. 5. 5).4This is clearly a mistake, perhaps a scribal mistake, for India, and editors since Reiske have tended to correct the text accordingly. The city was known as Alexandria of the Caucasus.5Cp. the note on chap. 28, p. 195, note 5.357