Diodorus of Sicily

κατεδίκαζον. διόπερ εἰς στάσεις ἐμπίπτουσαι
φυγὰς καὶ δημεύσεις οὐσιῶν ἐποιοῦντο, μάλιστα
δὲ πρὸς τοὺς ἐπὶ τῆς Λακεδαιμονίων ἡγεμονίας
2προεστηκότας τῶν πατρίδων. ἐν γὰρ τοῖς τότε
χρόνοις ἐπιτακτικῶς ἐκείνων τοῖς πολίταις προσενηνεγμένων,
ὕστερον ὁ δημοτικὸς ὄχλος ἀπολαβὼν
τὴν ἐλευθερίαν ἐμνησικάκει. πρῶτον δὲ τῶν
Φιαλέων οἱ φυγάδες συστραφέντες κατελάβοντο
τὴν καλουμένην Ἡραίαν, χωρίον ὀχυρόν. ἐκ ταύτης
δ᾿ ὁρμηθέντες παρεισέπεσον εἰς τὴν Φιάλειαν,
καὶ Διονυσίων κατὰ τύχην ὄντων ἐπιπεσόντες
ἀπροσδοκήτως τοῖς ἐν τῷ θεάτρῳ καθημένοις, καὶ
πολλοὺς ἀποσφάξαντες, οὐκ ὀλίγους δὲ καὶ συναπονοήσασθαι
πείσαντες, ἀνεχώρησαν εἰς τὴν Σπάρτην.
3οἱ δὲ τῆς Κορίνθου φυγάδες, συχνοὶ διατρίβοντες
παρὰ τοῖς Ἀργείοις, ἐπεχείρησαν κατιέναι· παραδεχθέντες
δ᾿ ἐπὶ τὴν πόλιν ὑπό τινων οἰκείων καὶ
φίλων, διαβληθέντες ἐγένοντο1 περικατάληπτοι·
μέλλοντες δὲ συναρπάζεσθαι, καὶ φοβούμενοι τὴν
ἐκ τῆς ἁλώσεως αἰκίαν, ἀλλήλους ἀπέκτειναν. οἱ
δὲ Κορίνθιοι πολλοὺς τῶν πολιτῶν αἰτιασάμενοι
μετεσχηκέναι τοῖς φυγάσι τῆς ἐπιθέσεως, οὓς μὲν
4ἀπέκτειναν, οὓς δ᾿ ἐφυγάδευσαν. ἐν δὲ τῇ πόλει
τῶν Μεγαρέων ἐπιχειρήσαντές τινες μεταστῆσαι
τὴν πολιτείαν, καὶ κρατηθέντες ὑπὸ τοῦ δήμου,
πολλοὶ μὲν ἀνῃρέθησαν, οὐκ ὀλίγοι δ᾿ ἐξέπεσον.
ὁμοίως δὲ καὶ παρὰ τοῖς Σικυωνίοις τινὲς νεωτερίζειν



1τε after ἐγένοντο deleted by Vogel; δέ, ἐγένοντο Dindorf,
Bekker.58Book XV

condemned them. Thus falling into internal strife 375/4 b.c. they had recourse to exilings and confiscations of property, particularly against those who during the Spartan hegemony had been leaders of their native cities. Indeed in those times the oligarchs had exercised authoritative control over their fellow citizens, and later as the democratic mob recovered its freedom it harboured a grudge. First, however, the exiles of Phialeia,1 rallying their forces, recovered Heraea,2 as it is called, a stronghold. And setting out from there, they swooped down upon Phialeia,3 and at a time when, as it happened, the festival of Dionysus was being celebrated, they fell unexpectedly upon the spectators in the theatre, killed many, persuaded not a few to participate in their folly, and retreated to Sparta. And the exiles from Corinth, who, many in number, were living among the Argives, attempted to return, but though admitted into the city by some of their relatives and friends, they were denounced and surrounded, and, as they were about to be apprehended, fearful of the maltreatment their capture would entail, they slew one another. The Corinthians, having charged many of their citizens with assisting the exiles in the attack, put some to death and exiled others. Again, in the city of the Megarians, when some persons endeavoured to overturn the government and were overpowered by the democracy, many were slain and not a few driven into exile. Likewise among the Sicyonians as well


1Phialeia, in the south-western corner of Arcadia. The
more ancient name was Phigaleia, which later came back
into use.2Heraea, an Arcadian town, near the frontier of Elis, on the road from Arcadia to Olympia.3Beloch (Griechische Geschichte2, 3. 1. 174, notes 2, 4) would assign these instances of party strife to the period after Leuctra. Glotz (3. 151, note 22) likewise. See Isocrates, Archidamus 64–69.59