Diodorus of Sicily

δυσὶ φορτίσι ναυσὶν ἀναχθεὶς κατέπλευσε
τῆς Ἀκραγαντίνης εἰς τὴν ὀνομαζομένην Μίνῳαν.
αὕτη δὲ τὸ μὲν παλαιὸν ὑπὸ Μίνωος ἐκτίσθη τοῦ
βασιλέως Κρητῶν, καθ᾿ ὃν καιρὸν ζητῶν Δαίδαλον
ἐπεξενώθη Κωκάλῳ τῷ βασιλεῖ τῶν Σικανῶν· κατὰ
δὲ τοὺς ὑποκειμένους καιροὺς ἡ μὲν πόλις αὕτη
τοῖς Καρχηδονίοις ὑπήκουεν,1 ὁ δ᾿ ἐπιστάτης αὐτῆς,
ὄνομα Πάραλος, φίλος ὢν Δίωνος προθύμως
5ὑπεδέξατ᾿ αὐτόν. ὁ δὲ Δίων ἐξελόμενος ἐκ τῶν
φορτηγῶν πανοπλίας πεντακισχιλίας τῷ Παράλῳ
παρέδωκεν καὶ παρεκάλεσεν αὐτὸν ἁμάξαις παρακομίσαι
πρὸς τὰς Συρακούσσας· αὐτὸς δὲ τοὺς μισθοφόρους
παραλαβών, ὄντας χιλίους, προῆγεν ἐπὶ
τὰς Συρακούσσας. ἐν παρόδῳ δὲ τούς τε Ἀκραγαντίνους
καὶ Γελῴους καί τινας τῶν τὴν μεσόγειον
οἰκούντων Σικανῶν τε καὶ Σικελῶν, ἔτι δὲ Καμαριναίους2
πείσας συνελευθερῶσαι τοὺς Συρακοσίους
6προῆγεν ἐπὶ τὴν κατάλυσιν τοῦ τυράννου. πολλῶν
δὲ πάντοθεν συρρυέντων μετὰ τῶν ὅπλων ταχὺ
πλείους τῶν δισμυρίων στρατιωτῶν ἠθροίσθησαν.
οὐδὲν δ᾿ ἧττον καὶ πολλοὶ τῶν ἐκ τῆς Ἰταλίας
Ἑλλήνων καὶ Μεσσηνίων μετεπέμφθησαν καὶ πάντες
σὺν πολλῇ προθυμίᾳ κατὰ σπουδὴν ἧκον.
10. Ὡς δ᾿ ἐπὶ τοῖς ὅροις3 τῆς Συρακοσίας ὁ
Δίων ἦν, ἀπήντα πρὸς αὐτὸν πλῆθος ἀνόπλων ἀνθρώπων






1Dindorf: ὑπήκουσεν.2After Καμαριναίους MSS. have καὶ Μαδιναίους, deleted
by most editors.3So Hertlein: τοὺς ὅρους.264Book XVI

lies by Cephallenia, with two merchantmen, put in at 357/6 b.c. the harbour of Acragas named Minoa. This had been founded of olden time by Minos, king of the Cretans, on the occasion when, in his search for Daedalus, he had been entertained by Cocalus, king of the Sicanians,1 but in the period with which we are concerned this city was subject to the Carthaginians, and its governor, named Paralus,2 who was a friend of Dion, received him enthusiastically. Dion, having unloaded from the merchantmen five thousand suits of armour, handed them over to Paralus and requested him to transport them on wagons to Syracuse, while he himself, taking along the mercenaries3 numbering a thousand, led them against Syracuse. On the march he persuaded the peoples of Acragas, Gela, and some of the Sicanians and Sicels who dwelt in the interior, also the people of Camarina, to join in the liberation of the Syracusans, and then advanced to overthrow the tyrant. Since many men with their arms streamed in from all sides, soon more than twenty thousand soldiers were gathered. Likewise many also of the Greeks from Italy and of the Messenians were summoned, and all came in haste with great enthusiasm.4
10. When Dion was on the borders of the Syracusan territory, there came to meet him a host of men without



1For this myth see Book 4. 77–79. There is no mention
of “founding” Minoa in chap. 79.2Plutarch, Dion, 25–26. 3, gives a more detailed account of
Dion’s voyage and his landing at Minoa. Synalus (ibid. 25. 5) is there the name given to the Carthaginian commander, Dion’s friend. It is very possible that Carthage favoured Dion’s project since it gave every indication of weakening the military power of Syracuse (see Beloch, Griechische Geschichte2, 3. 1. 258).3These seem to be the mercenaries he had brought, not new ones (see chap. 6. 5).4See the account in Plutarch, Dion, 26–27 and Hackforth, Cambridge Ancient History, 6. 278.265