Diodorus of Sicily

κατέστησαν ὑπάτους Μάρκον Πόπλιον Λαινάτην
καὶ Γναῖον Μαιμίλιον Ἰμπεριῶσον, ὀλυμπιὰς
δ᾿ ἤχθη ἕκτη πρὸς ταῖς ἑκατόν, καθ᾿ ἣν ἐνίκα
στάδιον Πῶρος Μαλιεύς. ἐπὶ δὲ τούτων κατὰ μὲν
τὴν Ἰταλίαν ἠθροίσθη περὶ τὴν Λευκανίαν πλῆθος
ἀνθρώπων πανταχόθεν μιγάδων, πλείστων δὲ δούλων
δραπετῶν. οὗτοι δὲ τὸ μὲν πρῶτον λῃστρικὸν
ἐνεστήσαντο βίον καὶ διὰ τὴν ἐν ταῖς ἀγραυλίαις
καὶ καταδρομαῖς συνήθειαν ἔσχον τριβὴν καὶ
μελέτην τῶν κατὰ πόλεμον ἔργων· διὸ καὶ τοῖς
πολεμικοῖς ἀγῶσι προτεροῦντες τῶν ἐγχωρίων εἰς
2αὔξησιν ἀξιολογωτέραν κατέστησαν. καὶ πρῶτον
μὲν Τέριναν1 πόλιν ἐκπολιορκήσαντες διήρπασαν,
ἔπειτα Ἱππώνιον2 καὶ Θουρίους καὶ πολλὰς ἄλλας
χειρωσάμενοι κοινὴν πολιτείαν συνέθεντο καὶ προσηγορεύθησαν
Βρέττιοι διὰ τὸ πλείστους εἶναι
δούλους· κατὰ γὰρ τὴν τῶν ἐγχωρίων διάλεκτον οἱ
δραπέται βρέττιοι προσηγορεύοντο.
Τὸ μὲν οὖν τῶν Βρεττίων πλῆθος οὕτω συνέστη
κατὰ τὴν Ἰταλίαν.
16. Κατὰ δὲ τὴν Σικελίαν Φίλιστος μὲν ὁ Διονυσίου
στρατηγὸς πλεύσας εἰς Ῥήγιον διεκόμισε τοὺς
ἱππεῖς εἰς Συρακούσσας, ὄντας πλείους τῶν πεντακοσίων.
προσθεὶς δὲ τούτοις ἱππεῖς τε ἄλλους
πλείονας καὶ πεζοὺς δισχιλίους ἐστράτευσεν ἐπὶ




1So Fischer (cp. Polyaenus, 2. 10. 1): Τέριν PX, Τερίναν
RF; Τερῖναν Dindorf.2ἔπειτα Ἱππώνιον Cluverius: ἐπὶ ταρπώνιον Ρ, ἔπειτα ταρπώνιον
Χ, Stephanus marg., ἔπειτ᾿ ἀρπώνιον RVF, ἐπεὶ ταρπώνιον Μ.280Book XVI

elected as consuls Marcus Poplius Laenas and Gnaeus 356/5 b.c. Maemilius Imperiosus,1 and the one hundred sixth celebration was held of the Olympian games, at which Porus2 the Malian won the stadion race. During their term of office, in Italy there gathered in Lucania a multitude of men from every region, a mixture of every sort, but for the most part runaway slaves. These at first led a marauding life and as they habituated themselves to out-of-door life and making raids they gained practice and training in warfare; consequently, since they regularly had the upper hand with the inhabitants in their battles, they reached a state of considerably increased importance. First they took by siege the city Terina3 and plundered it completely; then, having taken Hipponium, Thurii, and many other cities,4 they formed a common government and were called Bruttians from the fact that most of them were slaves, for in the local dialect runaway slaves were called “bruttians.”5
Such, then, was the origin6 of the people of the Bruttians in Italy.
16. In Sicily Philistus, Dionysius’ general, sailed to Rhegium and transported to Syracuse the cavalry, more than five hundred in number. When he had added to these other cavalry more numerous and two thousand infantry, he made an expedition against





1These names appear in Livy, 7. 12. 1 as Marcus Popilius
Laenas and Gnaeus Manlius.2Cp, chap. 2. 1.3A city on the west coast of Bruttian peninsula probably founded by Croton.4Sybaris on the Traïs is mentioned in Book 12. 22. 1.5Perhaps Oscan. Yet other legends have Brettos (Stephanus of Byzantium, Βρέττος), son of Hercules and Valentia, as eponymous hero, and still others Brettia (Justin, 23. 1. 12), as eponymous heroine. But the term Brettios is older than the date of this passage (see Aristophanes, fr. 629 Kock).6See Justin, 23. 1. 3–14; Strabo, 6. 1. 4.281