Diodorus of Sicily

καὶ τούτους καταπολεμήσαντα καταντᾶν πρὸς
Ἀντίπατρον, ὅπως εἰς ταὐτὸ συναχθεισῶν τῶν
δυνάμεων καὶ τοῦ Πτολεμαίου προσληφθέντος εἰς
τὴν συμμαχίαν δυνατοὶ γένωνται περιγενέσθαι τῶν
βασιλικῶν δυνάμεων.
30. Εὐμενὴς δὲ πυνθανόμενος προάγειν ἐπ᾿ αὐτὸν
τοὺς πολεμίους ἤθροισε πανταχόθεν τὰς δυνάμεις
καὶ μάλιστα τὴν ἱππικήν· τοῖς γὰρ πεζοῖς οὐ
δυνάμενος ἐξισωθῆναι τῇ Μακεδονικῇ φάλαγγι
κατεσκεύαζεν ἀξιόλογον σύστημα τῶν ἱππέων, δι᾿
2ὧν ἤλπιζε κρατήσειν τῶν ἐναντίων. ὡς δ᾿ ἤγγισαν
ἀλλήλαις αἱ δυνάμεις, ὁ μὲν Κρατερὸς συναγαγὼν
εἰς ἐκκλησίαν τὸ πλῆθος καὶ παρορμήσας εἰς τὸν
ἀγῶνα τοῖς οἰκείοις λόγοις ἔφησε διδόναι τοῖς
στρατιώταις, ἐὰν κρατήσωσι τῇ μάχῃ, διαρπάσαι
3τῶν πολεμίων πάσας τὰς ἀποσκευάς. πάντων δὲ
προθύμων γενομένων ἐξέταξε1 τὴν δύναμιν, τοῦ μὲν
δεξιοῦ κέρατος αὐτὸς ἡγούμενος, τοῦ δ᾿ εὐωνύμου
4τὴν ἡγεμονίαν παραδοὺς Νεοπτολέμῳ. εἶχε δὲ
τοὺς σύμπαντας πεζοὺς μὲν δισμυρίους, ὧν ἦσαν οἱ
πλείους Μακεδόνες2 διαβεβοημένοι ταῖς ἀνδραγαθίαις,
ἐν οἷς εἶχε μάλιστα τὰς ἐλπίδας τῆς νίκης·
ἱππεῖς δὲ συνηκολούθουν πλείους τῶν δισχιλίων.
5Εὐμενὴς δ᾿ εἶχε πεζοὺς μὲν δισμυρίους, παντοδαποὺς
τοῖς γένεσιν, ἱππεῖς δὲ πεντακισχιλίους,
δι᾿ ὧν τὸν κίνδυνον κρίνειν διεγνώκει.
Ἀμφοτέρων δὲ τοὺς ἱππεῖς διελομένων3 ἐπὶ τὰ
κέρατα καὶ πολὺ πρὸ τῆς φάλαγγος προϊππευσάντων
ὁ μὲν Κρατερὸς πρῶτος μετὰ τῶν ἐπιλέκτων
ἐπιρράξας τοῖς πολεμίοις ἠγωνίσατο μὲν περιβλέπτως,
σφαλέντος δὲ τοῦ ἵππου ἔπεσεν ἐπὶ τὴν

1ἐξέταξε Hertlein: ἔταξε.2Μακεδόνες Bekker: Μακεδόνων.3διελομένων Wesseling: ἑλομένων.98Book XVIII

defeating him, to join Antipater. In this way, when 321 b.c. they had combined their forces and had added Ptolemy to the alliance, they might be able to overmatch the royal armies.
30. As soon as Eumenes heard that the enemy was advancing upon him, he collected his forces, particularly his cavalry, from all sides. Since he could not equal the Macedonian phalanx with his foot soldiers, he made ready a noteworthy corps of horsemen, by means of whom he hoped to defeat those opposed to him. When the forces were near each other, Craterus summoned the whole army to an assembly and spurred them to battle with suitable words, saying that, if the soldiers were victorious in the battle, he would give them all the baggage of the enemy to plunder. Now that all had become eager for battle, he drew up the army, taking command of the right wing himself, and giving the command of the left to Neoptolemus. He had in all twenty thousand foot soldiers, chiefly Macedonians famed for their courage, on whom in particular he placed his hopes of victory, and more than two thousand horsemen as auxiliaries. Eumenes had twenty thousand foot soldiers, men of every race, and five thousand cavalry, by whom he had resolved to decide the encounter.
After both leaders had disposed their cavalry on the wings and had ridden far in advance of the line of infantry, Craterus was the first to charge upon the enemy with his picked troops, and he fought admirably; but his horse stumbled, and he fell to the



99