Diodorus of Sicily

σπεύδοντες ἄριστοι φανῆναι τῶν συστρατευομένων
Ἑλλήνων πρῶτοι καὶ μόνοι διὰ στενῆς τινος καὶ
βαθείας διώρυγος ἐτόλμησαν διαβῆναι παραβόλως.
9διαβάντων δ᾿ αὐτῶν καὶ προσβαλλόντων τοῖς τείχεσιν1
οἱ φρουροῦντες τὸ Πηλούσιον ἐκχυθέντες ἐκ
τῆς πόλεως συνῆψαν μάχην πρὸς τοὺς θηβαίους·
μεγάλου δ᾿ ἀγῶνος γενομένου διὰ τὰς παρ᾿ ἀμφοτέροις
φιλοτιμίας τότε μὲν ἐν τῷ κινδύνῳ διημερεύσαντες
ὑπὸ τῆς νυκτὸς διελύθησαν.
47. Τῇ δ᾿ ὑστεραίᾳ τοῦ βασιλέως εἰς τρία μέρη
τὴν Ἑλληνικὴν δύναμιν μερίσαντος ἑκάστη μερὶς
εἶχε στρατηγὸν Ἕλληνα καὶ τούτῳ παρακαθεσταμένον
ἡγεμόνα Πέρσην, ἄνδρα2 προκεκριμένον ἐπ᾿
2ἀρετῇ τε καὶ εὐνοίᾳ. τὴν μὲν οὖν πρώτην τάξιν
ἐπεῖχον οἱ Βοιωτοὶ στρατηγὸν μὲν ἔχοντες Λακράτην
τὸν Θηβαῖον, ἡγεμόνα δὲ Πέρσην Ῥωσάκην·
οὗτος δὲ ἀπόγονος μὲν ἦν ἑνὸς3 τῶν ἑπτὰ Περσῶν
τῶν τοὺς μάγους καταλυσάντων, σατράπης δὲ
Ἰωνίας καὶ Λυδίας· συνείπετο δ᾿ αὐτῷ πολλὴ μὲν
ἵππος οὐκ ὀλίγη δὲ πεζικὴ στρατιὰ τῶν βαρβάρων.
3δευτέρα δ᾿ ἦν μερὶς ἡ τῶν Ἀργείων Νικοστράτου
στρατηγοῦντος καὶ μετ᾿ αὐτοῦ Πέρσου συνάρχοντος
Ἀρισταζάνου· οὗτος δ᾿ ἦν εἰσαγγελεὺς τοῦ βασιλέως
καὶ πιστότατος τῶν φίλων μετὰ Βαγώαν· προσωρίσθησαν
δ᾿ αὐτῷ στρατιῶται μὲν ἐπίλεκτοι πεντακισχίλιοι,
4τριήρεις δὲ ὀγδοήκοντα. τῆς δὲ τρίτης
μερίδος ἐστρατήγει Μέντωρ ὁ τὴν Σιδῶνα παραδούς,



1καὶ προσβαλλόντων added by Fischer (cp. Book 15. 65. 4):
αὐτῶν (τοῖς τείχεσιν PX) οἱ φρ.2Πέρσην, ἄνδρα Capps: ἄνδρα Πέρσην.3ἑνὸς added by Reiske (cp. Book 19. 40. 2).368Book XVI

The Thebans, being eager to show themselves the 350/49 b.c. best of the Greeks that were taking part in the expedition, were the first to venture, unsupported and recklessly, to make a crossing through a narrow and deep canal. They had passed through it and were assaulting the walls when the garrison of Pelusium sallied forth from the city and engaged in battle with the Thebans. As the engagement proved severe because of the intense rivalry on both sides, they spent the whole of that day in the battle and were separated only by the night.
47. Then on the next day, as the King divided the Greek army into three contingents, each contingent had a Greek general, and stationed along beside him a Persian officer, a man preferred above the others for valour and loyalty. Now the forward position was held by the Boeotians, who had as general the Theban Lacrates and as Persian officer Rhosaces. The latter was a descendant of one of the seven Persians who deposed the Magi1; he was satrap of Ionia and Lydia, and he was accompanied by a large force of cavalry and no small body of infantry composed of barbarians. Next in line was the Argive contingent of which Nicostratus was general and with him as Persian colleague Aristazanes. The latter was an usher2 of the King and the most faithful of his friends after Bagoas; and assigned to him were five thousand elite soldiers and eighty triremes. Of the third contingent Mentor was general, he who had betrayed


1See the famous account in Herod. 3. 76–79.2It was the duty of an usher to make announcements to the King, and introduce ambassadors of foreign nations and others who required an audience with the King. Only those seven who had slain the Magi were permitted to enter the royal presence ἄνευ εἰσαγγελέως (cp. Herod. 3. 84).369