Diodorus of Sicily

τοὺς φίλους καὶ περὶ τῶν προτιθεμένων αἱρέσεων
ἀνακοινωσάμενος ἠξίου τὴν ἰδίαν γνώμην ἕκαστον
4μετὰ παρρησίας ἀποφήνασθαι. τῶν μὲν οὖν ἄλλων
οὐδεὶς ἐτόλμα συμβουλεῦσαι διὰ τὸ μέγεθος τῆς
ὑποκειμένης ζητήσεως, Παρμενίων δὲ πρῶτος
εἶπεν, Ἐγὼ μὲν ὢν Ἀλέξανδρος ἔλαβον ἂν τὰ διδόμενα
5καὶ τὴν σύνθεσιν ἐποιησάμην. ὁ δ᾿ Ἀλέξανδρος
ὑπολαβὼν εἶπεν, Κἀγὼ εἰ Παρμενίων ἦν
ἔλαβον ἄν.
Καθόλου δὲ καὶ ἄλλοις μεγαλοψύχοις λόγοις
χρησάμενος καὶ τοὺς μὲν λόγους τῶν Περσῶν
ἀποδοκιμάσας, προτιμήσας δὲ τὴν εὐδοξίαν τῶν
προτεινομένων δωρεῶν τοῖς μὲν πρέσβεσιν ἀπόκρισιν
ἔδωκεν ὡς οὔθ᾿ ὁ κόσμος δυεῖν ἡλίων ὄντων
τηρῆσαι δύναιτ᾿ ἂν1 τὴν ἰδίαν διακόσμησίν τε καὶ
τάξιν οὔθ᾿ ἡ οἰκουμένη δύο βασιλέων ἐχόντων τὴν
ἡγεμονίαν ἀταράχως καὶ ἀστασιάστως διαμένειν ἂν
6δύναιτο. διόπερ ἀπαγγέλλειν αὐτοὺς ἐκέλευσε τῷ
Δαρείῳ, εἰ μὲν τῶν πρωτείων ὀρέγεται, διαμάχεσθαι
πρὸς αὐτὸν περὶ τῆς τῶν ὅλων μοναρχίας· εἰ δὲ δόξης
καταφρονῶν προκρίνει τὴν λυσιτέλειαν καὶ τὴν
ἐκ τῆς ῥᾳστώνης τρυφήν, αὐτὸς μὲν Ἀλεξάνδρῳ
ποιείτω τὰ προσταττόμενα, ἄλλων δὲ ἄρχων βασιλευέτω,
συγχωρουμένης αὐτῷ τῆς ἐξουσίας ὑπὸ
τῆς Ἀλεξάνδρου χρηστότητος.
7Τὸ δὲ συνέδριον διαλύσας καὶ τὴν δύναμιν ἀναλαβὼν
προῆγεν ἐπὶ τὴν τῶν πολεμίων στρατοπεδείαν.
ἅμα δὲ τούτοις πραττομένοις τῆς τοῦ Δαρείου
γυναικὸς ἀποθανούσης ὁ Ἀλέξανδρος ἔθαψεν αὐτὴν
μεγαλοπρεπῶς.
1δύναται RX.274Book XVII

them the alternatives. He urged each to speak his 331/0 b.c. own mind freely. None of the rest, however, dared to give an opinion in a matter of this importance, but Parmenion spoke up and said: If I were Alexander, I should accept what was offered and make a treaty.” Alexander cut in and said: “So should I, if I were Parmenion.”
He continued with proud words and refuted the arguments of the Persians, preferring glory to the gifts which were extended to him. Then he told the envoys that the earth could not preserve its plan and order if there were two suns nor could the inhabited world remain calm and free from war so long as two kings shared the rule.1 He bade them tell Dareius that, if he desired the supremacy, he should do battle with him to see which of them would have sole and universal rule. If, on the other hand, he despised glory and chose profit and luxury with a life of ease, then let him obey Alexander, but be king over all other rulers,2 since this privilege was granted him by Alexander’s generosity.
Alexander dismissed the council and ordering his forces to resume their march, he advanced on the camp of the enemy. At this juncture the wife of Dareius died and Alexander gave her a sumptuous funeral.3
36.#x2013;7) place it before the embassy. This was the summer of
331. She had been taken prisoner in November, 333, but
Plutarch, Alexander, 30. 1, states that she died in childbirth. Plutarch, also (Alexander, 30), places this incident after Dareius’s embassy. Curtius (4. 10. 18–34) and Justin (11. 12. This may reflect a tradition that Alexander had not taken as good care of her as was generally believed.1The quip, “So should I if I were Parmenion,” occurs in all the sources. The “two suns” metaphor is given otherwise only by Justin (11. 12. 15).2This is a concept in keeping with the feudal organization of the Persian empire. The king was, quite literally, “king of kings”; if he accepted Alexander’s overlordship, he might still be king of all the other kings of “Iran and non-Iran.”275