Diodorus of Sicily

τε ἡγεμόνα τῆς φρουρᾶς Ἀλέξανδρον τὸν Σπαρτιάτην
ἀνεῖλον καὶ τῶν ἄλλων εἰς διακοσίους
ἀπέκτειναν, ἐν οἷς ὑπῆρχον καὶ οἱ τῶν Βοιωτῶν
3φυγάδες. ἡ δὲ τρίτη μερίς, ἐκ τῶν Ἀρκάδων
συνεστηκυῖα καὶ στρατιώτας ἔχουσα πλείστους,
εἰσέβαλεν εἰς τὴν Σκιρῖτιν καλουμένην χώραν, ἣν
παρεφύλαττεν Ἰσχόλας, ἀνὴρ ἀνδρείᾳ καὶ συνέσει
διαφέρων, μετὰ πολλῶν στρατιωτῶν. οὗτος δὲ τῶν
ἐπιφανεστάτων στρατιωτῶν ἐπετελέσατο πρᾶξιν
4ἡρωικὴν καὶ μνήμης ἀξίαν. ὁρῶν γὰρ ὅτι διὰ τὸ
πλῆθος τῶν πολεμίων πάντες οἱ συνάψαντες μάχην
ἀναιρεθήσονται, τὸ μὲν λιπεῖν τὴν ἐν ταῖς παρόδοις
τάξιν ἀνάξιον τῆς Σπάρτης ἔκρινε, τὸ δὲ διασῶσαι
τοὺς στρατιώτας χρήσιμον ἔσεσθαι τῇ πατρίδι·
διὸ1 παραδόξως ἀμφοτέρων προενοήθη, καὶ τὴν
γενομένην ποτὲ περὶ Θερμοπύλας ἀνδρείαν τοῦ
5βασιλέως Λεωνίδου φιλοτίμως ἐμιμήσατο. διαλέξας
γὰρ τοὺς νέους, τούτους μὲν ἀπέστειλεν εἰς
τὴν Σπάρτην χρησίμους ἐσομένους2 τῇ κινδυνευούσῃ
περὶ τῶν ὅλων· αὐτὸς δὲ μετὰ τῶν πρεσβυτέρων
φυλάττων τὴν τάξιν καὶ πολλοὺς ἀνελὼν
τῶν πολεμίων, κυκλωθεὶς ὑπὸ τῶν Ἀρκάδων μετὰ
6πάντων ἀνῃρέθη. Ἠλεῖοι δὲ τὴν τετάρτην μοῖραν
ἔχοντες, καὶ κατ᾿ ἄλλους τόπους πεπταμένους
διελθόντες, εἰς τὴν Σελλασίαν παρεγένοντο· εἰς
τοῦτον γὰρ τὸν τόπον πᾶσι καταντᾶν παρήγγελτο.
ἀθροισθείσης δὲ ἁπάσης τῆς δυνάμεως εἰς τὴν
Σελλασίαν, προῆγον ἐπ᾿ αὐτὴν τὴν Σπάρτην πορθοῦντες
ἅμα καὶ πυρπολοῦντες τὴν χώραν.
65. Οἱ δὲ Λακεδαιμόνιοι, πεντακόσια ἔτη τὴν
Λακωνικὴν τετηρηκότες ἀπόρθητον, τότε θεωροῦντες
1διὸ added by Bekker.2ἐσομένους Post: ἔσεσθαι.128Book XV

set to guard the pass, slew its leader Alexander the 369/8 b.c. Spartan and about two hundred of the rest, amongst whom were the Boeotian refugees. The third contingent, composed of the Arcadians and containing the largest number, invaded the district called Sciritis,1 which had a large garrison under Ischolas, a man of conspicuous valour and shrewdness. Himself one of the most distinguished soldiers, he accomplished an heroic and memorable deed. For, seeing that, because of the overwhelming number of the enemy, all who joined battle with them would be killed, he decided that while it was not in keeping with Spartan dignity to abandon his post in the pass, yet it would be useful to his country to preserve the men. He therefore in an amazing manner provided for both objects and emulated the courageous exploit of King Leonidas at Thermopylae.2 For he picked out the young men and sent them back to Sparta to be of service to her in her hour of deadly peril. He himself, keeping his post with the older men, slew many of the enemy, but finally, encircled by the Arcadians, perished with all his corps. The Eleians, who formed the fourth contingent, marching by other unguarded regions, reached Sellasia, for this was the locality designated to all as the rendezvous. When all the army had gathered in Sellasia, they advanced upon Sparta itself, sacking and burning the countryside.
65. Now the Lacedaemonians, who for five hundred years had preserved Laconia undevastated, could not





1A high mountainous district in the north of Laconia on the road leading from Sparta to Tegea.2The historic occasion, 480 b.c., when Leonidas sent home all but three hundred Spartans, whom he kept to hold up Xerxes’ advance. See Book .11. 11.129