Diodorus of Sicily

πλείους τῶν δισχιλίων. πάντων δὲ προθύμως ἐπὶ
τὴν πολιορκίαν ὁρμησάντων διελόμενοι τὰ πλήθη
τὰς προσβολὰς ἐκ διαδοχῆς ἐποιοῦντο, προσκαρτεροῦντες
τοῖς κινδύνοις συνεχῶς καὶ καθ᾿ ἡμέραν
καὶ νυκτός.
27. Οἱ δ᾿ ἐν τῇ Καδμείᾳ φρουροῦντες1 παρακληθέντες
ὑπὸ τῶν ἡγεμόνων εὐρώστως ἠμύνοντο
τοὺς πολεμίους, ἐλπίζοντες συντόμως ἥξειν τοὺς
Λακεδαιμονίους μετὰ μεγάλης δυνάμεως. ἕως
μὲν οὖν εἶχον τροφὰς ἱκανάς, ἐνεκαρτέρουν τοῖς
δεινοῖς, καὶ πολλοὺς τῶν πολιορκούντων ἀπέκτεινον
καὶ κατετραυμάτιζον, συνεργὸν ἔχοντες τὴν τῆς
ἀκροπόλεως ὀχυρότητα· ὡς δ᾿ ἡ μὲν τῶν ἀναγκαίων
σπάνις ἐπέτεινεν, οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι δὲ περὶ τὰς
παρασκευὰς ὄντες ἐχρόνιζον, ἐστασίαζον πρὸς ἀλλήλους.
2οἱ μὲν γὰρ Λακεδαιμόνιοι μέχρι θανάτου
καρτερεῖν ᾤοντο δεῖν, οἱ δὲ ἀπὸ τῶν συμμαχίδων
πόλεων συστρατεύσαντες, ὄντες πολλαπλάσιοι,
παραδιδόναι τὴν Καδμείαν ἀπεφήναντο· συνηναγκάσθησαν
δὲ καὶ οἱ ἐξ αὐτῆς τῆς Σπάρτης, ὄντες
ὀλίγοι, παραχωρῆσαι τῆς ἀκροπόλεως. διόπερ
οὗτοι μὲν ὑπόσπονδοι καθ᾿ ὁμολογίαν ἀφεθέντες
3εἰς τὴν Πελοπόννησον ἀπηλλάγησαν, οἱ δὲ Λακεδαιμόνιοι
δυνάμεσιν ἀξιολόγοις προσιόντες ἐπὶ τὰς
Θήβας, καὶ βραχὺ τῶν καιρῶν ὑστερήσαντες,
ἄπρακτον ἔσχον τὴν ἐπιβολήν. τοὺς δὲ ἡγεμόνας
τῆς φρουρᾶς τρεῖς ὄντας μετέστησαν2 εἰς κρίσιν,
καὶ τοὺς μὲν δύο κατεδίκασαν θανάτῳ, τὸν μέντοι
τρίτον τοσούτῳ πλήθει χρημάτων ὥστε μὴ δύνασθαι
4τὴν οὐσίαν αὐτοῦ τοσαῦτα χρήματα ἐκτῖσαι. μετὰ
1φρουροῦντες Dindorf: οἰκοῦντες (deleted by Madvig).2μετέστησαν] Vogel defends (cp. Book 13. 64. 6 and 75. 8); κατέστησαν Bekker, Dindorf.18Book XV

two thousand horse were assembled. And since they 378/7 b.c. were one and all eager for the siege, dividing their forces they kept making their assaults in relays, maintaining a persistent attack at all times both day and night.
27. The garrison in the Cadmeia under the exhortations of their commanders stoutly defended themselves against their adversaries, expecting that the Lacedaemonians would come shortly with a large army. Now as long as they had sufficient food, they held out stubbornly against the attacks and slew and wounded many of their besiegers, supported by the strength of the citadel; but when the scarcity of provisions increased and the Lacedaemonians, occupied in mustering forces, were long in coming, dissension spread amongst them. For the Lacedaemonians among them thought they should hold out till death, while their partners in war from the allied cities, who were many times their number, declared themselves for surrendering the Cadmeia. Under such compulsion even the men from Sparta itself, who were but few, joined in the evacuation of the citadel. These therefore capitulated on terms and returned to the Peloponnese;
but the Lacedaemonians advanced with a considerable force on Thebes, and, coming just too late, were unsuccessful in their attack.1 They put on trial the three officers of the garrison, sentenced two to death, and inflicted so heavy a fine upon the third that his estate could not pay it. Subsequently the




1Cp. Xenophon, Hell. 5. 4. 13–18. Plutarch, Pelopidas, 13.19