Diodorus of Sicily

μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα τοῦ Λυκόφρονος μεταπεμψαμένου
παρὰ τῶν Φωκέων συμμαχίαν ἀπεστάλη
Φάυλλος ὁ ἀδελφὸς Ὀνομάρχου μετὰ στρατιωτῶν
ἑπτακισχιλίων. ὁ δὲ Φίλιππος τοὺς Φωκεῖς νικήσας
2ἐξέβαλεν ἐκ τῆς Θετταλίας. Ὀνόμαρχος δ᾿
ἀναλαβὼν πᾶσαν τὴν δύναμιν καὶ νομίζων ὅλης τῆς
Θετταλίας κυριεύσειν ἧκεν ἐν τάχει βοηθήσων τοῖς
περὶ τὸν Λυκόφρονα. τοῦ δὲ Φιλίππου μετὰ τῶν
Θετταλῶν ἀντιπαραταξαμένου τοῖς Φωκεῦσιν Ὀνόμαρχος
ὑπερέχων τοῖς πλήθεσι δυσὶ μάχαις ἐνίκησε
καὶ πολλοὺς τῶν Μακεδόνων ἀνεῖλεν. Φίλιππος δ᾿
εἰς τοὺς ἐσχάτους κινδύνους περικλεισθεὶς καὶ τῶν
στρατιωτῶν διὰ τὴν ἀθυμίαν καταλιπόντων αὐτὸν
παραθαρσύνας τὸ πλῆθος μόγις ἐποίησεν αὐτοὺς
3εὐπειθεῖς. μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα ὁ Φίλιππος μὲν ἀνεχώρησεν
εἰς Μακεδονίαν, Ὀνόμαρχος δὲ στρατεύσας
εἰς Βοιωτίαν ἐνίκησε μάχῃ τοὺς Βοιωτοὺς καὶ
πόλιν εἷλε Κορώνειαν. κατὰ δὲ τὴν Θετταλίαν
Φίλιππος μὲν ἐκ τῆς Μακεδονίας μετὰ τῆς δυνάμεως
ἄρτι κατηντηκὼς ἐστράτευσεν ἐπὶ Λυκόφρονα
4τὸν Φερῶν τύραννον. οὗτος δ᾿ οὐκ ὢν
ἀξιόμαχος μετεπέμψατο συμμαχίαν παρὰ Φωκέων,
ἐπαγγελλόμενος συγκατασκευάσειν αὐτοῖς τὰ κατὰ
τὴν Θετταλίαν. διόπερ Ὀνομάρχου σπουδῇ1 βοηθήσαντος
μετὰ πεζῶν δισμυρίων καὶ πεντακοσίων
ἱππέων ὁ μὲν Φίλιππος πείσας τοὺς Θετταλοὺς
κοινῇ τὸν πόλεμον ἄρασθαι συνήγαγε τοὺς πάντας
πεζοὺς μὲν ὑπὲρ τοὺς δισμυρίους, ἱππεῖς δὲ τρισχιλίους.
5γενομένης δὲ παρατάξεως ἰσχυρᾶς καὶ
τῶν Θετταλῶν ἱππέων τῷ πλήθει καὶ ταῖς ἀρεταῖς

1So Sherman, σπουδῇ πάσῃ Capps: πεζῇ (deleted by
Reiske).334Book XVI

when Lycophron summoned an auxiliary force from 353/2 b.c. his allies the Phocians, Phaÿllus, the brother of Onomarchus, was dispatched with seven thousand men. But Philip defeated the Phocians and drove them out of Thessaly. Then Onomarchus came in haste with his entire military strength to the support of Lycophron, believing that he would dominate all Thessaly. When Philip in company with the Thessalians joined battle against the Phocians, Onomarchus with his superior numbers defeated him in two battles and slew many of the Macedonians. As for Philip, he was reduced to the uttermost perils and his soldiers were so despondent that they had deserted him, but by arousing the courage of the majority, he got them with great difficulty to obey his orders. Later Philip withdrew to Macedonia, and Onomarchus, marching into Boeotia, defeated the Boeotians in battle1 and took the city of Coroneia. As for Thessaly, however, Philip had just at that time returned with his army from Macedonia2 and had taken the field against Lycophron, tyrant of Pherae. Lycophron, however, since he was no match for him in strength, summoned reinforcements from his allies the Phocians, promising jointly with them to organize the government of all Thessaly. So when Onomarchus in haste came to his support with twenty thousand foot and five hundred horse, Philip, having persuaded the Thessalians to prosecute the war in common, gathered them all together, numbering more than twenty thousand foot and three thousand horse. A severe battle took place and since the Thessalian cavalry were


1At Hermeum, cp. Ephorus, fr. 153, and Aristotle, Nicomachean Ethics, 3. 8. 9, 1116 b.2On the chronology of these events see Beloch, Griechische Geschichte2, 3. 2. 267–270.335