Diodorus of Sicily
55. Δαρεῖος δὲ τῶν ἀποκρίσεων ἀκούσας καὶ
τὴν διὰ τῶν λόγων σύνθεσιν ἀπογνοὺς τὴν μὲν
δύναμιν καθ᾿ ἡμέραν συνέταττε καὶ πρὸς τὴν ἐν
τοῖς κινδύνοις εὐηκοΐαν ἑτοίμην κατεσκεύαζε, τῶν
δὲ φίλων Μαζαῖον μὲν μετὰ στρατιωτῶν ἐπιλέκτων
ἐξαπέστειλε παραφυλάξοντα τὴν διάβασιν τοῦ ποταμοῦ
καὶ τὸν πόρον προκαταληψόμενον, ἑτέρους δ᾿
ἐξέπεμψε τὴν χώραν πυρπολήσοντας δι᾿ ἧς ἀναγκαῖον
ἦν διελθεῖν τοὺς πολεμίους· ἐνόμιζε γὰρ τῷ
μὲν ῥεύματι τοῦ ποταμοῦ προβλήματι χρῆσθαι πρὸς
2τὴν ἔφοδον τῶν Μακεδόνων. τούτων δ᾿ ὁ μὲν
Μαζαῖος ὁρῶν ἀδιάβατον ὄντα τὸν ποταμὸν διά τε
τὸ βάθος καὶ τὴν σφοδρότητα τοῦ ῥεύματος τῆς μὲν
τούτου φυλακῆς ἠμέλησε, τοῖς δὲ τὴν χώραν
πυρπολοῦσι συνεργήσας καὶ πολλὴν γῆν διαφθείρας
ὑπέλαβεν ἄβατον ἔσεσθαι τοῖς πολεμίοις διὰ τὴν
σπάνιν τῆς τροφῆς.
3Ὁ δ᾿ Ἀλέξανδρος παραγενόμενος πρὸς τὴν διάβασιν
τοῦ Τίγρεως ποταμοῦ καὶ τὸν πόρον ὑπό
τινων ἐγχωρίων μαθὼν διεβίβασε τὴν δύναμιν οὐ
μόνον ἐπιπόνως, ἀλλὰ καὶ παντελῶς ἐπικινδύνως.
4τοῦ γὰρ πόρου τὸ μὲν βάθος ἦν ὑπὲρ τῶν μαστῶν,
τοῦ δὲ ῥεύματος ἡ ὀξύτης πολλοὺς τῶν διαβαινόντων
παρέσυρεν καὶ τὴν βάσιν τῶν σκελῶν παρῃρεῖτο,
τό τε ῥεῦμα τοῖς ὅπλοις ἐμπῖπτον πολλούς τε
παρέφερε καὶ τοῖς ἐσχάτοις κινδύνοις περιέβαλλεν.
5ὁ δ᾿ Ἀλέξανδρος πρὸς τὴν σφοδρότητα τοῦ ῥεύματος
ἀντιμηχανώμενος παρήγγειλε πᾶσι τὰς χεῖρας


276Book XVII
55. Dareius heard Alexander’s answer and gave up 331/0 b.c. any hope of a diplomatic settlement. He continued drilling his troops each day and brought their battle discipline to a satisfactory state. He sent off one of his Friends, Mazaeus, with a picked body of men to guard the crossing of the river and to seize and hold the ford. Other troops he sent out to scorch the earth over which the enemy must come. He thought of using the bed of the Tigris as a defence against the advance of the Macedonians.1 Mazaeus, however, looked upon the river as uncrossable because of its depth and the swiftness of the current,2 and neglected to guard it. Instead he joined forces with those who were burning the countryside, and having wasted a great stretch of it, judged that it would be unusable by the enemy because of the lack of forage.
Alexander, nevertheless, when he came to the crossing of the Tigris River, learned of the ford from some of the local natives, and transferred his army to the east bank. This was accomplished not only with difficulty but even at substantial risk. The depth of the water at the ford was above a man’s breast and the force of the current swept away many who were crossing and deprived them of their footing, and as the water struck their shields, it bore many off their course and brought them into extreme danger. But Alexander contrived a defence against the violence of the river. He ordered all to lock arms with each



1According to Arrian (3. 7. 1), Mazaeus was also supposed to defend the line of the Euphrates, and this plan is reported in a different form by Curtius, 4. 9. 7 and 12.2The Tigris is said to owe its name to the “arrow-swift” character of its current (Curtius, 4. 9. 16).277