Diodorus of Sicily

εἰς πόλεμον. τέλος δὲ τῶν Ἑλλήνων ἑλομένων
αὐτὸν στρατηγὸν αὐτοκράτορα τῆς Ἑλλάδος
μεγάλας παρασκευὰς ἐποιεῖτο πρὸς τὴν ἐπὶ τοὺς
Πέρσας στρατείαν. διατάξας δ᾿ ἑκάστῃ πόλει τὸ
πλῆθος τῶν εἰς συμμαχίαν στρατιωτῶν ἐπανῆλθεν
εἰς τὴν Μακεδονίαν.
Καὶ τὰ μὲν περὶ Φίλιππον ἐν τούτοις ἦν.
90. Κατὰ δὲ τὴν Σικελίαν Τιμολέων ὁ Κορίνθιος
ἅπαντα τοῖς Συρακοσίοις καὶ τοῖς Σικελιώταις
κατωρθωκὼς ἐτελεύτησε, στρατηγήσας ἔτη ὀκτώ.
οἱ δὲ Συρακόσιοι μεγάλως ἀποδεδεγμένοι τὸν ἄνδρα
διά τε τὴν ἀρετὴν καὶ τὸ μέγεθος τῶν εὐεργεσιῶν
μεγαλοπρεπῶς ἔθαψαν αὐτὸν καὶ κατὰ τὴν ἐκφορὰν
ἀθροισθέντος τοῦ πλήθους τόδε τὸ ψήφισμα ἀνηγόρευσεν
ὁ Δημήτριος ὃς ἦν μεγαλοφωνότατος τῶν
τότε κηρύκων1· ἐψήφισται2 ὁ δᾶμος3 τῶν Συρακοσίων
Τιμολέοντα Τιμαινέτου Κορίνθιον τόνδε4 θάπτειν
μὲν ἀπὸ διακοσιᾶν μνᾶν,5 τιμᾶσθαι δὲ εἰς τὸν
ἅπαντα χρόνον ἀγώνεσσι6 μουσικοῖς καὶ ἱππικοῖς
καὶ γυμνικοῖς, ὅτι τοὺς τυράννους καταλύσας καὶ
τοὺς βαρβάρους καταπολεμήσας καὶ τὰς μεγίστας
τῶν Ἑλληνίδων πόλεων ἀνοικίσας7 αἴτιος ἐγενήθη
τᾶς8 ἐλευθερίας τοῖς Σικελιώταις.
2Περὶ δὲ τοὺς αὐτοὺς καιροὺς Ἀριοβαρζάνης
μὲν ἐτελεύτησεν βασιλεύσας ἔτη εἴκοσι καὶ ἕξ, τὴν
δὲ βασιλείαν διαδεξάμενος Μιθριδάτης ἦρξεν ἔτη






1ὁ Δημήτριος . . . κηρύκων inserted by Cobet, from Plutarch,
Timoleon, 39. 3.2ἐψήφισται inserted by Fischer.3So P: δῆμος cet.4Κορίνθιον τόνδε Cobet; Τιμαινέτου υἱὸν τόνδε Fischer:
τιμᾶν ἐτούσιον (ἐτήσιον RF) τοῦτον δὲ.5διακοσιᾶν μνᾶν PX: διακοσίων μνῶν cet.6So P: ἀγώνεσι X, ἀγῶσι cet.7ἀνοικίσας Dindorf: ἐνοικίσας RF, οἰκήσας P, οἰκίσας X.8So PX: τῆς cet.86Book XVI

representatives over to war. The Greeks elected him 337/6 b.c. the general plenipotentiary of Greece, and he began accumulating supplies for the campaign. He prescribed the number of soldiers that each city should send for the joint effort, and then returned to Macedonia.
This was the state of affairs as regards Philip.
90. In Sicily, Timoleon the Corinthian died; he had put in order all the affairs of the Syracusans and the other Siceliot Greeks, and had been their general for eight years.1 The Syracusans revered him greatly because of his ability and the extent of his services to them and gave him a magnificent funeral. As the body was borne out in the presence of all the people the following decree was proclaimed by that Demetrius who had the most powerful voice of all the criers of his time2: “The people of Syracuse have voted to bury this Timoleon son of Timaenetus, of Corinth, at a cost of two hundred minas, and to honour him to the end of time with musical, equestrian, and gymnastic games, because he destroyed the tyrants, defeated the barbarians, and resettled the mightiest of Greek cities, and so became the author of freedom for the Greeks of Sicily.”
In this year, also, Ariobarzanes died after ruling for twenty-six years and Mithridates, succeeding him,





1Continued from chap. 83.2Nepos, Timoleon, 5. 4. Plutarch, Timoleon, 39. 1–3, gives the same text of the decree except at the end, where instead of mentioning freedom, he has: “he restored their laws to the Syracusans.” These threefold agones were the highest form of “heroic” honours; cp. C. Habicht, Gottmenschentum und griechische Städte (1956), p. 150.87