Diodorus of Sicily

βοηθοὺς ἐπεκαλοῦντο τὰς παρ᾿ ἑτέρων ἐπικουρίας
7δεομένας. ἦγον δ᾿ αὐτὰς οἱ μὲν ἀπὸ τῆς
κόμης ἐπισπώμενοι τὰς ἠτυχηκυίας, οἱ δὲ τὰς
ἐσθῆτας περιρηγνύντες καὶ γυμνοῖς τοῖς σώμασιν
ἐπιβάλλοντες τὰς χεῖρας καὶ ταῖς στάθμαις τῶν
δοράτων τύπτοντες καὶ τὰ τιμιώτατα καὶ περιβόητα
τῶν βαρβάρων ταῖς τῆς τύχης δωρεαῖς ὑβρίζοντες.
36. Οἱ δ᾿ ἐπιεικέστατοι τῶν Μακεδόνων τὴν μεταβολὴν
τῆς τύχης ὁρῶντες συμπαθεῖς ἐγίνοντο καὶ
τὰς τῶν ἀκληρούντων συμφορὰς ἠλέουν, αἷς τὰ μὲν
προσήκοντα καὶ μεγάλα1 μακρὰν ἀπήρτητο, τὰ δ᾿
ἀλλόφυλα καὶ πολέμια παρῆν σύνεγγυς . . . καὶ
πρὸς ἀτυχῆ καὶ ἐπονείδιστον αἰχμαλωσίαν παρώρμητο.
2Μάλιστα δὲ τοὺς παρόντας εἰς δάκρυα καὶ συμπάθειαν
ἤγαγεν ἡ Δαρείου μήτηρ καὶ γυνὴ καὶ δύο
3θυγατέρες ἐπίγαμοι καὶ υἱὸς παῖς τὴν ἡλικίαν. ἐπὶ
γὰρ τούτων ἡ μεταβολὴ τῆς τύχης καὶ τὸ μέγεθος
τῶν ἀνελπίστων ἀκληρημάτων ἐν ὄψει κείμενον
εὐλόγως τοὺς ὁρῶντας ἐποίει συμπάσχειν τοῖς
4ἠτυχηκόσι. περὶ μὲν γὰρ Δαρείου πότερον ζῇ καὶ
περίεστιν ἢ καὶ μετὰ τῆς τῶν ἄλλων φθορᾶς ἀπόλωλεν
οὐκ ἐγίνωσκον, ἑώρων δὲ τὴν σκηνὴν διαρπάζοντας
ἐνόπλους πολεμίους ἄνδρας, ἀγνοοῦντας
μὲν τὰς ἡλωκυίας, πολλὰ δὲ διὰ τὴν ἄγνοιαν
ἀπρεπῆ πράττοντας, καὶ τὸ σύνολον ὅλην τὴν Ἀσίαν
αἰχμάλωτον μεθ᾿ αὑτῶν γεγενημένην καὶ ταῖς μὲν
τῶν σατραπῶν γυναιξὶ προσπιπτούσαις καὶ δεομέναις
βοηθεῖν οὐχ οἷον συνεπιλαβέσθαι τινὸς ἴσχυον,



1For μεγάλα Wesseling suggests μειλίχια, Bezzel φίλια.218Book XVII

called to help them those who were themselves in 333/2 b.c. need of help from others. Some of their captors dragged these unfortunates by the hair, others, ripping off their clothing, drove them with blows of their hands or spear-butts against their naked bodies, thus outraging the dearest and proudest of the Persian possessions by virtue of Fortune’s generosity to them.
36. Now the most prudent of the Macedonians looked on this reversal of fortune with compassion and felt pity for the case of those who had seen their former lot so violently changed; everything belonging to their high rank was far removed from them, and they were encompassed by what was foreign and hostile. (This, however, was not the attitude of most of the soldiery,)1 and the women were herded off into a luckless and humiliating captivity.
What particularly moved to tears of pity those who saw it was the family of Dareius, his mother, wife, two daughters of marriageable age, and a son who was a mere boy.2 In their case, the change in fortune and the magnitude of their loss of position, incredible as it was, was a spectacle that might well inspire compassion in those who beheld it. They knew nothing of Dareius, whether he lived and survived or had perished in the general disaster, but they saw their tent plundered by armed men who were unaware of the identity of their captives and committed many improper acts through ignorance. They saw the whole of Asia taken prisoner with them, and as the wives of the satraps fell at their feet and implored their help, they were not able to assist any one of


1There seems to be an omission in the manuscript here. The words in parenthesis represent what may have been the original sense.2In chap. 38. 2, he is said to have been six years old.219