Diodorus of Sicily

αὐτὸς δὲ τὸ δεύτερον ἠγωνισμένος
ὑπὲρ τῆς Αἰγύπτου καὶ νομίσας δορίκτητον ἔχειν
τὴν χώραν ἐπανῆλθεν εἰς τὴν Ἀλεξάνδρειαν.
77. Ἅμα δὲ τούτοις πραττομένοις Διονύσιος ὁ
τῆς Ἡρακλείας τῆς ἐν τῷ Πόντῳ τύραννος ἐτελεύτησεν
ἄρξας ἔτη τριάκοντα δύο, τὴν δὲ δυναστείαν
διαδεξάμενοι οἱ υἱοὶ Ὀξάθρας1 καὶ Κλέαρχος ἦρξαν
ἔτη ἑπτακαίδεκα.
Κατὰ δὲ τὴν Σικελίαν Ἀγαθοκλῆς ἐπῄει τὰς
ὑπ᾿ αὐτὸν πόλεις ἀσφαλιζόμενος φρουραῖς καὶ χρήματα
πραττόμενος· σφόδρα γὰρ εὐλαβεῖτο μήποτε
διὰ τὰς γεγενημένας περὶ αὐτὸν ἀτυχίας ὁρμήσωσιν
2οἱ Σικελιῶται πρὸς τὴν αὐτονομίαν. καθ᾿ ὃν δὴ
χρόνον Πασίφιλος ὁ στρατηγός, ἀκούσας τὴν τῶν
Ἀγαθοκλέους υἱῶν ἀναίρεσιν καὶ τὰ περὶ τὴν Λιβύην
ἐλαττώματα, τοῦ μὲν δυνάστου κατεφρόνησε,
πρὸς δὲ Δεινοκράτην ἀποστὰς καὶ φιλίαν αὐτῷ
συνθέμενος τάς τε πόλεις ἃς ἦν πεπιστευμένος διακατέσχεν
καὶ τὴν μετ᾿ αὐτοῦ δύναμιν ἐλπίσι ψυχαγωγήσας
3ἀλλοτρίαν κατεσκεύασε τοῦ τυράννου. ὁ
δ᾿ Ἀγαθοκλῆς πανταχόθεν τῶν ἐλπίδων περικοπτομένων
οὕτως ἐταπεινώθη τὴν ψυχὴν ὥστε διαπρεσβεύσασθαι
πρὸς Δεινοκράτην καὶ παρακαλεῖν ἐπὶ
τοῖσδε συνθήκας ποιήσασθαι, ἐκχωρῆσαι μὲν τῆς
δυναστείας Ἀγαθοκλέα, παραδοῦναι δὲ τὰς Συρακούσσας
τοῖς πολίταις καὶ μηκέτι εἶναι φυγάδα
Δεινοκράτην, ἐξαίρετα δὲ δοθῆναι τῶν ἐρυμάτων

1Ὀξάθρας Wesseling (cp. Book 17. 34. 2 Ὀξάθρης): ζαθρας.346Book XX

him; and he himself, having finished the second 306 b.c. struggle for Egypt1 and convinced that the country was his as a prize of war, returned to Alexandria.2 77. While these events were taking place, Dionysius, the tyrant of Heraclea Pontica, died after having ruled for thirty-two years3; and his sons, Oxathras and Clearchus, succeeding to his tyranny, ruled for seventeen years.
In Sicily4 Agathocles visited the cities that were subject to him, making them secure with garrisons and exacting money from them; for he was taking extreme precautions lest, because of the misfortunes that had befallen him, the Sicilian Greeks should make an effort to gain their independence. Indeed at that very time Pasiphilus the general, having heard of the murder of Agathocles’ sons and of his reverses in Libya, regarded the tyrant with contempt; and, deserting to Deinocrates and establishing friendship with him, he both kept a firm grip on the cities which had been entrusted to him and by alluring the minds of his soldiers with hopes alienated them from the tyrant. Agathocles, now that his hopes were being curtailed in every quarter, was so cast down in spirit that he sent an embassy to Deinocrates and invited him to make a treaty on these terms: that, on the one hand, Agathocles should withdraw from his position as tyrant and restore Syracuse to its citizens, and Deinocrates should no longer be an exile, and that, on the other hand, there should be given to




1Cp. Book 18. 33–35.2It is probably in the winter after this campaign that Ptolemy assumed the diadem and the royal title; cp. chap. 53. 3, and note. The narrative is continued in chap. 81.3Cp. Book 16. 88. 5.4Continued from chap. 72. 5.347