Diodorus of Sicily

τοῖς πολεμίοις συνεχεῖς. αἰεὶ δὲ μᾶλλον ἐπισχύοντες
πολλοὺς ἀνῄρουν τῶν Περσῶν καὶ κατεθάρρουν
4τῶν πολεμίων. χρονιζούσης δὲ τῆς περὶ τὸ πολισμάτιον
τοῦτο στρατείας, καὶ τῶν ἐτησίων ἤδη
γενομένων, ὁ Νεῖλος πληρούμενος καὶ πάντα τόπον
ἐπέχων τῷ πλήθει τοῦ ῥεύματος αἰεὶ μᾶλλον ὠχύρου
τὴν Αἴγυπτον. οἱ δὲ τῶν Περσῶν ἡγεμόνες,
ἀντιπραττούσης αὐτοῖς αἰεὶ1 τῆς περιστάσεως,
ἔγνωσαν2 ἐκ τῆς Αἰγύπτου τὴν ἀπαλλαγὴν ποιήσασθαι.
5διόπερ ἐπανιόντων αὐτῶν εἰς τὴν Ἀσίαν,
καὶ γενομένης διαφορᾶς τῷ Φαρναβάζῳ πρὸς τὸν
Ἰφικράτην, ὑποπτεύσας ὁ Ἰφικράτης μὴ συλληφθῇ
καὶ τιμωρίας τύχῃ, καθάπερ Κόνων ἔπαθεν
ὁ Ἀθηναῖος, ἔκρινε λάθρᾳ φεύγειν ἐκ τοῦ στρατοπέδου·
διὸ καὶ παρασκευασάμενος πλοῖον ἔλαθε
νυκτὸς ἀπαλλαγεὶς καὶ καταπλεύσας εἰς τὰς
6Ἀθήνας. ὁ δὲ Φαρνάβαζος πρέσβεις ἐκπέμψας
κατηγόρησε τοῦ Ἰφικράτους ὡς αἰτίου γεγονότος
τοῦ μὴ ληφθῆναι τὴν Αἴγυπτον. οἱ δὲ Ἀθηναῖοι
τοῖς μὲν Πέρσαις ἀπόκρισιν ἔδωκαν ὅτι ἐὰν εὕρωσιν
αὐτὸν ἠδικηκότα, κολάσουσι κατὰ τὴν ἀξίαν,
αὐτοὶ δὲ μετ᾿ ὀλίγον χρόνον στρατηγὸν κατέστησαν
τὸν3 Ἰφικράτην ἐπὶ τὸ ναυτικόν.
44. Οὐκ ἀνοίκειον δ᾿ ἐστὶ τὰ περὶ τῆς Ἰφικράτους
ἀρετῆς ἱστορούμενα παραθεῖναι. οὗτος γὰρ
παραδέδοται στρατηγικήν τε ἀγχίνοιαν ἐσχηκέναι
καὶ πρὸς πᾶσαν ἐπίνοιαν ἀγαθὴν φύσει κεχρῆσθαι
διαφόρῳ. προσλαβόμενον οὖν αὐτὸν τὴν ἐν τῷ





1αἰεὶ] deleted by Dindorf, Vogel.2ἔγνωσαν Dindorf: ἔγνωκαν.3So FK: κατεστήσαντο cet.68Book XV

enemy. With ever-increasing strength they slew 374/3 b.c. many Persians and gained confidence against them. As the campaign about this stronghold dragged on, and the Etesian winds had already set in, the Nile, which was filling up and flooding1 the whole region with the abundance of its waters, made Egypt daily more secure. The Persian commanders, as this state of affairs constantly operated against them, decided to withdraw from Egypt. Consequently, on their way back to Asia, when a disagreement arose between him and Pharnabazus, Iphicrates, suspecting that he might be arrested and punished as Conon2 the Athenian had been, decided to flee secretly from the camp. Accordingly, having secured a ship he covertly got away at night and reached port at Athens. Pharnabazus dispatched ambassadors to Athens and accused Iphicrates of being responsible for the failure to capture Egypt. The Athenians, however, replied to the Persians that if they detected him in wrongdoing they would punish him as he deserved, and shortly afterward appointed Iphicrates general in command of their fleet.
44. It will not be out of place to set forth what I have learned about the remarkable character of Iphicrates. For he is reported to have possessed shrewdness in command and to have enjoyed an exceptional natural genius for every kind of useful invention. Hence we are told, after he had acquired his long

1See Book 1. 39.2When Antalcidas, the Spartan, went to Tiribazus, satrap of Ionia, in 392, to enlist the aid of Persia against the growing power of Athens, Tiribazus arrested Conon (Xenophon, Hell. 4. 8. 16; Book 14. 85), who was acting with the confidence of Pharnabazus. According to one authority Conon was put to death by the Persians in prison, according to another he took refuge with Evagoras in Cyprus, where he died of sickness.69