Diodorus of Sicily

καὶ ταῦτα εὐχόμενοι τὸν Ἀπόλλωνα πατρῷον αὐτῶν
εἶναι καὶ πρόγονον· Λακεδαιμόνιοι δὲ τῷ περὶ
Δελφοὺς μαντείῳ χρησάμενοι καὶ τὴν θαυμαζομένην
παρὰ πᾶσι πολιτείαν διὰ τούτου κτησάμενοι
καὶ περὶ τῶν μεγίστων ἔτι καὶ νῦν τὸν θεὸν ἐπερωτῶντες
ἐτόλμησαν τοῖς τὸ ἱερὸν συλήσασι κοινωνῆσαι
τῆς παρανομίας.
58. Κατὰ δὲ τὴν Βοιωτίαν οἱ μὲν Φωκεῖς τρεῖς
πόλεις ἔχοντες ὠχυρωμένας, Ὀρχομενὸν καὶ Κορώνειαν
καὶ Κορσίας, ἐκ τούτων ἐποιοῦντο τὴν ἐπὶ
τοὺς Βοιωτοὺς στρατείαν. εὐπορούμενοι δὲ μισθοφόρων
τήν τε χώραν ἐδῄουν καὶ κατὰ τὰς ἐπιθέσεις
2καὶ συμπλοκὰς περιεγίνοντο τῶν ἐγχωρίων. διόπερ
οἱ Βοιωτοὶ θλιβόμενοι μὲν τῷ πολέμῳ καὶ πολλοὺς
τῶν στρατιωτῶν ἀπολωλεκότες, χρημάτων δὲ ἀπορούμενοι
πρέσβεις ἐξέπεμψαν πρὸς τὸν Φίλιππον
3ἀξιοῦντες βοηθῆσαι. ὁ δὲ βασιλεὺς ἡδέως ὁρῶν τὴν
ταπείνωσιν αὐτῶν καὶ βουλόμενος τὰ Λευκτρικὰ
φρονήματα συστεῖλαι τῶν Βοιωτῶν ὀλίγους1 ἀπέστειλε
στρατιώτας, αὐτὸ μόνον φυλαττόμενος τὸ
4μὴ δοκεῖν2 περιορᾶν τὸ μαντεῖον σεσυλημένον. τῶν
δὲ Φωκέων οἰκοδομούντων φρούριον περὶ τὰς ὀνομαζομένας
Ἄβας, καθ᾿ ἅς ἐστιν Ἀπόλλωνος ἅγιον
ἱερόν, ἐστράτευσαν ἐπ᾿ αὐτοὺς οἱ Βοιωτοί. εὐθὺ
δ᾿ αὐτῶν οἱ μὲν εἰς τὰς ἔγγιστα πόλεις φυγόντες
διεσπάρησαν, οἱ δ᾿ εἰς τὸν νεὼ3 τοῦ Ἀπόλλωνος






1perpaucos Cospus: οὐκ ὀλίγους.2So Post: δοκεῖν μὴ.3So PR: νεὼν cett.400Book XVI

the divine powers, and that too though they boasted 347/6 b.c. that Apollo was their tutelary god and progenitor.1 And the Lacedaemonians, though they had consulted the oracle of Apollo at Delphi and through it come to possess their constitution2 which is admired of all the world, though even now they still interrogate the god on matters of supreme importance,3 had the effrontery to become partners in crime of those who pillaged the sanctuary.
58. In Boeotia the Phocians, who held three strongly fortified cities, Orchomenus, Coroneia, and Corsiae,4 conducted from these their campaign against the Boeotians. Being well supplied with mercenaries they pillaged the country and in their thrusts and engagements proved superior to the inhabitants of the place. As a consequence the Boeotians, feeling the pinch of war and the loss of great numbers of their men, but having no financial resources, sent envoys to Philip with a request for assistance. The king, pleased to see their discomfiture and disposed to humble the Boeotians’ pride over Leuctra, dispatched few men, being on his guard against one thing only—lest he be thought to be indifferent to the pillaging of the oracle. As the Phocians were engaged in building a fortress near the place named Abae,5 at which is a holy shrine of Apollo, the Boeotians took the field against them. Some of the Phocians straightway fled to the nearest cities and dispersed, while others took refuge in the



1Through Ion, son of Apollo and Creusa.2See Plutarch, Lycurgus, 5. 3, esp. καὶ καταινεῖν ἔφη τὸν
θεὸν ἢ πολὺ κρατίστη τῶν ἄλλων ἔσται πολιτειῶν.3Cp. Book 14. 13. 3: τοὺς Λακεδαιμονίους μάλιστα τοῖς μαντείοις προσέχοντας.4A town sometimes included in Opuntian Locris, called Κορσιά in Demosthenes, 19. 141; in Theopompus Κορσίαι, FHG, 1. 310.5A town of Phocis near the frontiers of the Opuntian Locrians.401