Diodorus of Sicily

μὴ περιιδεῖν τέκνα καὶ γυναῖκας καὶ1 γονεῖς
ὑπὲρ ἀνδραποδισμοῦ κινδυνεύοντας καὶ τὴν πατρίδα
πανοίκιον ὑπὸ τοὺς Μακεδόνων θυμοὺς ὑποπεσοῦσαν,
μνησθῆναι δὲ τῆς ἐν Λεύκτροις καὶ ἐν Μαντινείᾳ
μάχης2 καὶ τῶν παρὰ πᾶσι περιβοήτων
ἀνδραγαθημάτων. ἐπὶ πολὺν μὲν οὖν χρόνον
ἰσόρροπος ἦν ἡ μάχη διὰ τὴν ὑπερβολὴν τῆς τῶν
ἀγωνιζομένων ᾄνδρείας.
12. Μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα ὁ Ἀλέξανδρος ὁρῶν τοὺς
μὲν Θηβαίους ἑτοίμως ὑπὲρ τῆς ἐλευθερίας ἀγωνιζομένους
τοὺς δὲ Μακεδόνας κάμνοντας τῇ μάχῃ
προσέταξε τοὺς ἐπὶ τῆς ἐφεδρίας τεταγμένους διαδέξασθαι
τὸν ἀγῶνα. οἱ μὲν οὖν Μακεδόνες ἄφνω
προσπεσόντες τοῖς Θηβαίοις κατακόποις βαρεῖς
2ἐπέκειντο τοῖς πολεμίοις καὶ πολλοὺς ἀνῄρουν. οὐ
μὴν οἱ Θηβαῖοι τῆς νίκης ἐξεχώρουν, τοὐναντίον
δὲ τῇ φιλοτιμίᾳ προαχθέντες πάντων τῶν δεινῶν
κατεφρόνουν. ἐπὶ τοσοῦτο δὲ ταῖς ἀνδραγαθίαις
προέβησαν ὥστε βοᾶν ὅτι Μακεδόνες ὁμολογοῦσιν
ἥττους εἶναι Θηβαίων, καὶ τῶν ἄλλων πάντων
εἰωθότων ἐν ταῖς διαδοχαῖς τῶν πολεμίων δεδιέναι
τοὺς ἀκεραίους τῶν ἐφεδρευόντων οὗτοι μόνοι τότε
θρασύτεροι πρὸς τοὺς κινδύνους ὑπῆρξαν, ὅθ᾿ οἱ
πολέμιοι διαδοχὴν ἐξέπεμψαν τοῖς καταπονουμένοις
ὑπὸ τῆς κακοπαθείας.
3Ἀνυπερβλήτου δὲ τῆς φιλοτιμίας γινομένης ὁ
βασιλεὺς κατανοήσας τινὰ πυλίδα καταλελειμμένην
ὑπὸ τῶν φυλάκων ἐξαπέστειλε Περδίκκαν
μετὰ στρατιωτῶν ἱκανῶν καταλαβέσθαι ταύτην καὶ


1γυναῖκας καὶ added by Radermacher.2R. Laqueur (Ilermes, 86 (1958), 261 f.) would explain
the singular μάχης by referring to chap. 10. 6 above: Dio- dorus’s source referred to only one battle, and Diodorus added Mantineia.150Book XVII

and on the Theban, not to forget children and wives 335/4 b.c. and parents threatened with slavery and their every household lying exposed to the fury of the Macedonians, and to remember the battles of Leuctra and of Mantineia and the glorious deeds which were household words throughout Greece. So for a long time the battle remained evenly poised because of the surpassing valour of the contestants.
12. At length Alexander saw that the Thebans were still fighting unflinchingly for their freedom, but that his Macedonians were wearying in the battle, and ordered his reserve division to enter the struggle. As this suddenly struck the tired Thebans, it bore heavily against them and killed many. Still the Thebans did not concede the victory, but on the contrary, inspired by the will to win, despised all dangers. They had the courage to shout that the Macedonians now openly confessed to being their inferiors. Under normal circumstances, when an enemy attacks in relays, it is usual for soldiers to fear the fresh strength of the reinforcements, but the Thebans alone then faced their dangers ever more boldly, as the enemy sent against them new troops for those whose strength flagged with weariness.
So the Theban spirit proved unshakable here, but the king took note of a postern gate that had been deserted by its guards and hurried Perdiccas with a large detachment of troops to seize it and penetrate


151