Diodorus of Sicily

διειληφότες. ἐφ᾿ ἱκανὸν μὲν οὖν χρόνον ἰσόρροπος
ἦν ὁ κίνδυνος, φιλοτίμως ἀμφοτέρων τῶν στρατοπέδων
ἀγωνιζομένων· τοῦ δ᾿ ἑτέρου τῶν στρατηγῶν
Φιλωνίδου πεσόντος καὶ τοῦ κατὰ τοῦτον
μέρους τραπέντος ἠναγκάσθη καὶ Δεινοκράτης ἀποχωρῆσαι.
οἱ δὲ περὶ τὸν Πασίφιλον τούτων τε
πολλοὺς κατὰ τὴν φυγὴν ἀνεῖλον καὶ τὴν Γαλερίαν
ἀνακτησάμενοι τοὺς αἰτίους τῆς ἀποστάσεως ἐκόλασαν.
3Ἀγαθοκλῆς δὲ πυνθανόμενος τοὺς Καρχηδονίους
τὸν Ἔκνομον καλούμενον λόφον ἐν τῇ
Γελῴα κατειληφέναι, διέγνω πάσῃ τῇ δυνάμει διαγωνίσασθαι.
ὁρμήσας δ᾿ ἐπ᾿ αὐτοὺς καὶ πλησίον
γενόμενος προεκαλεῖτο εἰς μάχην, ἐπηρμένος τῇ
4προγεγενημένῃ νίκῃ. οὐ τολμώντων δὲ τῶν βαρβάρων
παρατάξασθαι νομίσας ἀκονιτὶ κρατεῖν τῶν
ὑπαίθρων ἐπανῆλθεν εἰς τὰς Συρακούσσας καὶ
τῶν ναῶν τοὺς ἐπιφανεστάτους τοῖς σκύλοις
ἐκόσμησεν.
Ταῦτα μὲν οὖν ἐπράχθη κατὰ τοῦτον τὸν ἐνιαυτὸν
ὧν ἡμεῖς ἐδυνήθημεν ἐφικέσθαι.
105. Ἐπ᾿ ἄρχοντος δ᾿ Ἀθήνησι Σιμωνίδου Ῥωμαῖοι
μὲν ὑπάτους κατέστησαν Μάρκον Οὐαλλέριον
καὶ Πόπλιον Δέκιον. ἐπὶ δὲ τούτων οἱ περὶ
Κάσανδρον καὶ Πτολεμαῖον καὶ Λυσίμαχον διαλύσεις
ἐποιήσαντο πρὸς Ἀντίγονον καὶ συνθήκας
ἔγραψαν. ἐν δὲ ταύταις ἦν Κάσανδρον μὲν εἶναι
στρατηγὸν τῆς Εὐρώπης μέχρι ἂν Ἀλέξανδρος ὁ
ἐκ Ῥωξάνης εἰς ἡλικίαν ἔλθῃ, καὶ Λυσίμαχον μὲν
τῆς Θρᾴκης κυριεύειν, Πτολεμαῖον δὲ τῆς Αἰγύπτου
καὶ τῶν συνοριζουσῶν ταύτῃ πόλεων κατά τε τὴν
Λιβύην καὶ τὴν Ἀραβίαν, Ἀντίγονον δὲ ἀφηγεῖσθαι
116Book XIX

each in command of a wing. For some time 312 b.c. the conflict was evenly balanced, both of the armies fighting with zest; but when one of the generals, Philonides, fell and his part of the army was put to flight, Deinocrates also was forced to withdraw. Pasiphilus killed many of his opponents during the flight and, after gaining possession of Galeria, punished those guilty of the uprising. Agathocles, on hearing that the Carthaginians had seized the hill called Ecnomus in the territory of Gela, decided to fight them to a finish with his whole army. When he had set out against them and had drawn near, he challenged them to battle since he was elated by his previous victory. But the barbarians not venturing to meet him in battle, he assumed that he now completely dominated the open country without a fight and went off to Syracuse, where he decorated the chief temples with the spoils.1
These are the events of this year that we have been able to discover.
105. When Simonides was archon in Athens, the 311 b.c. Romans elected to the consulship Marcus Valerius and Publius Decius.2 While these held office, Cassander,
Ptolemy, and Lysimachus came to terms with Antigonus and made a treaty. In this it was provided that Cassander be general of Europe until Alexander, the son of Roxanê, should come of age; that Lysimachus rule Thrace, and that Ptolemy rule Egypt and the cities adjacent thereto in Libya and Arabia; that Antigonus have first place in all Asia;


1Continued in chap. 106.2Simonides was archon in 311/10 b.c. In the Fasti the consuls of 312 b.c. are M. Valerius Maximus and P. Decius Mus (CIL, 1, p. 130; cp. Livy, 9. 28. 8). The narrative is continued from chap. 100. 7.117