Diodorus of Sicily
10τεταγμένους ἐπὶ τοῦ λαιοῦ κέρατος. ταχὺ
δὲ διὰ τὸ παράδοξον τρεψάμενος τοὺς ἐναντίους
καὶ πολλοὺς ἀνελὼν διαπέστειλε τῶν ἱππέων τοὺς
ἐλαφροτάτους καὶ διὰ τούτων ἀνεκαλέσατο τοὺς
φεύγοντας καὶ παρὰ τὴν ὑπωρίαν πάλιν εἰς τάξιν
κατέστησεν. καὶ γὰρ οἱ περὶ τὸν Εὐμενῆ πυθόμενοι
τὴν τῶν ἰδίων τροπὴν ἀνεκαλοῦντο τῇ σάλπιγγι
τοὺς διώκοντας, σπεύδοντες βοηθῆσαι τοῖς περὶ
τὸν Εὔδαμον.
31. Ἤδη δὲ τῆς ὥρας οὔσης περὶ λύχνων ἁφὰς
ἀμφότεροι τοὺς φεύγοντας ἀνακαλεσάμενοι πάλιν
πᾶσαν ἐξέταττον τὴν δύναμιν· τοσαύτης φιλονεικίας
ὑπῆρχον πλήρεις οὐχ οἱ στρατηγοὶ μόνον, ἀλλὰ καὶ
2τὰ πλήθη τῶν ἀγωνιζομένων. τῆς δὲ νυκτὸς οὔσης
αἰθρίου καὶ πανσελήνου καὶ τῶν δυνάμεων ἀντιπαραγουσῶν
ἀλλήλαις ὡς ἂν ἐν1 τέτταρσι πλέθροις
ὁ ψόφος τῶν ὅπλων καὶ τῶν ἵππων2 ὁ φρυαγμὸς
ἐν χερσὶν ἐδόκει πᾶσιν εἶναι τοῖς ἀντιτεταγμένοις.
ὡς δὲ παράγοντες ἀπέσχον ἀπὸ τῶν ἐν τῇ μάχῃ
πεπτωκότων ὡς τριάκοντα σταδίους, ἡ μὲν ὥρα
κατελάμβανεν μεσονύκτιος, κακῶς δὲ διέκειντο
ἀμφότεροι διά τε τὴν ὁδοιπορίαν καὶ τὴν ἐν τῇ
3μάχῃ κακοπάθειαν, ἔτι δὲ τὴν ἀσιτίαν, ὥστε ἠναγκάσθησαν
ἀφέμενοι τῆς μάχης καταστρατοπεδεῦσαι.
Εὐμενὴς μὲν οὖν ἐπεχείρει ἀναζευγνύειν ἐπὶ
τῶν νεκρῶν, σπεύδων κρατεῖν τῆς τούτων ἀναιρέσεως
καὶ τὴν νίκην ἀναμφισβήτητον περιποιήσασθαι.
οὐ προσεχόντων δὲ τῶν στρατιωτῶν, ἀλλὰ
βοώντων ἐπὶ τὴν ἰδίαν ἀποσκευὴν ἀναχωρεῖν μακρὰν
ἀπέχουσαν ἠναγκάσθη πεισθῆναι τῷ πλήθει·


1ἐν added by Wesseling.2ἵππων Wesseling: ἱππέων.314Book XIX

the left wing. Because the attack was unexpected, 317 b.c. he quickly put to flight those who faced him, destroying many of them; then he sent out the swiftest of his mounted men and by means of them he assembled those of his soldiers who were fleeing and once more formed them into a line along the foothills. As soon as Eumenes learned of the defeat of his own soldiers he recalled the pursuers by a trumpet signal, for he was eager to aid Eudamus.
31. Although it was already lamp-lighting time, both rallied their fleeing troops and began to put their entire forces in battle order once more, such zeal for victory filled not only the generals but also the mass of the contestants. Since the night was clear and lighted by a full moon and the armies were forming parallel to each other at a distance of about four plethra,1 the clatter of arms and the snorting of the horses seemed close at hand to all the contestants. But as they were moving from column into line, being distant about thirty stades2 from those who had fallen in the battle, the hour of midnight overtook them, and both armies were so exhausted by marching, by their suffering in the battle, and by lack of food, that they were forced to give up the battle and go into camp. Eumenes undertook to march back to the dead, desiring to control the disposal of the bodies and to put his claim to victory beyond dispute. When, however, the soldiers would not listen to him, insisting with shouts that they return to their own baggage train, which was some distance away, he was forced to yield to the majority3; for he was not able to



1400.feet.2About three and one-half miles.3Cp. Nepos, Eumenes, 8, 10.315