Diodorus of Sicily

διεσκευασμένην ἐπιέναι,1 ταχὺ τοῖς στρατιώταις
2ἐδήλωσαν τὴν προσιοῦσαν δύναμιν. διαδοθέντος οὖν
πρὸς ἅπαντας τοῦ λόγου θόρυβος ἐνέπιπτε καὶ
προσδοκία τῆς τῶν πολεμίων ἐφόδου. ἑκάστου
δὲ τὴν σωτηρίαν ἐν τῇ φυγῇ τιθεμένου, καὶ μήτε
παραγγέλματος δοθέντος ὑπὸ τῶν στρατηγῶν μήτε
τάξεως οὔσης μηδεμιᾶς οἱ φεύγοντες ἐνέπιπτον
ἀλλήλοις· ὧν οἱ μὲν διὰ τὸ σκότος, οἱ δὲ διὰ τὴν
ἔκπληξιν ἀγνοοῦντες τοὺς οἰκείους ὡς πολεμίους
3ἠμύνοντο. πολλοῦ δὲ φόνου γινομένου καὶ τῆς
ἀγνοίας ἐπικρατούσης οἱ μὲν ἐν χειρῶν νόμῳ διεφθάρησαν,
οἱ δ᾿ ἐκπεπηδηκότες ἄνοπλοι καὶ τὴν
φυγὴν ποιούμενοι διὰ τῶν δυσχωριῶν κατεκρημνίζοντο,
τῆς ψυχῆς ἐπτοημένης διὰ τὸν ἀπροσδόκητον
φόβον. τὸ δὲ τέλος πλειόνων ἢ πεντακισχιλίων
ἀπολομένων τὸ λοιπὸν πλῆθος διεσώθη πρὸς τὴν
4Καρχηδόνα. οἱ δ᾿ ἐν τῇ πόλει τότε μὲν συνεξαπατηθέντες
τῇ φήμῃ τῶν ἰδίων ὑπέλαβον ἡττῆσθαι
μάχῃ καὶ τῆς δυνάμεως τὸ πλεῖστον διεφθάρθαι.
διόπερ ἀγωνιῶντες ἀνέῳξαν τὰς πύλας καὶ μετὰ
θορύβου καὶ πτοήσεως ἐδέχοντο τοὺς στρατιώτας,
φοβούμενοι μὴ τοῖς ἐσχάτοις οἱ πολέμιοι συνεισπέσωσιν·
ἡμέρας δὲ γενομένης μαθόντες τἀληθὲς
μόλις ἀπελύθησαν τῆς τῶν δεινῶν προσδοκίας.
67. Οἱ δὲ περὶ τὸν Ἀγαθοκλέα κατὰ τὸν αὐτὸν
χρόνον δι᾿ ἀπάτην καὶ προσδοκίαν ψευδῆ ταῖς
ὁμοίαις περιέπεσον συμφοραῖς. τῶν γὰρ ἀποστατῶν
Λιβύων μετὰ τὸν ἐμπυρισμὸν τῆς παρεμβολῆς
καὶ τὸν γενόμενον θόρυβον οὐ τολμησάντων προάγειν,
ἀλλ᾿ εἰς τοὐπίσω πάλιν ἐπανιόντων, τῶν
1ἐπιέναι Fischer: εἶναι.322Book XX

was advancing ready for battle, they quickly reported 307 b.c. the approaching force to their fellow soldiers. When the report had been spread through the whole force, there arose tumult and dread of the enemy’s attack. Each man placed his hope of safety in flight; and since no order had been given by the commanders nor was there any formation, the fugitives kept running into each other. When some of them failed to recognize their friends because of the darkness and others because of fright, they fought against them as if they were enemies. A general slaughter took place; and while the misunderstanding still prevailed, some were slain in hand to hand fighting and others, who had sped away unarmed and were fleeing through the rough country, fell from cliffs, distraught in mind by the sudden panic. Finally after more than five thousand had perished, the rest of the multitude came safe to Carthage. But those in the city, who had also been deceived at that time by the report of their own people, supposed that they had been conquered in a battle and that the largest part of the army had been destroyed. Therefore in great anxiety they opened the city gates and with tumult and excitement received their soldiers, fearing lest with the last of them the enemy should burst in. When day broke, however, they learned the truth and were with difficulty freed from their expectation of disaster.
67. At this same time, however, Agathocles by reason of deceit and mistaken expectation met with similar disaster. For the Libyans who had deserted did not dare go on after the burning of the camp and the tumult that had arisen, but turned back again;


323