Diodorus of Sicily

περὶ τὴν κατασκευὴν τῶν ἔργων ἀπεκόμισε τὸ
σῶμα τοῦ βασιλέως ἐκ Βαβυλῶνος εἰς Αἴγυπτον·
3Πτολεμαῖος δὲ τιμῶν τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον ἀπήντησε
μετὰ δυνάμεως μέχρι τῆς Συρίας καὶ παραλαβὼν
τὸ σῶμα τῆς μεγίστης φροντίδος ἠξίωσεν. ἔκρινε
γὰρ ἐπὶ τοῦ παρόντος εἰς μὲν Ἄμμωνα μὴ παρακομίζειν,
κατὰ δὲ τὴν ἐκτισμένην ὑπ᾿ αὐτοῦ πόλιν,
ἐπιφανεστάτην οὖσαν σχεδόν τι τῶν κατὰ τὴν
4οἰκουμένην, ἀποθέσθαι. κατεσκεύασεν οὖν τέμενος
κατὰ τὸ μέγεθος καὶ κατὰ τὴν κατασκευὴν τῆς
Ἀλεξάνδρου δόξης ἄξιον, ἐν ᾧ κηδεύσας αὐτὸν
καὶ θυσίαις ἡρωικαῖς καὶ ἀγῶσι μεγαλοπρεπέσι
τιμήσας οὐ παρ᾿ ἀνθρώπων μόνον ἀλλὰ καὶ παρὰ
5θεῶν καλὰς ἀμοιβὰς ἔλαβεν. οἱ μὲν γὰρ ἄνθρωποι
διὰ τὸ τῆς ψυχῆς εὐχάριστον καὶ μεγαλόψυχον
συνέτρεχον πάντοθεν εἰς τὴν Ἀλεξάνδρειαν καὶ
προθύμως ἑαυτοὺς εἰς τὴν στρατείαν παρείχοντο,
καίπερ τῆς βασιλικῆς δυνάμεως μελλούσης πολεμεῖν
πρὸς Πτολεμαῖον, καὶ κινδύνων προδήλων καὶ
μεγάλων ὄντων ὅμως ἅπαντες τὴν τούτου σωτηρίαν
6τοῖς ἰδίοις κινδύνοις ἑκουσίως περιεποιήσαντο· οἱ
δὲ θεοὶ διὰ τὴν ἀρετὴν καὶ εἰς πάντας τοὺς φίλους
ἐπιείκειαν ἐκ τῶν μεγίστων κινδύνων παραδόξως
αὐτὸν διέσωσαν.
29. Περδίκκας γὰρ ὑφορώμενος αὐτοῦ τὴν αὔξησιν
αὐτὸς μὲν ἔκρινε μετὰ τῶν βασιλέων τῷ
πλείστῳ μέρει τῆς δυνάμεως στρατεύειν ἐπὶ τὴν
Αἴγυπτον, Εὐμενῆ δ᾿ ἐξέπεμψεν ἐπὶ τὸν Ἑλλήσποντον
κωλύσοντα τοὺς περὶ τὸν Ἀντίπατρον καὶ
Κρατερὸν διαβαίνειν εἰς τὴν Ἀσίαν, δοὺς αὐτῷ
94Book XVIII

making ready this work, he brought the body of the 321 b.c. king from Babylon to Egypt.1 Ptolemy, moreover, doing honour to Alexander, went to meet it with an army as far as Syria, and, receiving the body, deemed it worthy of the greatest consideration. He decided for the present not to send it to Ammon, but to entomb it in the city that had been founded by Alexander himself,2 which lacked little of being the most renowned of the cities of the inhabited earth. There he prepared a precinct worthy of the glory of Alexander in size and construction. Entombing him in this and honouring him with sacrifices such as are paid to demigods and with magnificent games, he won fair requital not only from men but also from the gods. For men, because of his graciousness and nobility of heart, came together eagerly from all sides to Alexandria and gladly enrolled for the campaign, although the army of the kings was about to fight against that of Ptolemy; and, even though the risks were manifest and great, yet all of them willingly took upon themselves at their personal risk the preservation of Ptolemy’s safety. The gods also saved him unexpectedly from the greatest dangers on account of his courage and his honest treatment of all his friends.3
29. For Perdiccas, viewing with suspicion Ptolemy’s increase in power, decided that he himself and the kings would make a campaign against Egypt with most of the army, but Eumenes he sent to the Hellespont to prevent Antipater and Craterus from crossing



1Cp. Arrian, FGrH, 156. 9. 25, 10. 1; Pausanias, 1. 6. 3; Strabo, 17. 1.8.2According to Pausanias, the body was buried at Memphis.3Cp. chaps. 14. 1 and 33. 3.95