Diodorus of Sicily

ἔχων τοὺς προϋπάρχοντας αὐτῷ μισθοφόρους·
συνεστρατεύετο δ᾿ αὐτῷ Βαγώας, ᾧ μάλιστα βασιλεὺς
ἐνεπίστευε, τόλμῃ καὶ παρανομίᾳ διαφέρων·
εἶχε δ᾿ οὗτος τοὺς τοῦ βασιλέως Ἕλληνας καὶ τῶν
βαρβάρων ἱκανὸν πλῆθος καὶ ναῦς οὐκ ὀλίγας.
5αὐτὸς δὲ τὴν λοιπὴν δύναμιν ἔχων ἐφήδρευε τοῖς
ὅλοις πράγμασι. τοιαύτης δὲ τῆς1 διαιρέσεως
γενομένης παρὰ τοῖς Πέρσαις ὁ μὲν τῶν Αἰγυπτίων
βασιλεὺς Νεκτανεβὼς οὔτε τὸ πλῆθος τῶν πολεμίων
οὔτε τὴν ὅλην διάταξιν τῶν Περσῶν κατεπλάγη,
6καίπερ πολὺ λειπόμενος τοῦ πλήθους. εἶχε γὰρ
Ἕλληνας μὲν μισθοφόρους δισμυρίους, Λίβυας δὲ
παραπλησίους τούτοις, Αἰγυπτίους δὲ τοὺς μαχίμους
παρ᾿ αὐτοῖς ὀνομαζομένους ἑξακισμυρίους,
πρὸς δὲ τούτοις πλοίων ποταμίων πρὸς τὰς κατὰ
τὸν Νεῖλον μάχας καὶ συμπλοκὰς εὐθέτων ἄπιστον
7πλῆθος. ὠχύρωτο δ᾿ αὐτῷ καὶ ἡ πρὸς τὴν Ἀραβίαν
νεύουσα πλευρὰ τοῦ ποταμοῦ, πεπυκνωμένη
πολίσμασιν, ἔτι δὲ τείχεσι καὶ τάφροις πᾶσα διειλημμένη.
ἔχων δὲ καὶ τὰς ἄλλας παρασκευὰς
πάσας πρὸς τὸν πόλεμον ἱκανάς, διὰ τὴν ἰδίαν
ἀβουλίαν ταχὺ τοῖς ὅλοις ἔπταισεν.
48. Αἰτία δ᾿ ἐγένετο τῆς ἥττης μάλισθ᾿ ἡ τοῦ
στρατηγεῖν ἀπειρία καὶ τὸ προνενικῆσθαι τοὺς Πέρσας
ὑπ᾿ αὐτοῦ κατὰ τὴν πρὸ ταύτης γεγενημένην
2στρατείαν. ἐσχηκὼς γὰρ τοὺς τότε στρατηγοὺς
ἐπιφανεῖς ἄνδρας καὶ διαφέροντας ἀρετῇ τε καὶ
1τῆς PX (cp. chap. 48. 3); other MSS. omit.370Book XVI

Sidon, having the mercenaries that were formerly 350/49 b.c. under his command; and associated with him on the expedition was Bagoas, whom the King trusted most, a man exceptionally daring and impatient of propriety; and he had the King’s Greeks and an ample force of barbarians and not a few ships. The King himself with the remainder of the army held himself in reserve for the whole operation.1 Such being the distribution of the army on the Persian side, the king of the Egyptians, Nectanebôs, was dismayed neither by the multitude of the enemy nor by the general disposition of the Persian forces, though his numbers were far inferior. In fact he had twenty thousand Greek mercenaries, about the same number of Libyans, and sixty thousand Egyptians of the caste known amongst them as “The Warriors”; and besides these an incredible number of river-boats suited for battles and engagements on the Nile. The bank of the river facing Arabia had been strongly fortified by him, being a region crowded with towns and, besides, all intersected by walls and ditches. Although he had ready also all the other preparations which were adequate for the war, yet because of his own poor judgement he soon met with complete disaster.
48. The reason for his defeat was chiefly his lack of experience as a general and the fact that the Persians had been defeated by him in the previous expedition. For he had then had as his generals men who were distinguished and superior both in valour 




1As an ἔφεδρος, the third pugilist or wrestler, who sat by to take on the winner; in this case as a reserve if the issue was at stake. Cp. chap. 48. 3 ταῖς εὐκαιροτάταις τῶν εἰσβολῶν ἐφήδρευεν.371