Diodorus of Sicily

ἐπίθεσιν, Πευκέστῃ δὲ τὴν Περσίδα, Τληπολέμῳ
δὲ τὴν Καρμανίαν, Πίθωνι δὲ Μηδίαν, Φιλίππῳ δὲ
τὴν Παρθυαίαν, Ἀρίαν δὲ καὶ Δραγγηνὴν Στασάνδρῳ
τῷ Κυπρίῳ, τὴν δὲ Βακτριανὴν καὶ Σογδιανὴν
Στασάνορι τῷ Σολίῳ ἀπὸ τῆς αὐτῆς ὄντι
νήσου. Παροπανισάδας δὲ Ὀξυάρτῃ προσώρισε
τῷ Ῥωξάνης πατρὶ τῆς Ἀλεξάνδρου γυναικός, τῆς
δὲ Ἰνδικῆς τὰ μὲν συνορίζοντα Παροπανισάδαις
Πίθωνι τῷ Ἀγήνορος, τὰς δ᾿ ἐχομένας βασιλείας
τὴν μὲν παρὰ τὸν Ἰνδὸν ποταμὸν Πώρῳ, τὴν δὲ
παρὰ τὸν Ὑδάσπην Ταξίλῃ (οὐ γὰρ ἦν τούτους
τοὺς βασιλεῖς μετακινῆσαι χωρὶς βασιλικῆς δυνάμεως
καὶ ἡγεμόνος ἐπιφανοῦς), τῶν δὲ πρὸς τὴν
ἄρκτον κεκλιμένων Καππαδοκίαν μὲν Νικάνορι,
Φρυγίαν δὲ τὴν μεγάλην καὶ Λυκίαν Ἀντιγόνῳ
καθάπερ πρότερον ἔσχε, Καρίαν δὲ Ἀσάνδρῳ,1
Λυδίαν δὲ Κλείτῳ, Φρυγίαν δὲ τὴν ἐφ᾿ Ἑλλησπόντῳ
7Ἀρριδαίῳ. στρατηγὸν δὲ τῆς βασιλικῆς
δυνάμεως ἀπέδειξεν Ἀντίγονον, ᾧ προστεταγμένον
ἦν καταπολεμῆσαι Εὐμενῆ τε καὶ Ἀλκέταν· παρέζευξε
δὲ τῷ Ἀντιγόνῳ χιλίαρχον τὸν υἱὸν Κάσανδρον,
ὅπως μὴ δύνηται διαλαθεῖν ἰδιοπραγῶν.
αὐτὸς δὲ τοὺς βασιλεῖς ἀναλαβὼν καὶ τὴν ἰδίαν




1Ἀσάνδρῳ Wesseling, cp. chap. 3. 1: Κασάνδρῳ.122Book XVIII

the attack on Perdiccas, Persia to Peucestes,
Carmania 321 b.c. to Tlepolemus, Media to Pithon, Parthia to Philip,1 Aria and Drangenê to Stasander of Cyprus, Bactrianê and Sogdianê to Stasanor of Soli, who
was from that same island.2 He added Paropanisadae to the domain of Oxyartes, father of Alexander’s
wife Roxanê, and the part of India bordering on Paropanisadae to Pithon son of Agenor. Of the two neighbouring kingdoms, the one along the Indus River was assigned to Porus and that along the Hydaspes to Taxiles, for it was not possible to
remove these kings without employing a royal army and
an outstanding general. Of the satrapies that face the north, Cappadocia was assigned to Nicanor,3 Great Phrygia and Lycia to Antigonus as before, Caria to Asander, Lydia to Cleitus, and Hellespontine
Phrygia to Arrhidaeus. As general of the royal army he appointed Antigonus, assigning him the task of
finishing the war against Eumenes and Alcetas; but he attached his own son Cassander to Antigonus
as chiliarch4 so that the latter might not be able to pursue his own ambitions undetected. Antipater himself with the kings and his own army went on


1A little later we find a Philotas governing Parthia, cp.
Book 19. 14. 1.2Mention of the re-appointment of Sibyrtius as satrap of
Arachosia seems to have been omitted or lost at this point
(Arrian, FGrH, 156. 9. 36; cp. chap. 3. 3, and Book 19.
14. 6).3Four men of this name are mentioned in this period: this satrap of Cappadocia, who remained true to Antigonus and was finally defeated by Seleucus (Book 19. 92); the friend and general of Ptolemy (chap. 43. 2); Cassander’s supporter, who commanded the garrison in Munychia (chap. 64. I, etc.): and Cassander’s brother (Book 19. 11. 8). Cp. Droysen, Geschichte des Hellenismus, 2. 145, note 2.4A chiliarch was, properly speaking, a commander of a thousand, but the Greeks used the term to designate the very influential official who had commanded the bodyguard of the Persian king. Alexander gave this title first to Hephaestion and later to Perdiccas (Arrian, FGrH, 156. 1. 3, cp. chap. 48. 4–5 below).123