Diodorus of Sicily

Πολυπέρχων πρός τε τὴν Ἀργείων πόλιν καὶ
τὰς λοιπάς, προστάττων τοὺς ἀφηγησαμένους ἐπ᾿
Ἀντιπάτρου τῶν πολιτευμάτων φυγαδεῦσαι, τινῶν
δὲ καὶ θάνατον καταγνῶναι καὶ δημεῦσαι τὰς οὐσίας,
ὅπως ταπεινωθέντες εἰς τέλος μηδὲν ἰσχύσωσι
2συνεργεῖν Κασάνδρῳ. ἔγραψε δὲ καὶ πρὸς Ὀλυμπιάδα
τὴν Ἀλεξάνδρου μητέρα, διατρίβουσαν ἐν
Ἠπείρῳ διὰ τὴν πρὸς Κάσανδρον ἔχθραν, ἵνα τὴν
ταχίστην εἰς Μακεδονίαν καταντήσῃ καὶ παραλαβοῦσα
τὸ Ἀλεξάνδρου παιδίον ἐπιμέλειαν αὐτοῦ
ποιῆται, μέχρι ἂν εἰς ἡλικίαν ἔλθῃ καὶ τὴν πατρῴαν
3βασιλείαν παραλάβῃ. ἔπεμψε δὲ καὶ πρὸς Εὐμενῆ,
γράψας ἐπιστολὴν ἐκ τοῦ τῶν βασιλέων ὀνόματος,
ὅπως πρὸς μὲν Ἀντίγονον μὴ διαλύσηται τὴν ἀλλοτριότητα,
πρὸς δὲ τοὺς βασιλεῖς ἀποκλίνας εἴτε
βούλεται καταντᾶν εἰς Μακεδονίαν καὶ μετ᾿ αὐτοῦ
κοινοπραγῶν ἐπιμελητὴς εἶναι τῶν βασιλέων, εἴτε
μᾶλλον προαιρεῖται μένειν ἐπὶ τῆς Ἀσίας καὶ λαβὼν
δύναμιν καὶ χρήματα διαπολεμεῖν πρὸς Ἀντίγονον,
φανερῶς ἤδη γεγενημένον ἀποστάτην τῶν
βασιλέων. ἀποκαθιστάνειν δ᾿ αὐτῷ τοὺς βασιλεῖς
τήν τε σατραπείαν ἣν Ἀντίγονος ἀφῄρηται
καὶ τὰς δωρεὰς ἁπάσας ὅσας πρότερον εἶχε κατὰ
4τὴν Ἀσίαν. τὸ δ᾿ ὅλον ἀπεφαίνετο μάλιστα πάντων
πρέπειν Εὐμενῆ τῆς βασιλικῆς οἰκίας κήδεσθαι
καὶ φροντίζειν, ἀκολουθοῦντα τοῖς ὑπ᾿ αὐτοῦ
πεπολιτευμένοις1 πρὸς βασιλικὴν οἰκίαν. ἐὰν
δὲ μείζονος δυνάμεως προσδέηται, καὶ αὐτὸς μετὰ
τῶν βασιλέων ἀναζεύξειν ἐκ Μακεδονίας μετὰ πάσης
τῆς βασιλικῆς δυνάμεως.
Ταῦτα μὲν οὖν ἐπράχθη κατὰ τοῦτον τὸν ἐνιαυτόν.
1Fischer reads προπεπολιτευμένοις.168Book XVIII

to all the cities, Polyperchon wrote to Argos 319 b.c. and the other cities, ordering them to exile those who had been leaders of the governments in the time of Antipater—even to condemn certain of them to death and to confiscate their property—in order that these men, completely stripped of power, might be unable to co-operate with Cassander in any way. He also wrote to Olympias, the mother of Alexander, who was staying in Epirus because of her quarrel with Cassander, asking her to return to Macedonia as soon as possible, to take charge of the son of Alexander, and to assume responsibility for him until he should become of age and receive his father’s kingdom. He also sent to Eumenes,1 writing a letter in the name of the kings, urging him not to put an end to his enmity toward Antigonus, but turning from him to the kings, either to cross over to Macedonia, if he wished, and become a guardian of the kings in co-operation with himself, or if he preferred, to remain in Asia and after receiving an army and money fight it out with Antigonus, who had already clearly shown that he was a rebel against the kings. He said that the kings were restoring to him the satrapy that Antigonus had taken away and all the prerogatives that he had ever possessed in Asia. Finally he set forth that it was especially fitting for Eumenes to be careful and solicitous for the royal house in conformity with his former public services in its interest. If he needed greater military power, Polyperchon promised that he himself and the kings would come from Macedonia with the entire royal army.
This is what happened in that year.
1Cp. Plutarch, Eumenes, 13. 1–2.169