Diodorus of Sicily

τὸ μὲν πρῶτον ἐπεχείρουν ἀγωνίζεσθαι, μετὰ δὲ
ταῦτα πυθόμενοι τὴν τῶν Σαμνιτῶν ἧτταν καὶ
νομίσαντες πάσας τὰς δυνάμεις ἥξειν ἐπ᾿ αὐτοὺς
5διελύσαντο πρὸς Ῥωμαίους· τοὺς γὰρ αἰτίους τῆς
ταραχῆς ἐξέδωκαν, οἳ προτεθείσης κρίσεως οὐ περιμείναντες
τὴν ἀπόφασιν αὑτοὺς ἀνεῖλαν. αἱ δὲ
πόλεις τυχοῦσαι συγγνώμης εἰς τὴν προϋπάρχουσαν
συμμαχίαν ἀποκατέστησαν.
77. Τοῦ δ᾿ ἔτους τούτου διελθόντος Ἀθήνησι μὲν
ἦρχε Πολέμων, ἐν Ῥώμῃ δ᾿ ὑπῆρχον ὕπατοι Λεύκιος
Παπείριος τὸ πέμπτον καὶ Γάιος Ἰούνιος,
ἤχθη δὲ καὶ Ὀλυμπιὰς κατὰ τοῦτον τὸν ἐνιαυτὸν
ἑβδόμη πρὸς ταῖς ἑκατὸν καὶ δέκα, καθ᾿ ἣν ἐνίκα
2στάδιον Παρμενίων Μιτυληναῖος. ἐπὶ δὲ τούτων
τῶν χρόνων Ἀντίγονος ἀπέστειλεν εἰς τὴν Ἑλλάδα
στρατηγὸν Πτολεμαῖον1 τοὺς Ἕλληνας ἐλευθερώσοντα,
συνέπεμψε δ᾿ αὐτῷ ναῦς μὲν μακρὰς ἑκατὸν
καὶ πεντήκοντα, Μήδιον ἐπιστήσας ναύαρχον, στρατιώτας
δὲ πεζοὺς μὲν πεντακισχιλίους, ἱππεῖς δὲ
3πεντακοσίους. ἐποιήσατο δὲ καὶ πρὸς Ῥοδίους
συμμαχίαν καὶ προσελάβετο παρ᾿ αὐτῶν ναῦς
ἐξηρτισμένας πρὸς τὸν πόλεμον δέκα πρὸς τὴν τῶν
4Ἑλλήνων ἐλευθέρωσιν. ὁ δὲ Πτολεμαῖος μετὰ
παντὸς τοῦ στόλου καταπλεύσας τῆς Βοιωτίας εἰς
τὸν Βαθὺν καλούμενον λιμένα παρὰ μὲν τοῦ κοινοῦ
τῶν Βοιωτῶν προσελάβετο στρατιώτας πεζοὺς μὲν
δισχιλίους διακοσίους, ἱππεῖς δὲ χιλίους τριακοσίους.
μετεπέμψατο δὲ καὶ τὰς ἐξ Ὠρεοῦ ναῦς καὶ



1Πτολεμαῖον Palmer: Πολέμωνα.44Book XIX

to fight; but afterwards, hearing of the 313 b.c. defeat of the Samnites and believing that all the forces would come against themselves, they made terms with the Romans. They surrendered those guilty of the uprising, who without awaiting the judgement of the trial that was instituted killed themselves. But the cities gained pardon and were reinstated in their former alliance.1
77. When this year had passed, Polemon was archon in Athens, and in Rome the consuls were Lucius Papirius for the fifth time and Gaius Iunius2; and in this year the Olympic Games were celebrated for the one hundred and seventeenth time, Parmenion of Mitylenê winning the footrace. In this year3 Antigonus ordered his general Ptolemaeus into Greece to set the Greeks free and sent with him one hundred and fifty warships, placing Medius in command of them as admiral, and an army of five thousand foot and five hundred horse. Antigonus also made an alliance with the Rhodians and received from them for the liberation of the Greeks ten ships fully equipped for war. Ptolemaeus, putting in with the entire fleet at the harbour of Boeotia known as Bathys,4 received from the Boeotian League two thousand two hundred foot soldiers and one thousand three hundred horse. He also summoned his ships




1For this revolt cp. Livy, 9. 26. 5–7, where, however, the dictator and master-of-horse are called respectively C. Maenius and M. Folius. The account of Roman affairs is continued in chap. 101.2Polemon was archon in 312/11 b.c. In the Fasti Capitolini
the consuls for 313 b.c. are L. Papirius Cursor for the fifth time and C. Iunius Bubulcus Brutus for the second time (CIL, 1, p. 130; cp. Livy, 9. 28. 2). The events related in chaps. 77–80. 2 still belong to the year 313 b.c.3The narrative is continued from chap. 75. 8.4i.e. “Deep,” on the Euripus near Aulis.45