Diodorus of Sicily
3τὸ δ᾿ ἔσχατον πανδήμῳ φωνῇ καταχειροτονηθέντες
εἰς τὸ δεσμωτήριον ἤγοντο τὴν ἐπὶ θανάτῳ. συνηκολούθουν
δὲ αὐτοῖς πολλοὶ τῶν σπουδαίων ἀνδρῶν,
ὀδυρόμενοι καὶ συμπάσχοντες ἐπὶ τῷ μεγέθει
4τῶν ἀτυχημάτων· τὸ γὰρ πρωτεύοντας ἄνδρας ταῖς
δόξαις καὶ ταῖς εὐγενείαις, πολλὰ πεπραχότας ἐν τῷ
ζῆν φιλάνθρωπα, μήτε λόγου μήτε κρίσεως δικαίας
τυγχάνειν πολλοὺς ἦγεν εἰς ἐπίστασιν διανοίας καὶ
φόβον, ἀστάτου τε1 καὶ κοινῆς ἅπασι τῆς τύχης
5οὔσης. πολλοὶ δὲ2 καὶ τῶν δημοτικῶν καὶ πικρῶς
διακειμένων πρὸς αὐτὸν ἐλοιδόρουν τε ἀνηλεῶς καὶ
πικρῶς ὠνείδιζον αὐτῷ τὰς συμφοράς· τὸ γὰρ ἐν
ταῖς εὐτυχίαις σιωπώμενον μῖσος, ὅταν ἐκ μεταβολῆς
ἐν ταῖς ἀτυχίαις ἐκραγῇ, ταῖς ὀργαῖς ἀποθηριοῦται
6πρὸς τοὺς μισουμένους. διὰ δὴ3 τῆς τοῦ
κωνείου πόσεως κατὰ τὸ πάτριον ἔθος τὸν βίον
καταλύσαντες ἐρρίφησαν ἄταφοι πάντες ἐκ τῶν τῆς
Ἀττικῆς ὅρων. ὁ μὲν οὖν Φωκίων καὶ οἱ μετ᾿
αὐτοῦ διαβληθέντες τοιαύτην ἔσχον τὴν τοῦ βίου
καταστροφήν.
68. Κάσανδρος δὲ παρ᾿ Ἀντιγόνου λαβὼν ναῦς
μακρὰς τριάκοντα καὶ πέντε, στρατιώτας δὲ τετρακισχιλίους
κατέπλευσεν εἰς τὸν Πειραιᾶ. προσδεχθεὶς
δ᾿ ὑπὸ Νικάνορος τοῦ φρουράρχου παρέλαβε
τὸν Πειραιᾶ καὶ τὰ κλεῖθρα τοῦ λιμένος· τὴν δὲ
Μουνυχίαν αὐτὸς ὁ Νικάνωρ κατεῖχεν, ἔχων4 ἰδίους
στρατιώτας ἱκανοὺς εἰς τὸ τηρεῖν τὸ φρούριον.
2Πολυπέρχων δὲ μετὰ τῶν βασιλέων ἔτυχε μὲν
διατρίβων περὶ τὴν Φωκίδα, πυθόμενος δὲ τὸν
εἰς Πειραιᾶ κατάπλουν τοῦ Κασάνδρου παρῆλθεν



1τε Capps: δὲ MSS., omitted by Dindorf and Fischer.2δὲ added by Dindorf.3δὴ Capps: δὲ.4μὲν before ἔχων omitted by editors.196Book XVIII

greeted them. Finally by the universal voice of the 318 b.c. people the accused were condemned and led off to the prison on the way to death. They were accompanied by many good men, mourning and sympathizing with them at their great misfortune. For that men who were second to none in reputation and birth and had done many acts of human kindness during life should obtain neither a chance to defend themselves nor a fair trial turned many to arresting thoughts and fear, Fortune being not only unstable but impartial to all alike. But many of the popular party, men who were bitter in their opposition to Phocion, kept reviling him mercilessly and cruelly charging him with their misfortunes. For when hatred, that in prosperity finds no utterance, after a change of Fortune breaks out in adversity, it loses all human semblance in its rage against its object. So when, by taking the draught of hemlock according to the ancient custom, these men had ended their lives, they were all thrown unburied beyond the boundaries of Attica. In this manner died Phocion and those who had been falsely accused with him.1
68. Cassander, after receiving from Antigonus thirty-five warships and four thousand soldiers, sailed into the Piraeus. Welcomed by Nicanor, the garrison commander, he took over the Piraeus and the harbour booms, while Munychia was retained by Nicanor himself, who had enough soldiers of his own to man the fortress. Polyperchon and the kings happened to be staying in Phocis, but when Polyperchon learned of Cassander’s arrival in the Piraeus,



1Phocion was executed during the Attic month Munychion (April or May), 318 (Plutarch, Phocion, 37. 1).197