Diodorus of Sicily

ἀστασιάστους καὶ ἀμνησικακουμένους ἐν ταῖς ἑαυτῶν
πατρίσι πολιτεύεσθαι· καὶ εἴ τι κατὰ τούτων
ἐψήφιστο, ἄκυρον ἔστω, πλὴν εἴ τινες ἐφ᾿ αἵματι ἢ
5ἀσεβείᾳ κατὰ νόμον πεφεύγασι. μὴ κατιέναι δὲ
μηδὲ Μεγαλοπολιτῶν τοὺς μετὰ Πολυαινέτου ἐπὶ
προδοσίᾳ φεύγοντας μηδ᾿ Ἀμφισσεῖς μηδὲ Τρικκαίους
μηδὲ Φαρκαδωνίους μηδὲ Ἡρακλεώτας·
τοὺς δ᾿ ἄλλους καταδεχέσθωσαν πρὸ τῆς τριακάδος
6τοῦ Ξανθικοῦ μηνός. εἰ δέ τινα τῶν πολιτευμάτων
Φίλιππος ἢ Ἀλέξανδρος ἀπέδειξαν ἑαυτοῖς
ὑπεναντία, παραγινέσθωσαν πρὸς ἡμᾶς, ἵνα διορθωσάμενοι
τὰ συμφέροντα καὶ ἡμῖν καὶ ταῖς πόλεσι
πράττωσιν. Ἀθηναίοις δ᾿ εἶναι τὰ μὲν ἄλλα καθάπερ
ἐπὶ Φιλίππου καὶ Ἀλεξάνδρου, Ὠρωπὸν δὲ
7Ὠρωπίους ἔχειν καθάπερ νῦν. Σάμον δὲ δίδομεν
Ἀθηναίοις, ἐπειδὴ καὶ Φίλιππος ἔδωκεν ὁ πατήρ.
ποιήσασθαι δὲ δόγμα πάντας τοὺς Ἕλληνας μηδένα
μήτε στρατεύειν μήτε πράττειν ὑπεναντία ἡμῖν·
εἰ δὲ μή, φεύγειν αὐτὸν καὶ γενεὰν καὶ τῶν ὄντων
στέρεσθαι. προστετάχαμεν δὲ καὶ περὶ τούτων καὶ
8τῶν λοιπῶν Πολυπέρχοντι πραγματεύεσθαι. ὑμεῖς
οὖν, καθάπερ ὑμῖν καὶ πρότερον ἐγράψαμεν, ἀκούετε
τούτου· τοῖς γὰρ μὴ ποιοῦσί τι τῶν γεγραμμένων
οὐκ ἐπιτρέψομεν.”
57. Τούτου δὲ τοῦ διαγράμματος ἐκδοθέντος καὶ
πρὸς ἁπάσας τὰς πόλεις ἀποσταλέντος ἔγραψεν ὁ



166Book XVIII

their property, undisturbed by faction, and enjoying 319 b.c. a complete amnesty, shall exercise their rights as citizens in their native states; and if any measures have been passed to their disadvantage, let such measures be void, except as concerning those who had been exiled for blood guilt or impiety in accordance with the law. Not to be restored are the men of Megalopolis who were exiled for treason along with Polyaenetus, nor those of Amphissa, Tricca, Pharcadon, or Heraclea1; but let the cities receive back the others before the thirtieth day of Xanthicus.2 If in any case Philip or Alexander published regulations that are inconsistent with each other, let the cities concerned present themselves before us so that, after bringing the provisions into harmony, they may follow a course of action advantageous both to us and to themselves. The Athenians shall possess everything as at the time of Philip and Alexander, save that Oropus shall belong to its own people as at present.3 Samos we grant to Athens, since Philip our sire also gave it to them.4 Let all the Greeks pass a decree that no one shall engage either in war or in public activity in opposition to us, and that if anyone disobeys, he and his family shall be exiled and his goods shall be confiscated. We have commanded Polyperchon to take in hand these and other matters. Do you obey him, as we also have written to you formerly; for if anyone fails to carry out any of these injunctions, we shall not overlook him.”
57. When this edict had been published and dispatched


1Nothing seems to be known in regard to any of these
exiles.2The sixth month in the Macedonian year, normally
falling just before the vernal equinox. The year must be
318, the edict itself being issued in the preceding summer
or fall.3Oropus, geographically a part of Boeotia but throughout most of its history in the possession of Athens, had been assigned to Athens by Philip in 338 (Pausanias, 1. 34. 1). It seems to have become free as a result of the Lamian War.4Cp. chaps. 8. 7, 18. 9.167