Diodorus of Sicily

συντεθεῖσθαι φιλίαν, ἔπεμψε τῶν φίλων Ἀργαῖον
καὶ Καλλικράτην, προστάξας αὐτοῖς ἀνελεῖν τὸν
Νικοκλέα· πάνυ γὰρ εὐλαβεῖτο μὴ καὶ τῶν ἄλλων
τινὲς ὁρμήσωσι πρὸς μεταβολήν, ὁρῶντες ἀθῴους
γεγονότας τοὺς πρότερον ἀφεστηκότας. οὗτοι μὲν
οὖν πλεύσαντες εἰς τὴν νῆσον καὶ παρὰ Μενελάου
τοῦ στρατηγοῦ στρατιώτας λαβόντες περιέστησαν
τὴν οἰκίαν τοῦ Νικοκλέους καὶ τὰ δόξαντα τῷ
βασιλεῖ δηλώσαντες προσέταξαν ἑαυτὸν ἀπαλλάξαι
2τοῦ ζῆν. ὁ δὲ τὸ μὲν πρῶτον πρὸς τὴν ἀπολογίαν
ἐτρέπετο τῶν ἐγκαλουμένων· ὡς δ᾿ οὐδεὶς προσεῖχεν,
ἑαυτὸν ἀπέκτεινεν. Ἀξιοθέα δὲ ἡ γυνὴ τοῦ
Νικοκλέους ἀκούσασα τὴν ἀνδρὸς τελευτὴν τὰς μὲν
θυγατέρας τὰς ἑαυτῆς παρθένους οὔσας ἀπέσφαξεν,
ὅπως μηδεὶς αὐτῶν πολέμιος κυριεύσῃ, τὰς δὲ τῶν
ἀδελφῶν τῶν Νικοκλέους γυναῖκας προετρέψατο
μεθ᾿ αὑτῆς ἑλέσθαι τὸν θάνατον, οὐδὲν συντεταχότος
Πτολεμαίου περὶ τῶν γυναικῶν, ἀλλὰ
3συγκεχωρηκότος αὐταῖς τὴν ἀσφάλειαν. τῶν δὲ
βασιλείων πεπληρωμένων φόνων καὶ συμπτωμάτων
ἀπροσδοκήτων οἱ τοῦ Νικοκλέους ἀδελφοὶ συγκλείσαντες
τὰς θύρας τὴν μὲν οἰκίαν ἐνέπρησαν ἑαυτοὺς
δ᾿ ἀπέσφαξαν. ἡ μὲν οὖν τῶν ἐν Πάφῳ βασιλέων
οἰκία τραγικοῖς συγκυρήσασα πάθεσι τὸν εἰρημένον
τρόπον κατελύθη.
Ἡμεῖς δὲ τὴν ἀπαγγελίαν τῶν κατὰ τὴν Κύπρον1
γεγονότων διελθόντες ἐπὶ τὰς συνεχεῖς πράξεις
μεταβιβάσομεν τὸν λόγον.
22. Περὶ γὰρ τοὺς αὐτοὺς καιροὺς ἐν τῷ Πόντῳ
μετὰ τὴν Παρυσάδου τελευτήν, ὃς ἦν βασιλεὺς τοῦ
Κιμμερικοῦ Βοσπόρου, διετέλουν οἱ παῖδες αὐτοῦ

1κατὰ τὴν Κύπρον added by Reiske.196Book XX

privately formed an alliance with Antigonus, dispatched 310 b.c. two of his friends, Argaeus and Callicrates, ordering them to slay Nicocles; for he was taking all precautions lest any others also should hasten to shift allegiance when they saw that those were left unpunished who had previously rebelled. These two men, accordingly, after sailing to the island and obtaining soldiers from Menelaüs the general,1 surrounded the house of Nicocles, informed him of the king’s wishes and ordered him to take his own life. At first he tried to defend himself against the charges, but then, since no one heeded him, he slew himself. Axiothea, the wife of Nicocles, on learning of her husband’s death, slew her daughters, who were unwed, in order that no enemy might possess them; and she urged the wives of Nicocles’ brothers to choose death along with her, although Ptolemy had given no instructions in regard to the women but had agreed to their safety. When the palace had thus been filled full of death and unforeseen disaster, the brothers of Nicocles, after fastening the doors, set fire to the building and slew themselves. Thus the house of the kings of Paphos, after meeting such tragic suffering, was brought to its end in the way described.
Now that we have followed to its end the tale of what took place in Cyprus, we shall turn the course of our narrative toward the events which follow.
22. At about this same time in the region of the Pontus, after the death of Parysades, who was king of the Cimmerian Bosporus, his sons Eumelus, Satyrus,

1A brother of Ptolemy, cp. Book 19. 62. 4.197