Diodorus of Sicily

Φίλιππος Ποτίδαιαν ἐκπολιορκήσας τὴν μὲν τῶν
Ἀθηναίων φρουρὰν ἐξήγαγεν ἐκ τῆς πόλεως καὶ
φιλανθρώπως αὐτῇ προσενεγκάμενος ἐξαπέστειλεν
εἰς τὰς Ἀθήνας (σφόδρα γὰρ εὐλαβεῖτο τὸν δῆμον
τῶν Ἀθηναίων διὰ τὸ βάρος καὶ τὸ ἀξίωμα τῆς
πόλεως)· τὴν δὲ πόλιν1 ἐξανδραποδισάμενος παρέδωκε
τοῖς Ὀλυνθίοις, δωρησάμενος ἅμα καὶ τὰς
6κατὰ τὴν χώραν κτήσεις. μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα παρελθὼν
ἐπὶ πόλιν Κρηνίδας ταύτην μὲν ἐπαυξήσας οἰκητόρων
πλήθει μετωνόμασε Φιλίππους, ἀφ᾿ ἑαυτοῦ
προσαγορεύσας, τὰ δὲ κατὰ τὴν χώραν2 χρύσεια
μέταλλα παντελῶς ὄντα λιτὰ καὶ ἄδοξα ταῖς κατασκευαῖς
ἐπὶ τοσοῦτον ηὔξησεν ὥστε δύνασθαι φέρειν
αὐτῷ πρόσοδον πλεῖον ἢ ταλάντων χιλίων.
7ἐκ δὲ τούτων ταχὺ σωρεύσας πλοῦτον, αἰεὶ μᾶλλον
διὰ τὴν εὐπορίαν τῶν χρημάτων εἰς ὑπεροχὴν μεγάλην
ἤγαγε τὴν Μακεδονικὴν βασιλείαν· νόμισμα
γὰρ χρυσοῦν κόψας τὸ προσαγορευθὲν ἀπ᾿ ἐκείνου
Φιλίππειον μισθοφόρων τε δύναμιν ἀξιόλογον συνεστήσατο
καὶ τῶν Ἑλλήνων πολλοὺς διὰ τούτου
προετρέψατο προδότας γενέσθαι τῶν πατρίδων.
ἀλλὰ περὶ μὲν τούτων αἱ κατὰ μέρος πράξεις3
ἕκαστα δηλώσουσιν, ἡμεῖς δ᾿ ἐπὶ τὰς συνεχεῖς
πράξεις μεταβιβάσομεν τὸν λόγον.
9. Ἐπ᾿ ἄρχοντος γὰρ Ἀθήνησιν Ἀγαθοκλέους
Ρωμαῖοι κατέστησαν ὑπάτους Μάρκον Φάβιον καὶ






1πόλιν Gemistus; so Wesseling, Fischer: Πύδναν.2χώραν] πόλιν PX.3πράξεις] τάξεις P.260Book XVI

be, Philip, when he had forced Potidaea to surrender, 358/7 b.c. led the Athenian garrison out of the city and, treating it considerately, sent it back to Athens—for he was particularly solicitous toward the people of Athens on account of the importance and repute of their city—but, having sold the inhabitants into slavery, he handed it over to the Olynthians, presenting them also at the same time with all the properties in the territory of Potidaea. After this he went to the city of Crenides,1 and having increased its size with a large number of inhabitants, changed its name to Philippi, giving it his own name, and then, turning to the gold mines in its territory, which were very scanty and insignificant, he increased their output so much by his improvements that they could bring him a revenue of more than a thousand talents. And because from these mines he had soon amassed a fortune, with the abundance of money he raised the Macedonian kingdom higher and higher to a greatly superior position, for with the gold coins which he struck, which came to be known from his name as Philippeioi,2 he organized a large force of mercenaries, and by using these coins for bribes induced many Greeks to become betrayers of their native lands. But concerning these matters the several events, when recorded, will explain everything in detail, and we shall now shift our account back to the events in the order of their occurrence.
9. When Agathocles was archon at Athens, the 357/6 b.c. Romans elected as consuls Marcus Fabius and Gaius

1On Crenides see chap. 3. 7 and note.2Worth about $6.25. According to Seltman, Greek Coins, 200.#x2013;201, the issue of Philippi bore the name of the town ΦΙΛΙΠΠΩΝ (see Plate XLVI 7) and only after 348 began the issue of Philippeioi. See also West, “The Early Diplomacy of Philip II of Macedon Illustrated by his Coins,” Numismatic Chronicle, 3 (1923), 169 ff.261