Diodorus of Sicily

τῶν Φοινίκων ἀνανδρίαν ὑπέμνησε δὲ τῆς Γέλωνος
εὐημερίας.
3Πάντων δὲ καθάπερ τινὶ μιᾷ φωνῇ βοώντων ἐπιθέσθαι
τοῖς βαρβάροις καὶ κατάρχεσθαι τῆς μάχης,
κατὰ τύχην ὑποζυγίων σέλινα κομιζόντων εἰς τὰς
στιβάδας ὁ Τιμολέων ἔφη δέχεσθαι τὸν οἰωνὸν τῆς
νίκης· τὸν γὰρ Ἰσθμιακὸν στέφανον ἐκ σελίνου
4συνίστασθαι. οἱ δὲ στρατιῶται παραγγείλαντος
τοῦ Τιμολέοντος ἐκ τῶν σελίνων πλέξαντες στεφάνους
καὶ ταῖς κεφαλαῖς περιθέντες προῆγον μετὰ
χαρᾶς ὡς τῶν θεῶν προσημαινόντων αὐτοῖς τὴν
5νίκην· ὅπερ καὶ συνέβη γενέσθαι· περιεγένοντο γὰρ
ἀνελπίστως τῶν πολεμίων οὐ μόνον διὰ τὰς ἰδίας
ἀνδραγαθίας, ἀλλὰ καὶ διὰ τὴν τῶν θεῶν συνεργίαν.
Ὁ μὲν γὰρ Τιμολέων ἐκτάξας τὴν δύναμιν κατέβαινεν
ἀπό τινων λόφων ἐπὶ τὸν Κρίμισον1 ποταμὸν
καὶ μυρίων ἤδη διαβεβηκότων ἐξ ἐφόδου τούτοις
ἐπέρραξε, τεταγμένος αὐτὸς ἐπὶ μέσης τῆς φάλαγγος.
6γενομένης δὲ μάχης καρτερᾶς καὶ τῶν
Ἑλλήνων ὑπερεχόντων ταῖς τε ἀρεταῖς καὶ ταῖς
εὐχειρίαις πολὺς ἐγίνετο φόνος τῶν βαρβάρων. ἤδη
δὲ φευγόντων τῶν διαβεβηκότων ἡ πᾶσα δύναμις
τῶν Καρχηδονίων περαιωθεῖσα τὸ ῥεῖθρον διωρθώσατο
τὴν τῶν ἰδίων ἧτταν.
1MSS. omit. Κρίμισον supplied from Plutarch, Timoleon,
25. 4 (Κρίμησον) with the spelling common elsewhere.58Book XVI

cowardice of the Phoenicians and recalling the success 340/39 b.c. of Gelon.1
Just at the moment when all as with one voice were clamouring to attack the barbarians and to begin the battle, it chanced that pack animals came carrying wild celery2 for their bedding, and Timoleon declared that he accepted the omen of his victory, for the crown at the Isthmian games is woven of this. On his suggestion, the soldiers plaited crowns out of celery and with their heads wreathed advanced cheerfully in the confidence that the gods foretold their victory. And that, as a matter of fact, is how it was, for unpredictably, incredible to tell, they got the better of the enemy not only through their own valour but also through the gods’ specific assistance.
Timoleon deployed his forces and advanced down from a line of little hills to the river Crimisus,3 where ten thousand of the enemy had already crossed. These he shattered at the first onset, taking his own position in the centre of his line.4 There was a sharp fight, but as the Greeks were superior both in bravery and in skill, there was great slaughter of the barbarians. The rest began to flee, but the main body of the Carthaginians crossed the river in the mean time and restored the situation.
1That is, at the battle of Himera, 480 b. c. Polybius reproaches
Timaeus for placing in the mouth of Timoleon
derogatory remarks concerning the Carthaginians, but not
advancing proof that Timoleon did not actually speak in this
way (12. 26a; Jacoby, Fragmente der griechischen Historiker,
no. 566, F 31).2This was the apium graveolens which is also frequently called parsley. It is fragrant (cp. Olck, Real-Encyclopädie, 6 (1909), 255 f.). This anecdote was told by Timaeus (Jacoby, Fragmente der griechischen Historiker, no. 566, F 118) and appears in Plutarch, Timoleon. 26.3The river is variously spelled Crimesus (Plutarch, Timoleon, 25. 4) and Crimissus (Nepos, Timoleon, 2. 4).4The story of the battle is told more circumstantially in Plutarch, Timoleon, 27–29. The time was just before the summer solstice of 339 b.c. (Plutarch, Timoleon, 27. 1).59