Diodorus of Sicily

δὲ ταῦτ᾿ Ἀθηναῖοι μὲν ἐπανῆλθον εἰς τὴν πατρίδα,
Θηβαῖοι δὲ Θεσπιὰς πολιορκήσαντες ἄπρακτον
ἔσχον τὴν ἐπιβολήν.
Ἅμα δὲ τούτοις πραττομένοις Ῥωμαῖοι μὲν1
ἐπὶ ἀτελείᾳ πεντακοσίους ἀποίκους εἰς Σαρδονίαν2
ἀπέστειλαν.
28. Ἐπ᾿ ἄρχοντος δ᾿ Ἀθήνησι Καλλέου3 Ῥωμαῖοι
χιλιάρχους ἀντὶ τῶν ὑπάτων κατέστησαν
τέτταρας, Λεύκιον Παπίριον, Μάρκον Πόπλιον,
Τίτον Κορνήλιον, Κόιντον4 Λεύκιον. ἐπὶ δὲ τούτων,
Λακεδαιμονίων ἐπταικότων περὶ τὰς Θήβας,
οἱ μὲν Βοιωτοὶ θαρρήσαντες συνεστράφησαν, καὶ
κοινὴν συμμαχίαν ποιησάμενοι, δύναμιν ἀξιόλογον
συνεστήσαντο, προσδοκῶντες ἥξειν τοὺς Λακεδαιμονίους
2μεγάλαις δυνάμεσιν εἰς τὴν Βοιωτίαν. Ἀθηναῖοι
δὲ πρέσβεις τοὺς ἀξιολογωτάτους τῶν παρ᾿
αὐτοῖς ἐξέπεμψαν ἐπὶ τὰς ὑπὸ τοὺς Λακεδαιμονίους
τεταγμένας πόλεις, παρακαλοῦντες ἀντέχεσθαι
τῆς κοινῆς ἐλευθερίας. οἱ γὰρ Λακεδαιμόνιοι
διὰ τὸ μέγεθος τῆς περὶ αὐτοὺς δυνάμεως ὑπεροπτικῶς
καὶ βαρέως ἦρχον τῶν ὑποτεταγμένων·
διόπερ πολλοὶ τῶν ὑπ᾿ αὐτοὺς τεταγμένων ἀπέκλινον
3πρὸς τοὺς Ἀθηναίους. πρῶτοι δὲ πρὸς
τὴν ἀπόστασιν ὑπήκουσαν Χῖοι καὶ Βυζάντιοι, καὶ
μετὰ τούτους Ῥόδιοι καὶ Μυτιληναῖοι καὶ τῶν
ἄλλων τινὲς νησιωτῶν· αἰεὶ δὲ μᾶλλον αὐξομένης
τῆς τῶν Ἑλλήνων ὁρμῆς πολλαὶ πόλεις προσέθεντο
1μὲν] omitted by Dindorf.2Σαρδονίαν] Wesseling suggests Satricum.3Corrected from Kirchner, Pros. Att. no. 7766: Καλλίου.4Κόιντον Vogel: κύντον P, καὶ Κόιντον FJK.20Book XV

Athenians returned home, and the Thebans assailed 378/7 b.c. Thespiae but were unsuccessful in their attack.
While these things were taking place in Greece, the Romans dispatched five hundred colonists, who were to be exempt from taxes, to Sardinia.1
28. When Calleas was archon at Athens, the 377/6 b.c. Romans elected as military tribunes with consular power four men, Lucius Papirius, Marcus Publius, Titus Cornelius, and Quintus Lucius. During their term of office, following the failure of the Lacedaemonians at Thebes, the Boeotians, uniting boldly, formed an alliance and gathered a considerable army, expecting that the Lacedaemonians would arrive in Boeotia in great strength. The Athenians sent their most respected citizens as ambassadors to the cities which were subject to the Lacedaemonians, urging them to adhere to the common cause of liberty. For the Lacedaemonians, relying on the size of the force at their disposal, ruled their subject peoples inconsiderately and severely, and consequently many of those who belonged to the Spartan sphere of influence fell away to the Athenians. The first to respond to the plea to secede were the peoples of Chios and Byzantium; they were followed by the peoples of Rhodes and Mytilenê and certain others of the islanders; and as the movement steadily gathered force throughout Greece, many cities






1The Romans were scarcely interested in Sardinia before the first Punic War. Hence Satricum, a city of Latium, may be the correct reading. See critical note and cp. Livy, 6. 16. 6.21