Diodorus of Sicily
15. Μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα εἰς τὰς Ἀθήνας ἐξαπέστειλε
τοὺς ἐξαιτήσοντας τῶν ῥητόρων δέκα τοὺς κατ᾿
αὐτοῦ πεπολιτευμένους, ὧν ὑπῆρχον ἐπιφανέστατοι
Δημοσθένης καὶ Λυκοῦργος. συναχθείσης οὖν ἐκκλησίας
καὶ τῶν πρεσβευτῶν εἰσαχθέντων εἰς τὸ
πλῆθος ὁ μὲν δῆμος ἀκούσας τῶν λόγων εἰς πολλὴν
ἀγωνίαν καὶ ἀπορίαν ἐνέπεσεν. ἅμα μὲν γὰρ
ἔσπευδε τὸ τῆς πόλεως ἀξίωμα τηρεῖν, ἅμα δὲ διὰ
τὴν Θηβαίων ἀπώλειαν ἐκπεπληγμένος τὸ δεινὸν
περίφοβος καθειστήκει, νουθετούμενος τοῖς τῶν
πλησιοχώρων ἀτυχήμασι.
2Πολλῶν δὲ λόγων γινομένων κατὰ τὴν ἐκκλησίαν
Φωκίων μὲν ὁ χρηστός, ἀντιπολιτευόμενος τοῖς
περὶ τὸν Δημοσθένην, ἔφη δεῖν τοὺς ἐξαιτουμένους
μιμήσασθαι τὰς Λεὼ1 κόρας καὶ τὰς Ὑακινθίδας
καὶ τὸν θάνατον ἑκουσίως ὑπομεῖναι ἕνεκα τοῦ μηδὲν
ἀνήκεστον παθεῖν τὴν πατρίδα καὶ τὴν ἀνανδρίαν
καὶ δειλίαν ὠνείδιζε τῶν μὴ βουλομένων ὑπὲρ
τῆς πόλεως τελευτᾶν· ὁ δὲ δῆμος τοῦτον μὲν τοῖς
θορύβοις ἐξέβαλε, προσάντως ἀκούων τοὺς λόγους.
3Δημοσθένους δὲ λόγον πεφροντισμένον διελθόντος
ὁ δῆμος εἰς συμπάθειαν τῶν ἀνδρῶν προαχθεὶς
φανερὸς ἦν σώζειν βουλόμενος τοὺς ἄνδρας.
Ἐπὶ τελευτῆς δὲ Δημάδης, πεπεισμένος ὑπὸ τῶν
περὶ Δημοσθένην, ὥς φασι, πέντε ταλάντοις ἀργυρίου,



1So Wesseling: Λεωκόρας.158Book XVII
15. After this he sent men to Athens to demand 335/4 b.c. the surrender of ten1 political leaders who had opposed his interest, the most prominent of whom were Demosthenes and Lycurgus. So an assembly was convened and the ambassadors were introduced, and after they had spoken, the people were plunged into deep distress and perplexity. They were anxious to uphold the honour of their city but at the same time they were stunned with horror at the destruction of Thebes and, warned by the calamities of their neighbours, were alarmed in face of their own danger.
After many had spoken in the assembly, Phocion, the “Good,” who was opposed to the party of Demosthenes, said that the men demanded should remember the daughters of Leos and Hyacinthus2 and gladly endure death so that their country would suffer no irremediable disaster, and he inveighed against the faint-heartedness and cowardice of those who would not lay down their lives for their city. The people nevertheless rejected his advice and riotously drove him from the stand, and when Demosthenes delivered a carefully prepared discourse, they were carried away with sympathy for their leaders and clearly wished to save them.
In the end, Demades, influenced, it is reported, by a bribe of five silver talents from Demosthenes’s supporters,



1This number is given by Plutarch (Demosthenes, 23. 3) as from Idomeneus and Duris, but he thinks eight rather, whom he names.2The Attic hero Leôs sacrificed his daughters to avert danger to the city; so also Erechtheus, whose name may He behind the unknown Hyacinthus. Cp. Lycurgus, C. Leocr. 98–99; Demades, Duod. Ann. 37; Aeschines, C. Ctes. 161; Plutarch, Phocion 17. See Addenda.159