Diodorus of Sicily

συσκευαζόμενον τὰς πόλεις· αἱρετώτερον
γὰρ εἶναι πρὸ τοῦ τὸν τύραννον ἰσχυρὸν γενέσθαι
διαπολεμεῖν ἑκουσίως ἢ περιμείναντας αὐτοῦ τὴν
αὔξησιν ἐξ ἀνάγκης πρὸς ἰσχυρότερον διαγωνίζεσθαι.
2δοξάντων δ᾿ αὐτῶν ἀληθῆ λέγειν ὁ μὲν δῆμος
τῶν Ἀκραγαντίνων ἐψηφίσατο τὸν πόλεμον καὶ
Γελῴους μὲν καὶ Μεσσηνίους εἰς τὴν συμμαχίαν
προσελάβοντο, εἰς δὲ τὴν Λακεδαιμονίαν τῶν φυγάδων
τινὰς ἐξέπεμψαν, ἐντειλάμενοι πειρᾶσθαι
στρατηγὸν ἄγειν τὸν δυνάμενον πραγμάτων ἀφηγήσασθαι·
3τοὺς γὰρ πολιτικοὺς ὑπώπτευον ὡς ὄντας
οἰκείους τυραννίδος, τοὺς δ᾿ ἔξωθεν ὑπελάμβανον
δικαίως ποιήσεσθαι τὴν τῶν ὅλων ἐπιμέλειαν,
ἀναμιμνησκόμενοι τῆς Τιμολέοντος τοῦ Κορινθίου
4στρατηγίας. οἱ δὲ πεμφθέντες ὥς ποθ᾿ ἧκον εἰς
τὴν Λακωνικήν, εὗρον Ἀκρότατον τὸν Κλεομένους
τοῦ βασιλέως υἱὸν προσκεκοφότα πολλοῖς τῶν
νέων καὶ διὰ τοῦτο ξενικῶν πραγμάτων ὀρεγόμενον.
5τῶν γὰρ Λακεδαιμονίων μετὰ τὴν πρὸς Ἀντίπατρον
μάχην ἀπολυόντων τῆς ἀτιμίας τοὺς ἐκ τῆς ἥττης
διασωθέντας μόνος ἐνέστη τῷ δόγματι. διόπερ
αὐτὸν συνέβη καὶ τῶν ἄλλων οὐκ ὀλίγοις προσκόψαι,
μάλιστα δ᾿ οἷς ἦν τῶν νόμων τὰ πρόστιμα·
οὗτοι γὰρ συστραφέντες πληγάς τε ἐνεφόρησαν1
6αὐτῷ καὶ διετέλουν ἐπιβουλεύοντες. διὰ ταῦτα δὴ
ξενικῆς ἡγεμονίας ἐπιθυμῶν ἀσμένως ὑπήκουσε
τοῖς Ἀκραγαντίνοις. τὴν δ᾿ ἀποδημίαν ποιησάμενος
ἄνευ τῆς τῶν ἐφόρων γνώμης ἀνήχθη ναυσὶν



1πληγάς τε ἐνεφόρησαν editors: πληγάς τε ἐνεφορήθησαν RX.
πληγὰς συνεφόρησαν F.22Book XIX

organized the cities; for it was better, they said, to 314 b.c. fight it out of their own free will before the tyrant became strong than to await the increase of his power and then be forced to struggle against him when he had grown stronger. Since they seemed to speak the truth, the popular assembly of the Acragantines voted for the war, added the people of Gela and Messenê to the alliance, and sent some of the exiles to Lacedaemon, instructing them to try to bring back a general capable of taking charge of affairs; for they were suspicious of their own statesmen as being inclined toward tyranny, but, remembering the generalship of Timoleon the Corinthian,1 assumed that leaders from abroad would honestly devote themselves to the common cause. The envoys, when they arrived in Laconia, found that Acrotatus, the son of King Cleomenes, had given offence to many of the younger men and for this reason was eager for activity away from home. This was because, when the Lacedaemonians after the battle against Antipater
relieved from ignominy those who had survived the defeat,2 he alone opposed the decree. He thus gave offence to many others and in particular to those who were subject to the penalties of the laws; indeed, these persons gathered together and gave him a beating, and they were constantly plotting against him. Being therefore anxious for a foreign command, he gladly accepted the invitation of the men from Acragas. Taking his departure from the state without the consent of the ephors, he set sail


1Cp. the action of the Syracusans who, after the death
of Timoleon, passed a law that henceforth they would always elect a Corinthian to lead them in foreign wars (Plutarch, Timoleon, 38. 2).2The battle at Megalopolis in 331 b.c., in which King Agis III of Sparta was defeated and lost his life (Book 17. 62–63).23