Diodorus of Sicily
2ἐκεῖνον· ἐξέπεμψε μὲν γὰρ τοὺς ἐπιφανεστάτους
τῶν πολιτῶν εἰς τὴν ἐπὶ τοὺς Νομάδας στρατείαν,
ἵνα μηδένα τῶν ἀξιολόγων ἔχῃ τὸν ἀντιστησόμενον,
οὐκ ἐτόλμα δὲ ἀποκαλύψασθαι πρὸς τὴν τυραννίδα,
3μετακαλούμενος ὑπὸ τῆς εὐλαβείας. καθ᾿ ὃν δὲ
καιρὸν Ἀγαθοκλῆς ἐπέθετο τοῖς περὶ τὸν Ὀφέλλαν,
ὁρμῆσαι καὶ τοῦτον συνέβη πρὸς τὴν δυναστείαν,
ἀγνοούντων ἀμφοτέρων τὰ παρὰ τοῖς πολεμίοις
4πραττόμενα. οὔτε γὰρ Ἀγαθοκλῆς ἔγνω τὴν ἐπίθεσιν
τῆς τυραννίδος καὶ τὴν ἐν τῇ πόλει ταραχήν,
ἐπεὶ ῥᾳδίως ἂν ἐκράτησε τῆς Καρχηδόνος· εἵλετο
γὰρ ἂν Βορμίλκας ἐπ᾿ αὐτοφώρῳ γενόμενος συνεργεῖν
Ἀγαθοκλεῖ μᾶλλον ἢ τοῖς πολίταις δοῦναι
τὴν ἐκ τοῦ σώματος τιμωρίαν· οὔτε πάλιν οἱ Καρχηδόνιοι
τὴν ἐπίθεσιν τὴν Ἀγαθοκλέους ἐπύθοντο·
ῥᾳδίως γὰρ ἂν αὐτὸν ἐχειρώσαντο προσλαβόμενοι
5τὴν μετ᾿ Ὀφέλλα δύναμιν. ἀλλ᾿, οἶμαι, παρ᾿
ἀμφοτέροις οὐκ ἀλογίστως συνέβη γενέσθαι ταύτην
τὴν ἄγνοιαν, καίπερ μεγάλων μὲν οὐσῶν τῶν
πράξεων, ἐγγὺς δ᾿ ἀλλήλων τῶν1 ἐπικεχειρηκότων
6τοῖς τηλικούτοις τολμήμασιν· ὅ τε γὰρ Ἀγαθοκλῆς
ἄνδρα φίλον μέλλων ἀναιρεῖν πρὸς οὐδὲν ἐπέβαλλε
τὴν διάνοιαν τῶν παρὰ τοῖς πολεμίοις συντελουμένων,
ὅ τε Βορμίλκας τὴν τῆς πατρίδος ἐλευθερίαν
ἀφαιρούμενος οὐδὲν ὅλως ἐπολυπραγμόνει τῶν παρὰ
τοῖς ἀντιστρατοπεδεύουσιν, ὡς ἂν ἔχων προκείμενον
ἐν τῇ ψυχῇ τὸ μὴ τοὺς πολεμίους ἐπὶ τοῦ
παρόντος, ἀλλὰ τοὺς πολίτας καταπολεμῆσαι.
7Ταύτῃ δ᾿ ἄν τις καὶ τὴν ἱστορίαν καταμέμψαιτο,
θεωρῶν ἐπὶ μὲν τοῦ βίου πολλὰς καὶ διαφόρους
πράξεις συντελουμένας κατὰ τὸν αὐτὸν καιρόν, τοῖς
δ᾿ ἀναγράφουσιν ἀναγκαῖον ὑπάρχον τὸ μεσολαβεῖν
1τῶν added by Geer.258Book XX

for he sent out the most distinguished of the citizens 308 b.c. to the campaign against the Nomads so that he might have no man of consequence to oppose him, but he did not venture to make an open bid for the tyranny, being held back by caution. But it happened that at the time when Agathocles attacked Ophellas, Bormilcar made his effort to gain the tyranny, each of the two being ignorant of what the enemy was doing. Agathocles did not know of the attempt at tyranny and of the confusion in the city when he might easily have become master of Carthage, for when Bormilcar was discovered in the act he would have preferred to co-operate with Agathocles rather than pay the penalty in his own person to the citizens. And again, the Carthaginians had not heard of Agathocles’ attack, for they might easily have overpowered him with the aid of the army of Ophellas. But I suppose that not without reason did such ignorance prevail on both sides, although the actions were on a large scale and those who had undertaken deeds of such daring were near each other. For Agathocles, when about to kill a man who was his friend, paid attention to nothing that was happening among his enemies; and Bormilcar, when depriving his fatherland of its liberty, did not concern himself at all with events in the camp of the enemy, since he had as a fixed purpose in his mind to conquer at the time, not his enemies, but his fellow citizens.
At this point one might censure the art of history, when he observes that in life many different actions are consummated at the same time, but that it is necessary for those who record them to interrupt the


259