Diodorus of Sicily

βεβηκὼς ἔτρωσε τὸν ἀντίπαλον εἴς τε τὸν βραχίονα
5καὶ τοὺς μηροὺς τρισὶ πληγαῖς. οὐδεμιᾶς δ᾿ οὔσης
πληγῆς καιρίου καὶ τῶν τραυμάτων ἔτι θερμῶν
ὄντων ὁ Εὐμενὴς δευτέραν πληγὴν ἐπὶ τὸν τράχηλον
ἐπενέγκας ἀπέκτεινε τὸν Νεοπτόλεμον.
32. Ἅμα δὲ τούτοις πραττομένοις καὶ τὸ λοιπὸν
πλῆθος τῶν ἱππέων συμπεσὸν εἰς μάχην πολὺν
ἐποίει φόνον. διὸ καὶ τῶν μὲν πιπτόντων, τῶν δὲ
τραυματιζομένων τὸ μὲν πρῶτον ἰσόρροπος ἦν ὁ
κίνδυνος, μετὰ ταῦτα δὲ φανερᾶς γενομένης τῆς
τοῦ Νεοπτολέμου τελευτῆς καὶ τῆς ἐπὶ θατέρου
κέρατος τροπῆς ἅπαντες πρὸς φυγὴν ὥρμησαν καὶ
καθάπερ πρὸς τεῖχος ὀχυρὸν πρὸς1 τὴν τῶν πεζῶν
2φάλαγγα κατέφυγον. ὁ δ᾿ Εὐμενὴς ἀρκεσθεὶς τῷ
προτερήματι καὶ τῶν στρατηγικῶν σωμάτων ἀμφοτέρων
κυριεύσας ἀνεκαλέσατο τῇ σάλπιγγι τοὺς
στρατιώτας. στήσας δὲ τρόπαιον καὶ τοὺς νεκροὺς
θάψας διεπέμψατο πρὸς τὴν τῶν ἡττημένων φάλαγγα,
παρακαλῶν ἑαυτῷ προσθέσθαι καὶ διδοὺς
ἐξουσίαν ἑκάστοις ὅποι2 βούλονται τὴν ἀποχώρησιν
3ποιήσασθαι. δεξαμένων δὲ τὰς διαλύσεις τῶν
Μακεδόνων καὶ δόντων τὰς διὰ τῶν ὅρκων πίστεις
ἔλαβον ἐξουσίαν ἔν τισι κώμαις πλησίον κειμέναις
ἐπισιτίσασθαι. καὶ παρεκρούσαντο τὸν Εὐμενῆ·
ἀναλαβόντες γὰρ ἑαυτοὺς καὶ τὰς τροφὰς παρασκευασάμενοι
νυκτὸς ἀπηλλάγησαν καὶ λαθραίως
4ἀπεχώρουν πρὸς τὸν Ἀντίπατρον. ὁ δ᾿ Εὐμενὴς
ἐπεβάλετο μὲν κολάσαι τὴν ἀθεσίαν τῶν παραβεβηκότων
τοὺς ὅρκους καὶ διώκειν ἐκ ποδῶν τὴν
φάλαγγα, οὐδὲν δὲ δυνάμενος πρᾶξαι διά τε τὰς
ἀρετὰς τῶν ἀποχωρούντων καὶ διὰ τὴν ἐκ τῶν
τραυμάτων ἐλάττωσιν ἀπέγνω τὸν διωγμόν. οὗτος
1πρὸς added by Fischer.2ὅποι Stephanus: ὅσοι.102Book XVIII

opponent with three blows on the arm and the thighs. 321 b.c. As none of these blows was fatal and the wounds were still fresh, Eumenes struck Neoptolemus in the neck with a second blow and slew him.
32. Meanwhile the rest of the cavalry had joined battle and were making great slaughter. So, while some fell and others were wounded, the battle at first was even, but afterwards, when they became aware of the death of Neoptolemus and of the rout of the other wing, all made off and fled for refuge to the phalanx of their infantry as to a strong fortress. Eumenes, satisfied with his advantage and master of the bodies of both generals, recalled his soldiers with the sound of the trumpet. After he had set up a trophy and buried the dead, he sent to the phalanx of the vanquished, inviting them to unite with him and giving permission to them severally to withdraw to whatever places they wished. When the Macedonians had accepted the terms of surrender and had pledged their faith by oaths, they received permission to go for food to certain villages that lay near. And they deceived Eumenes; for when they had recovered their strength and collected supplies, they set out at night and went off secretly to join Antipater. Eumenes attempted to punish the faithlessness of these men who had broken their oath and to follow at the heels of the phalanx; but, owing to the hardihood of those who were retreating and to the weakness caused by his wounds, he was unable to accomplish anything and gave up the pursuit. So by winning



103