Diodorus of Sicily
3παρελθὼν δὲ πρὸς πόλιν Ἔγγυον, τυραννουμένην
ὑπὸ Λεπτίνου, προσβολὰς συνεχεῖς ἐποιεῖτο βουλόμενος
τὸν μὲν Λεπτίνην ἐκβαλεῖν ἐκ τῆς πόλεως,
4τοῖς δ᾿ Ἐγγυΐνοις τὴν ἐλευθερίαν ἀποδοῦναι. περὶ
ταῦτα δὲ τοῦ Τιμολέοντος ὄντος Ἱκέτας πανδημεὶ
στρατεύσας ἐκ τῶν Λεοντίνων ἐπολιόρκει τὰς
Συρακούσσας, πολλοὺς δὲ τῶν στρατιωτῶν ἀποβαλὼν
5ταχέως ἐπανῆλθεν εἰς τοὺς Λεοντίνους. ὁ
δὲ Τιμολέων καταπληξάμενος τὸν Λεπτίνην τοῦτον
μὲν ὑπόσπονδον ἐξέπεμψεν εἰς τὴν Πελοπόννησον,
ἐνδεικνύμενος τοῖς Ἕλλησι τὰς τῶν καταπολεμηθέντων
τυράννων ἐκπτώσεις.
Οὔσης δὲ καὶ τῆς τῶν Ἀπολλωνιατῶν πόλεως ὑπὸ
τὸν Λεπτίνην παραλαβὼν τὴν Ἀπολλωνίαν ταύτῃ
τε καὶ τῇ τῶν Ἐγγυΐνων ἀπέδωκε τὴν αὐτονομίαν.
73. Ἀπορούμενος δὲ χρημάτων εἰς τὰς τῶν ξένων
μισθοδοσίας ἐξαπέστειλε στρατιώτας χιλίους
μετὰ τῶν ἀξιολογωτάτων ἡγεμόνων εἰς τὴν τῶν
Καρχηδονίων ἐπικράτειαν. οὗτοι δὲ πολλὴν χώραν
πορθήσαντες καὶ λαφύρων πλῆθος κομίσαντες παρέδωκαν
τῷ Τιμολέοντι. ὁ δὲ λαφυροπωλήσας τὴν
λείαν καὶ χρημάτων πλῆθος ἀθροίσας ἔδωκε τοῖς
2μισθοφόροις εἰς πλείω χρόνον τοὺς μισθούς. ἐκράτησε
δὲ καὶ τῆς Ἐντέλλης καὶ τοὺς τὰ Καρχηδονίων
μάλιστα φρονοῦντας πεντεκαίδεκα θανατώσας
τοῖς ἄλλοις ἀπένειμε τὴν ἐλευθερίαν. τοῦ δὲ
Τιμολέοντος αὐξομένου τῇ τε δυνάμει καὶ τῇ κατὰ
τὴν στρατηγίαν δόξῃ αἱ μὲν Ἑλληνίδες πόλεις αἱ
κατὰ τὴν Σικελίαν ἅπασαι προθύμως ὑπετάγησαν
τῷ Τιμολέοντι διὰ τὸ πάσαις τὰς αὐτονομίας ἀποδιδόναι,
τῶν δὲ Σικελῶν καὶ Σικανῶν καὶ τῶν
ἄλλων τῶν ὑπὸ τοὺς Καρχηδονίους τεταγμένων
42Book XVI

city Engyum, which was controlled by the tyrant 342/1 b.c. Leptines,1 he assailed it with repeated attacks in the hope of expelling Leptines and restoring to the city its freedom. Taking advantage of his preoccupation, Hicetas led out his entire force and attempted to lay siege to Syracuse, but lost many of his men and hastily retreated back to Leontini. Leptines was frightened into submission, and Timoleon shipped him off to the Peloponnese under a safe-conduct, giving the Greeks tangible evidence of the results of his programme of defeating and expelling tyrants.
The city of Apollonia had also been under Leptines. On taking it, Timoleon restored its autonomy as well as that of the city of Engyum.
73. Lacking funds to pay his mercenaries, he sent a thousand men with his best officers into the part of Sicily ruled by the Carthaginians.2 They pillaged a large area, and, carrying off a large amount of plunder, delivered it to Timoleon. Selling this and realizing a large sum of money, he paid his mercenaries for a long term of service. He took Entella also and, after putting to death the fifteen persons who were the strongest supporters of the Carthaginians, restored the rest to independence. As his strength and military reputation grew, all the Greek cities in Sicily began to submit themselves voluntarily to him, thanks to his policy of restoring to all their autonomy. Many too of the cities of the Sicels and the Sicanians and the rest who were subject to


1Probably the Leptines mentioned in chap. 45. 9, and probably the nephew of the elder Dionysius (T. Lenschau, Real-Encyclopädie, 12 (1925), 2073).2Plutarch, Timoleon, 24. 4; 25. 2.43