Diodorus of Sicily

Περσικῷ πολέμῳ πολυχρόνιον ἐμπειρίαν τῶν στρατιωτικῶν
ἔργων, ἐπινοήσασθαι πολλὰ τῶν εἰς τὸν
πόλεμον χρησίμων, καὶ μάλιστα1 περὶ τὸν καθοπλισμὸν
2φιλοτιμηθῆναι. τῶν γὰρ Ἑλλήνων μεγάλαις
ἀσπίσι χρωμένων καὶ διὰ τοῦτο δυσκινήτων
ὄντων, συνεῖλε τὰς ἀσπίδας καὶ κατεσκεύασε πέλτας
συμμέτρους, ἀμφοτέρων2 εὖ στοχασάμενος, τοῦ
τε σκέπειν ἱκανῶς τὰ σώματα καὶ τοῦ δύνασθαι
τοὺς χρωμένους ταῖς πέλταις διὰ τὴν κουφότητα
3παντελῶς εὐκινήτους ὑπάρχειν. διὰ δὲ τῆς πείρας
τῆς εὐχρηστίας ἀποδοχῆς τυγχανούσης, οἱ μὲν πρότερον
ἀπὸ τῶν ἀσπίδων ὁπλῖται καλούμενοι τότε
δὲ ἀπὸ τῆς πέλτης πελτασταὶ μετωνομάσθησαν.
ἐπὶ δὲ τοῦ δόρατος καὶ τοῦ ξίφους εἰς τοὐναντίον
τὴν μετάθεσιν ἐποιήσατο· ηὔξησε γὰρ τὰ μὲν
δόρατα ἡμιολίῳ μεγέθει, τὰ δὲ ξίφη σχεδὸν διπλάσια
κατεσκεύασεν. τὴν δὲ δοκιμασίαν ἡ χρεία
διαβεβαιοῦσα τὴν ἐπίνοιαν τοῦ στρατηγοῦ τῷ τῆς
4πείρας ἐπιτεύγματι δόξης ἠξίωσεν. τάς τε ὑποδέσεις
τοῖς στρατιώταις εὐλύτους καὶ κούφας
ἐποίησε, τὰς μέχρι τοῦ νῦν ἰφικρατίδας ἀπ᾿ ἐκείνου
καλουμένας. πολλὰ δὲ καὶ ἄλλα τῶν χρησίμων
εἰς τὰς στρατείας κατέδειξε, περὶ ὧν μακρὸν ἂν
εἴη γράφειν. ἡ μὲν οὖν ἐπ᾿ Αἴγυπτον στρατεία
τῶν Περσῶν, μεγάλης τυχοῦσα παρασκευῆς, παρ᾿
ἐλπίδας ἄπρακτον ἔσχε τὸ τέλος.
45. Κατὰ δὲ τὴν Ἑλλάδα ταραττομένων τῶν
πόλεων διὰ τὴν ἀσυνήθη πολιτείαν, καὶ πολλῶν




1τῶν after μάλιστα deleted by Dindorf.2ἐξ before ἀμφοτέρων deleted by Vogel (cp. chap. 64. 4).70Book XV

experience of military operations in the Persian War, 374/3 b.c. he devised many improvements in the tools of war, devoting himself especially to the matter of arms. For instance, the Greeks were using shields which were large and consequently difficult to handle; these he discarded and made small oval ones of moderate size, thus successfully achieving both objects, to furnish the body with adequate cover and to enable the user of the small shield, on account of its lightness, to be completely free in his movements. After a trial of the new shield its easy manipulation secured its adoption, and the infantry who had formerly been called “hoplites” because of their heavy shield, then had their name changed to “peltasts” from the light pelta they carried.1 As regards spear and sword, he made changes in the contrary direction: namely, he increased the length of the spears by half, and made the swords almost twice as long. The actual use of these arms confirmed the initial test and from the success of the experiment won great fame for the inventive genius of the general. He made soldiers’ boots that were easy to untie and light and they continue to this day to be called “iphicratids” after him. He also introduced many other useful improvements into warfare, but it would be tedious to write about them. So the Persian expedition against Egypt, for all its huge preparations, disappointed expectations and proved a failure in the end.
45. Throughout Greece now that its several states were in confusion because of unwonted forms of

1Consult H. W. Parke, Greek Mercenary Soldiers, 79 ff., who quotes this passage and upholds Diodorus in that “he regards the peltast’s equipment as a modification introduced into hoplite troops.” See also Nepos, Iphicrates, 1. 3–4.71