Diodorus of Sicily

παρίστατο καὶ συγκαθίει τὸ σῶμα πρὸς τὴν
7ἀνάβασιν. ὁ δὲ βασιλεὺς διὰ τὴν ἀρετὴν τοῦ ζῴου
δυσφορήσας τὴν μὲν χώραν δενδροτομεῖν προσέταξε,
διὰ δὲ τῶν ὁμοφώνων τοῖς ἐγχωρίοις κηρύττειν ὡς
ἂν μὴ τὸν ἵππον ἀποδῶσι,1 τήν τε χώραν εἰς τέλος
ὄψονται κατεφθαρμένην τούς τ᾿ ἐνοικοῦντας πανδημεὶ
8κατεσφαγμένους. τῶν δ᾿ ἀπειλῶν ὀξέως
ἐπιτελουμένων καταπλαγέντες οἱ βάρβαροι τὸν
ἵππον ἀποκατέστησαν καὶ μετ᾿ αὐτοῦ πολυτελέστατα
δῶρα προσεκόμισαν, πρὸς δὲ τούτοις καὶ
πεντήκοντ᾿ ἄνδρας ἀπέστειλαν, δεόμενοι τυχεῖν συγγνώμης.
ὁ δ᾿ Ἀλέξανδρος τοὺς μὲν ἀξιολογωτάτους
τῶν ἀνδρῶν ἔλαβεν ὁμήρους.
77. Ἐπανελθόντος δ᾿ αὐτοῦ πάλιν εἰς τὴν Ὑρκανίαν
ἧκεν πρὸς αὐτὸν ἡ βασίλισσα τῶν Ἀμαζόνων,
ὄνομα μὲν Θάλληστρις,2 βασιλεύουσα δὲ τῆς
μεταξὺ τοῦ Φάσιδος καὶ Θερμώδοντος χώρας. ἦν
δὲ τῷ τε κάλλει καὶ τῇ τοῦ σώματος ῥώμῃ διαφέρουσα
καὶ παρὰ τοῖς ὁμοεθνέσι θαυμαζομένη
κατ᾿ ἀνδρείαν, καὶ τὸ μὲν πλῆθος τῆς στρατιᾶς ἐπὶ
τῶν ὅρων τῆς Ὑρκανίας ἀπολελοιπυῖα, μετὰ δὲ





1εἰ μὴ . . . ἀποδώσειεν F.2Θάληστρις F.338Book XVII

alone stood quietly and even lowered his body to 329/8 b.c. assist in the mounting. Because of the superior qualities of this animal the king was infuriated at his loss and ordered that every tree in the land be felled, while he proclaimed to the natives through interpreters that if the horse were not returned, they should see the country laid waste to its furthest limit and its inhabitants slaughtered to a man. As he began immediately to carry out these threats, the natives were terrified and returned the horse and sent with it their costliest gifts. They sent also fifty men to beg forgiveness. Alexander took the most important of these as hostages.1
77. When Alexander returned to Hyrcania,2 there came to him the queen of the Amazons named Thallestris, who ruled all the country between the rivers Phasis and Thermodon. She was remarkable for beauty and for bodily strength, and was admired by her countrywomen for bravery. She had left the bulk of her army on the frontier of Hyrcania3 and had


1Curtius, 6. 5. 18–21; Plutarch, Alexander, 44; Arrian, 5. 19. 4–6 (told as an anecdote at the time of the animal’s death).2Plutarch, Alexander, 46. 1, has been generally taken to
mean that the queen of the Amazons visited Alexander north
of the Jaxartes, in spite of the considerations that this was an
odd place for Alexander to linger, and a very long way from
the traditional home of the Amazons. This is certainly
wrong. In sect. 44, Alexander was in Hyrcania, and lost and
recovered his horse. In sect. 45, Alexander advanced into Parthia, and experimented with Median dress. In sect. 46, the Amazons came. Sect. 47 deals again with his Medizing, and sect. 48 with the conspiracy exposed at Prophthasia in Drangianê. That is to say, Plutarch’s narrative follows the actual route of Alexander, and the word “here” with which sect. 46 begins must mean Parthia. The reference to Alexander’s flying expedition across the Jaxartes at the end of sect. 45, which has misled scholars, is a parenthesis, illustrating Alexander’s indifference to physical discomfort.3If we are to accept that Thallestris and her Amazons existed and had heard of Alexander, there is no insuperable difficulty in supposing that they proceeded from Thermodon on the Black Sea through the valleys of the Phasis and Cyrus Rivers and along the coast of the Caspian Sea. They would have passed through the recently subdued country of the Mardi and overtaken Alexander in Hyrcania (or Parthia, as Plutarch). Cp. Strabo, 11. 5. 4.339