Diodorus of Sicily

μὲν οὖν ἐπιφανεῖ μάχῃ νικήσας καὶ δύο μεγάλους
ἡγεμόνας ἀνελὼν μεγάλης ἔτυχε δόξης.
33. Ἀντίπατρος δὲ τοὺς ἀπὸ τῆς φυγῆς διασωθέντας
ἐκδεξάμενος καὶ προσαναλαβὼν προῆγεν ἐπὶ
Κιλικίαν, σπεύδων βοηθῆσαι τῷ Πτολεμαίῳ. Περδίκκας
δὲ πυθόμενος τὴν κατὰ τὸν Εὐμενῆ νίκην
πολλῷ θρασύτερος ἐγένετο πρὸς τὴν εἰς Αἴγυπτον
στρατείαν· ὡς δ᾿ ἐγγὺς ἐγένετο τοῦ Νείλου, κατεστρατοπέδευσεν
οὐ μακρὰν πόλεως Πηλουσίου.
2ἐπιχειρήσας δὲ διώρυγά τινα παλαιὰν ἀνακαθαίρειν
καὶ τοῦ ποταμοῦ λάβρως ἐκραγέντος καὶ τὰ ἔργα
λυμηναμένου πολλοὶ τῶν φίλων ἐγκαταλιπόντες
3ἀπεχώρησαν πρὸς τὸν Πτολεμαῖον· καὶ γὰρ φονικὸς
ἦν καὶ τῶν ἄλλων ἡγεμόνων περιαιρούμενος τὰς
ἐξουσίας καὶ καθόλου πάντων βουλόμενος ἄρχειν
βιαίως, ὁ δὲ Πτολεμαῖος τοὐναντίον εὐεργετικὸς
καὶ ἐπιεικὴς καὶ μεταδιδοὺς πᾶσι τοῖς ἡγεμόσι τῆς
παρρησίας, πρὸς δὲ τούτοις διειληφὼς πάντας τοὺς
ἐπικαιροτάτους Αἰγύπτου τόπους φυλακαῖς ἀξιολόγοις
καὶ βέλεσι παντοδαποῖς καὶ τοῖς ἄλλοις
4ἅπασιν εὖ κατεσκευασμέναις.1 διὸ καὶ τὰς
ἐπιβολὰς κατὰ τὸ πλεῖστον ἐπλεονέκτει, πολλοὺς
5ἔχων εὐνοοῦντας καὶ προθύμως διακινδυνεύοντας. ὁ
δ᾿ οὖν Περδίκκας διορθούμενος τὰς ἐλαττώσεις συνήγαγε
τοὺς ἡγεμόνας καὶ τοὺς μὲν δωρεαῖς, τοὺς
δ᾿ ἐπαγγελίαις μεγάλαις, πάντας δὲ φιλανθρώποις



1κατεσκευασμέναις Dindorf (1844), κατεσκευασμένος Dindorf
(1828), Fischer: κατεσκευασμένοις.104Book XVIII

a notable victory and by slaying two mighty leaders, 321 b.c. Eumenes gained great glory.
33. As soon as Antipater had received and enrolled those who escaped from the rout, he went on to Cilicia, making haste to go to the aid of Ptolemy. And Perdiccas, on learning of the victory of Eumenes,1 became much more confident in regard to the Egyptian campaign2; and when he approached the Nile, he camped not far from the city of Pelusium. But when he undertook to clear out an old canal, and the river broke out violently and destroyed his work, many of his friends deserted him and went over to Ptolemy. Perdiccas, indeed, was a man of blood, one who usurped the authority of the other commanders and, in general, wished to rule all by force; but Ptolemy, on the contrary, was generous and fair and granted to all the commanders the right to speak frankly. What is more, he had secured all the most important points in Egypt with garrisons of considerable size, which had been well equipped with every kind of missile as well as with everything else. This explains why he had, as a rule, the advantage in his undertakings, since he had many persons who were well disposed to him and ready to undergo danger gladly for his sake. Still Perdiccas, in an effort to correct his deficiencies, called the commanders together, and by gifts to some, by great promises to others, and by friendly intercourse with all, won them


1According to chap. 37. 1, news of the defeat of Craterus
and Neoptolemus did not reach the army until after the
death of Perdiccas. Diodorus is probably using and confusing
two different sources, unless by “the victory of Eumenes” he means the unimportant defeat of Neoptolemus, which is hardly possible in the context. Cp. R. Schubert, Die Quellen zur Geschichte der Diadochenzeit (Leipzig, 1914), 196.2For this campaign and the death of Perdiccas cp. Arrian, FGrH, 156. 9. 28–29; Justin, 13. 8. 10; Pausanias, 1. 6. 3; Strabo, 17. 1. 8.105