Diodorus of Sicily
4ταχίστην δειπνοποιησαμένοις ἀναζευγνύειν. ὧν
ἁπάντων ὀξέως συντελεσθέντων Ἀντίγονος ἀκούσας
τῶν αὐτομόλων ὅτι μάχεσθαι νυκτὸς διεγνώκασιν
οἱ πολέμιοι, τῆς μὲν πορείας ἀπέσχετο,
5διέτασσε δὲ τὴν δύναμιν εἰς τὸν κίνδυνον. τοῦ δὲ
περὶ ταῦτα θορυβουμένου καὶ περὶ τοῦ μέλλοντος
ἀγωνιῶντος ἔλαθον οἱ περὶ τὸν Εὐμενῆ προλαβόντες
καὶ τὴν ὁδοιπορίαν ποιούμενοι κατὰ τάχος
εἰς τὴν Γαβηνήν. ὁ δ᾿ Ἀντίγονος μέχρι μέν τινος
ἐν τοῖς ὅπλοις συνεῖχε τὴν δύναμιν, ὡς δὲ παρὰ τῶν
κατασκόπων ἐπύθετο τὴν ἀποχώρησιν τῶν ἐναντίων,
γνοὺς αὑτὸν κατεστρατηγημένον οὐδὲν ἧττον
6ἀντείχετο τῆς αὐτῆς προαιρέσεως. παραγγείλας
οὖν τοῖς στρατιώταις ἀναζευγνύειν, προῆγε σύντονον
τὴν πορείαν ποιούμενος καὶ διωγμῷ παραπλήσιον.
προέχοντος δ᾿ Εὐμενοῦς δύο φυλακὰς
ὁρῶν ὅτι καταλαβεῖν οὐ ῥᾴδιόν ἐστι τῇ δυνάμει
πάσῃ τοὺς τοσοῦτο προειληφότας, ἐπενόησέ τι
7τοιοῦτο. τὴν μὲν ἄλλην δύναμιν παραδοὺς Πίθωνι
προσέταξε κατὰ σχολὴν ἀκολουθεῖν, αὐτὸς δὲ τοὺς
ἱππεῖς ἀναλαβὼν ἤλαυνεν ἀπὸ ῥυτῆρος καὶ περιλαβὼν
ἅμ᾿ ἡμέρᾳ τὴν οὐραγίαν τῶν πολεμίων
καταβαίνουσαν ἀπό τινος ἀκρολοφίας ἐπέστη ταῖς
8ἀκρωρείαις, φανερὸς ὢν τοῖς ἐναντίοις. οἱ δὲ περὶ
τὸν Εὐμενῆ θεωρήσαντες ἐξ ἱκανοῦ διαστήματος
τῶν πολεμίων ἱππεῖς καὶ δόξαντες εἶναι πλησίον
ἅπασαν τὴν δύναμιν, τῆς μὲν πορείας ἐπέσχον, τὴν
δὲ στρατιὰν διέτασσον, ὡς αὐτίκα τῆς παρατάξεως
9γενησομένης. οἱ μὲν οὖν ἡγεμόνες ἀμφοτέρων τῶν
στρατοπέδων τὸν προειρημένον τρόπον ἀλλήλους
κατεστρατήγησαν, ὥσπερ προαγωνιζόμενοι περὶ
συνέσεως καὶ δεικνύοντες ὅτι τὰς ἐλπίδας ἐν αὑτοῖς
300Book XIX

soldiers to break camp after having taken a very 317 b.c. hasty meal. When all this had been swiftly accomplished, Antigonus, who had heard from the deserters that the enemy had decided to fight during the night, postponed his departure and drew up his forces for the battle. While he was distracted by these operations and concentrating on the coming battle, he failed to notice that Eumenes had got the start of him and was marching at top speed for Gabenê. For some time Antigonus kept his army under arms; but when he learned from his scouts that his opponent had departed, although he knew that he had been outgeneralled, none the less he held to his original purpose. So, ordering his soldiers to break camp, he led them on a forced march that resembled a pursuit. Eumenes, however, had a start of two watches; therefore Antigonus, knowing that it was not easy to overtake with his whole army a force that was so far ahead, devised a stratagem as follows. He gave the rest of the army to Pithon and ordered him to follow at leisure, but he himself with the cavalry pursued at top speed1; and overtaking the rearguard of the enemy at daybreak just as it was coming down from some hilly country, he took position on the ridges, where he was visible to the enemy. When Eumenes from a considerable distance beheld cavalry of the enemy and supposed that the entire army was near, he halted the march and drew up his army on the assumption there would be an engagement immediately. Thus in the manner described the generals of the two armies each outwitted the other as if they were taking part in a preliminary contest of skill and showing that

1Literally, “with loose rein.”301