Diodorus of Sicily

ὀλίγον χρόνον ἐν τῇ περὶ τὴν Μαντίνειαν μάχῃ
λαμπροτάτην τὴν νίκην τῇ πατρίδι περιποιήσας
ἡρωικῶς ἐτελεύτησεν, εὐθέως καὶ τὰ τῶν Θηβαίων
πράγματα τῇ τούτου τελευτῇ συναπέθανεν. ἀλλὰ
περὶ μὲν τούτων τὰ κατὰ μέρος μικρὸν ὕστερον
3ἀκριβῶς διέξιμεν. τότε δὲ τοῖς Θηβαίοις ἔδοξε
στρατεύειν ἐπὶ τὸν Ὀρχομενὸν διὰ τοιαύτας τινὰς
αἰτίας. τῶν φυγάδων τινὲς βουλόμενοι τὴν ἐν
Θήβαις πολιτείαν εἰς ἀριστοκρατικὴν κατάστασιν
μεταστῆσαι, συνέπεισαν τοὺς τῶν Ὀρχομενίων
ἱππεῖς, ὄντας τριακοσίους, συνεπιλαβέσθαι τῆς ἐπιβολῆς.
4οὗτοι δὲ εἰωθότες μετὰ Θηβαίων1 ἀπαντᾶν
ἡμέρᾳ τεταγμένῃ πρὸς τὴν ἐξοπλισίαν, εἰς ταύτην
συνέθεντο ποιήσασθαι τὴν ἐπίθεσιν· πολλῶν δὲ καὶ
ἄλλων κοινωνούντων τῆς προθέσεως καὶ προσορμησάντων,
5ἀπήντησαν πρὸς τὸν καιρόν. οἱ μὲν οὖν
συστησάμενοι τὴν πρᾶξιν μετανοήσαντες ἐδήλωσαν
τοῖς βοιωτάρχαις τὴν ἐπίθεσιν, προδόντες τοὺς
συνομόσαντας, καὶ διὰ τῆς εὐεργεσίας ταύτης
ἑαυτοῖς ἐπορίσαντο τὴν σωτηρίαν. τῶν δ᾿ ἀρχόντων
συλλαβόντων τοὺς τῶν Ὀρχομενίων ἱππεῖς
καὶ παραγαγόντων2 εἰς τὴν ἐκκλησίαν, ὁ δῆμος
ἐψηφίσατο τούτους μὲν ἀποσφάξαι, τοὺς δ᾿ Ὀρχομενίους
ἐξανδραποδίσασθαι καὶ τὴν πόλιν κατασκάψαι.
ἐκ παλαιῶν γὰρ χρόνων οἱ Θηβαῖοι πρὸς
τούτους ἀλλοτρίως διέκειντο, δασμοφοροῦντες μὲν
τοῖς Μινύαις ἐν τοῖς ἡρωικοῖς χρόνοις, ὕστερον δ᾿
6ὑφ᾿ Ἡρακλέους ἐλευθερωθέντες. οἱ δ᾿ οὖν Θηβαῖοι
καιρὸν ἔχειν νομίσαντες καὶ προφάσεις εὐλόγους


1μετὰ Θηβαίων Post, ἐκ Θηβῶν Wesseling, τοῖς ἐκ Θηβῶν
Dindorf, ἐπὶ Θηβῶν Hertlein, ἐξ ἀρχαίων Wurm, εἰς Θήβας
Vogel: ἐκ Θηβαίων.2So Schäfer: παραγόντων.170Book XV

land; when, however, a little while later, after winning 364/3 b.c. a most glorious victory for his country in the battle of Mantineia, he died a hero’s death, straightway the power of Thebes died with him. But this subject we shall set forth accurately in detail a little later. At that time1 the Thebans decided to take the field against Orchomenus for the following reasons. Certain refugees who wanted to change the constitution of Thebes to an aristocracy induced the knights of Orchomenus, three hundred in all, to join them in the attempt. These knights, who were in the habit of meeting with some Thebans on a stated day for a review under arms, agreed to make the attack on this day, and along with many others who joined the movement and added their efforts, they met at the appointed time. Now the men who had originated the action changed their minds, and disclosed to the boeotarchs the projected attack, thus betraying their fellow conspirators, and by this service they purchased safety for themselves. The officials arrested the knights from Orchomenus and brought them before the assembly, where the people voted to execute them, to sell the inhabitants of Orchomenus into slavery, and to raze the city. For from earliest times the Thebans had been ill-disposed towards them, having paid tribute to the Minyae2 in the heroic age, but later they had been liberated by Heracles. So the Thebans, thinking they had a good opportunity and having got


1Diodorus’ dating of the destruction of Orchomenus is established by the fact that Isocrates (Archidamus, 27) does not know of the event. See Pausanias, 9. 15. 3; Demosthenes, 20. 109; Plutarch, Comparison of Pelopidas and Marcellus, 1.2Peoples of prehistoric Greece who from Orchomenus ruled a large area of central Greece.171