Diodorus of Sicily

τῶν πεντηρικῶν ἀπέλιπε κωλύσοντα τὰς ἐκ τῆς
πόλεως ναῦς ἐπεξιέναι πρὸς τὴν ναυμαχίαν, ἔχοντος
τοῦ λιμένος στενὸν τὸν ἔκπλουν, τοῖς δ᾿ ἱππεῦσι
προσέταξε παράγειν παρὰ τὸν αἰγιαλόν, ἵν᾿ ἐάν τι
γένηται πταῖσμα, διασώσειαν1 τοὺς πρὸς τὴν γῆν
2διανηξομένους. αὐτὸς δ᾿ ἐκτάξας τὰς ναῦς ἀπήντα
τοῖς πολεμίοις, ἔχων τὰς ἁπάσας ὀκτὼ πλείους τῶν
ἑκατὸν2 σὺν ταῖς πληρωθείσαις ἐκ τῶν χωρίων τῶν
ληφθέντων· τούτων δ᾿ ἦσαν αἱ μέγισται μὲν ἑπτήρεις,
3αἱ πλεῖσται δὲ πεντήρεις. καὶ τὸ μὲν εὐώνυμον
κέρας ἐπεῖχον ἑπτήρεις ἑπτὰ Φοινίκων,
τετρήρεις δὲ τριάκοντα τῶν Ἀθηναίων, Μηδίου
τοῦ ναυάρχου τὴν ἡγεμονίαν ἔχοντος· ἐπίπλους δὲ
τούτοις ἔταξεν ἑξήρεις δέκα καὶ πεντήρεις ἄλλας
τοσαύτας, διεγνωκὼς3 ἰσχυρὸν κατασκευάσαι τοῦτο
τὸ κέρας ἐφ᾿ οὗ καὶ αὐτὸς ἤμελλε διαγωνίζεσθαι.
4κατὰ μέσην δὲ τὴν τάξιν τὰ ἐλάχιστα τῶν σκαφῶν
ἔστησεν, ὧν ἡγοῦντο Θεμίσων τε ὁ Σάμιος καὶ
Μαρσύας ὁ τὰς Μακεδονικὰς πράξεις συνταξάμενος.
τὸ δὲ δεξιὸν εἶχε κέρας Ἡγήσιππός τε ὁ Ἁλικαρνασσεὺς
καὶ Πλειστίας ὁ Κῷος, ἀρχικυβερνήτης
ὣν τοῦ σύμπαντος στόλου.
5Πτολεμαῖος δὲ τὸ μὲν πρῶτον ἔτι νυκτὸς ἐπέπλει
κατὰ σπουδὴν ἐπὶ τὴν Σαλαμῖνα, νομίζων φθάσειν4
τοὺς πολεμίους τὸν εἴσπλουν ποιησάμενος· ὡς δ᾿
ἡμέρας ἐπιγενομένης οὐ μακρὰν ὁ τῶν ἐναντίων






1διασώσειαν Dindorf, διασώσαιεν Fischer, F, διασώση μὲν RX.2See note on translation.3ἴσως after διεγνωκὼς omitted by Dindorf.4φθάσειν Dindorf: φθάσαι Fischer, following the MSS.280Book XX

quinqueremes to prevent the ships in the city from 307 b.c. going forth for the battle, since the harbour had a narrow exit; and he ordered the cavalry to patrol the shore so that, if any wreck should occur, they might rescue those who should swim across to the land. He himself drew up the fleet and moved against the enemy with one hundred and eight ships in all,1 including those that had been provided with crews from the captured towns. The largest of the ships were sevens and most of them were quinqueremes.2 The left wing was composed of seven Phoenician sevens and thirty Athenian quadriremes, Medius the admiral having the command. Sailing behind these he placed ten sixes and as many quinqueremes, for he had decided to make strong this wing where he himself was going to fight the decisive battle. In the middle of the line he stationed the lightest of his ships, which Themison of Samos and Marsyas,3 who compiled the history of Macedonia, commanded. The right wing was commanded by Hegesippus of Halicarnassus and Pleistias of Cos, who was the chief pilot of the whole fleet.
At first, while it was still night, Ptolemy made for Salamis at top speed, believing that he could gain an entrance before the enemy was ready; but as day broke, the fleet of the enemy in battle array was



1The number is probably corrupt; Plutarch (Demetrius, 16. gives the total as 180, Polyaenus (4. 7. 7) as 170. If we were right in regard to the βαρύτεραι στρατιώτιδες (cp. chap. 47. 1, and note), Demetrius by Diodorus’ own count should have had in this battle 110 triremes and quadriremes and 43 heavier warships (10 having been left at Salamis) plus any from the captured ports.2This statement also appears to be false.3According to Suidas he was a half-brother of Antigonus. He wrote a history of Macedonia in 10 books, one of Attica in 12 books, and a work on the education of Alexander.281