Diodorus of Sicily

ἀπαντήσαντος τήν τε βασιλείαν ἔχειν συνεχώρησε
καὶ ξενισθεὶς μετὰ τῆς δυνάμεως ἐπὶ δύο ἡμέρας
λαμπρῶς ἐπὶ τὸν Ὕφασιν1 ποταμὸν προῆγεν, οὗ τὸ
μὲν πλάτος ἦν σταδίων ἑπτά, τὸ δὲ βάθος ἓξ ὀργυιῶν,
τὸ δὲ ῥεῦμα σφοδρὸν καὶ δυσδιάβατον.
2Ἀκούσας δὲ τοῦ Φηγέως περὶ τῆς πέραν τοῦ
Ἰνδοῦ ποταμοῦ χώρας ὅτι δώδεκα μὲν ἡμερῶν ἔχει
δίοδον ἔρημον, μετὰ δὲ ταύτην εἶναι ποταμὸν τὸν
ὀνομαζόμενον Γάγγην, τὸ μὲν πλάτος τριάκοντα
καὶ δυεῖν σταδίων, τὸ δὲ βάθος μέγιστον τῶν κατὰ
τὴν Ἰνδικήν, πέραν δὲ τούτου κατοικεῖν τό τε τῶν
Ταβραισίων καὶ Γανδαριδῶν ἔθνος, τούτων δὲ βασιλεύειν
Ξανδράμην, ἔχοντα δισμυρίους μὲν ἱππεῖς,
πεζῶν δὲ εἴκοσι μυριάδας, ἅρματα δὲ δισχίλια,
ἐλέφαντας δὲ πολεμικῶς κεκοσμημένους τετρακισχιλίους,
ἀπιστήσας δὲ τοῖς λεγομένοις προσεκαλέσατο
τὸν Πῶρον καὶ περὶ τῶν προσαγγελλομένων
3τἀκριβὲς διεπυνθάνετο. ὁ δὲ τἄλλα μὲν ὑπάρχειν
ἅπαντα ἀληθῆ διεβεβαιοῦτο, τὸν δὲ βασιλέα τῶν
Γανδαριδῶν ἔφησεν εὐτελῆ2 παντελῶς εἶναι καὶ
ἄδοξον ὡς ἂν κουρέως υἱὸν νομιζόμενον εἶναί. εὐπρεπῆ3
γὰρ ὄντα τὸν τούτου πατέρα μεγάλως ὑπὸ
τῆς βασιλίσσης ἀγαπηθῆναι καὶ τοῦ βασιλέως διὰ
τῆς γυναικὸς δολοφονηθέντος εἰς τοῦτον περιστῆναι
τὴν βασιλείαν.
4Ὁ δ᾿ Ἀλέξανδρος, καίπερ ὁρῶν δυσεπίτευκτον



1Ὕπανσιν F.2πανευτελῆ F.3ἐκπρεπῆ F.388Book XVII

firmed him in his rule. Alexander and the army were 326/5 b.c. feasted bountifully for two days, and then advanced to the Hyphasis River, the width of which was seven furlongs, the depth six fathoms, and the current violent. This was difficult to cross.
He questioned Phegeus about the country beyond the Indus River,1 and learned that there was a desert to traverse for twelve days, and then the river called Ganges, which was thirty-two furlongs in width2 and the deepest of all the Indian rivers. Beyond this in turn dwelt the peoples of the Tabraesians and the Gandaridae, whose king was Xandrames. He had twenty thousand cavalry, two hundred thousand infantry, two thousand chariots, and four thousand elephants equipped for war.3 Alexander doubted this information and sent for Porus, and asked him what was the truth of these reports. Porus assured the king that all the rest of the acount was quite correct, but that the king of the Gandaridae was an utterly common and undistinguished character, and was supposed to be the son of a barber. His father had been handsome and was greatly loved by the queen; when she had murdered her husband, the kingdom fell to him.4
Alexander saw that the campaign against the Gandaridae 




1The river (the Beas) has just been called the Hyphasis, and editors have tended to remove the term “Indus” here.2The same figure is given by Plutarch, Alexander, 62. 1. In Book 2. 37. 2, in a description based probably on Megasthenes, Diodorus gives the width of the river as thirty furlongs.3Plutarch, Alexander, 62. 2, gives the reported figures as follows: 80,000 horse, 200,000 foot, 8000 chariots, and 6000 elephants. In Book 2. 37. 3 also Diodorus gives the number of elephants as 4000.4Curtius, 9. 2. 2–7. The narrative of these events in Arrian is entirely different.389