Diodorus of Sicily
5θανάτου. ἦν δ᾿ ὁ σύμπας τῆς κατηγορίας λόγος
ὅτι οὗτοι παραίτιοι γεγένηνται μετὰ τὸν Λαμιακὸν
πόλεμον τῆς τε δουλείας τῇ πατρίδι καὶ τῆς καταλύσεως
τοῦ δήμου καὶ τῶν νόμων. ὡς δὲ τοῖς
ἀπολογουμένοις ὁ καιρὸς παρεδόθη τῆς ἀπολογίας,
ὁ μὲν Φωκίων ἤρξατο ποιεῖσθαι τὸν ὑπὲρ ἑαυτοῦ
λόγον, τὸ δὲ πλῆθος τοῖς θορύβοις ἐξέσεισε τὴν
ἀπολογίαν, ὥστ᾿ εἰς πολλὴν ἀπορίαν παραγενέσθαι
6τοὺς ἀπολογουμένους. λήξαντος δὲ τοῦ θορύβου
πάλιν ὁ μὲν Φωκίων ἀπελογεῖτο, ὁ δὲ ὄχλος κατεβόα
καὶ τὴν φωνὴν τοῦ κινδυνεύοντος ἐκώλυεν
ἐξακούεσθαι· τὸ γὰρ πλῆθος τῶν δημοτικῶν, ἀπωσμένον
τῆς πολιτείας καὶ παρ᾿ ἐλπίδας τετευχὸς
τῆς καθόδου, πικρῶς διέκειτο πρὸς τοὺς ἀφῃρημένους
τὴν αὐτονομίαν.
67. Βιαζομένου δὲ τοῦ Φωκίωνος καὶ πρὸς περίστασιν
ἀπεγνωσμένην ὑπὲρ τοῦ ζῆν ἀγωνιζομένου
οἱ μὲν πλησίον ὄντες ἤκουον τῶν τῆς ὑποθέσεως
δικαίων, οἱ δὲ μακρότερον διεστηκότες διὰ τὸ
μέγεθος τῆς κραυγῆς τῶν θορυβούντων ἤκουον μὲν
οὐδέν, αὐτὴν δὲ μόνην ἐθεώρουν τὴν τοῦ σώματος
κίνησιν, γινομένην ἐναγώνιον καὶ ποικίλην διὰ τὸ
2μέγεθος τοῦ κινδύνου. τέλος δὲ ἀπογνοὺς τὴν σωτηρίαν
ὁ Φωκίων ἀνεβόησε, δεόμενος αὐτοῦ μὲν
καταψηφίσασθαι τὸν θάνατον, τῶν δ᾿ ἄλλων φείδεσθαι.
ἀμεταθέτου δὲ τῆς τοῦ πλήθους ὁρμῆς καὶ
βίας οὔσης παρεπορεύοντό τινες τῶν φίλων συνηγορήσοντες
τῷ Φωκίωνι, ὧν τὰς μὲν ἀρχὰς τῶν
λόγων ἤκουον, ὁπότε δὲ προβαίνοντες φανεροὶ
καθίσταντο τὴν ἀπολογίαν διεξιόντες, ἐξεβάλλοντο
τοῖς θορύβοις καὶ ταῖς ἐναντιουμέναις κραυγαῖς.
194Book XVIII

political opponents of the prisoners demanded the 318 b.c. death penalty. The whole basis for the accusation was that after the Lamian War these men had been responsible for the enslavement of the fatherland and the overthrow of the democratic constitution and laws.1 When opportunity was given the defendants for their defence, Phocion began to deliver a plea in his own behalf, but the mob by its tumult rejected his defence, so that the defendants were left in utter helplessness. When the tumult subsided, Phocion tried again to defend himself, but the crowd shouted him down and prevented the voice of the accused from being fully heard; for the many supporters of democracy, who had been expelled from their citizenship and then, beyond their hopes, had been restored, were bitter against those who had deprived Athens of its independence.
67. As Phocion attempted to overcome the opposition and fought for his life in desperate circumstances, those who were near heard the justice of his plea, but those who were at a greater distance heard nothing because of the great uproar caused by the rioters and only beheld his gestures, which because of his great danger were impassioned and varied. Finally, abandoning hope of safety, Phocion shouted in a loud voice, begging them to condemn him to death but to spare the others. As the fury and violence of the mob remained unalterable, certain of Phocion’s friends kept coming forward to add their pleas to his. The mob would listen to their opening words, but when, as they went on, they made it clear that they were speaking for the defence, they would be driven away by the tumult and by the jeers that

1Cp. chap. 18.195