Diodorus of Sicily
2ἐλευθερίας ἀντέχεσθαι· ἀπεδείκνυε δὲ τὴν χώραν
αὐτοῖς πολλὰ συνεργήσειν οὖσαν δυσείσβολον1 καὶ
πλῆθος ἱκανὸν ἔχουσαν ἀνδρῶν εἰς κατάκτησιν τῆς
αὐτονομίας. ἐπαγγελλόμενος δὲ καθηγήσασθαι2 τοῦ
πολέμου καὶ τὸ πλῆθος πείσας ἀνέδειξεν ἑαυτὸν
βασιλέα. οὗτος μὲν οὖν στρατιώτας τε κατέγραφε3
καὶ πλῆθος ὅπλων κατεσκεύαζε καὶ τἄλλα φιλοτίμως
πρὸς τὴν κατεπείγουσαν χρείαν παρεσκευάζετο.
3Ἀλέξανδρος δὲ ὁρῶν τοὺς Μακεδόνας τέλος τῆς
στρατείας τὴν Δαρείου τελευτὴν τάττοντας καὶ
μετεώρους ὄντας πρὸς τὴν εἰς τὴν πατρίδα ἐπάνοδον
τούτους μὲν ἀθροίσας εἰς ἐκκλησίαν καὶ λόγοις
οἰκείοις παρορμήσας εὐπειθεῖς πρὸς τὴν ὑπολειπομένην
στρατείαν παρεσκεύασεν, τοὺς δ᾿ ἀπὸ τῶν
Ἑλληνίδων πόλεων συμμαχήσαντας συναγαγὼν καὶ
περὶ τῶν πεπραγμένων ἐπαινέσας ἀπέλυσε μὲν τῆς
στρατείας, ἐδωρήσατο δὲ τῶν μὲν ἱππέων ἑκάστῳ
τάλαντον, τῶν δὲ πεζῶν μνᾶς δέκα, χωρὶς δὲ τούτων
τούς τε ὀφειλομένους μισθοὺς ἀπέλυσε καὶ τοὺς
κατὰ τὴν ἀνακομιδὴν μέχρι τῆς εἰς τὰς πατρίδας
4καθόδου προσέθηκεν· τῶν δ᾿ ἑλομένων μένειν ἐν τῇ
στρατιᾷ τῇ μετὰ τοῦ βασιλέως ἔδωκεν ἑκάστῳ τρία
τάλαντα. μεγάλαις δὲ δωρεαῖς ἐτίμησε τοὺς στρατιώτας







1δυσέμβολον F.2καθηγήσεσθαι F.3κατέγραψε codd.; corrected by Dindorf.330Book XVII

dom. He pointed out that the nature of their 329/8 b.c. country would assist them very much, since the region was hard for an enemy to penetrate and furnished enough men for them to establish their independence. He proclaimed that he would take personal command of the war and designated himself king, with the approval of the people. Then he set to work enrolling soldiers, manufacturing an adequate stock of weapons, and busily making everything ready for the approaching time of need.1
Alexander, for his part, was aware that the Macedonians regarded Dareius’s death as the end of the campaign and were impatient to go home. He called them all to a meeting and, addressing them with effective arguments, made them willing to follow him in the part of the war which remained,2 but he assembled the allied troops from the Greek cities3 and praising them for their services released them from their military duty. He gave to each of the cavalry a talent and to each of the infantry ten minas.4 Besides this he paid them their wages up to date and added more to cover the period of their march back until they should return to their homes. To those who would remain with him in the royal army, he gave a bonus of three talents each. He treated the soldiers with such lavishness in part because of his


1Curtius, 6. 6. 13; Arrian, 3. 25. 3.2Curtius, 6. 2. 15–3. 18; Justin, 12. 3. 2–3; Plutarch,
Alexander, 47.3These were the troops furnished according to their de- cision by the members of the Hellenic League (Books 16. 89. 3; 17. 4. 9). Curtius (6. 2. 17), also, reports their dismissal at this time; their mission was complete with the destruction of Persepolis and the death of Dareius. Arrian (3. 19. 5) places their dismissal earlier, at Ecbatana.4Curtius (6. 2. 17) gives the same figures. These sums are much larger than those distributed at Babylon (chap. 64. 6). One may wonder whether Alexander could have been so generous to Greeks without taking care of the Macedonians equally well.331