Diodorus of Sicily
6Ὡς δ᾿ ἐπῆγον ἀλλήλοις, ὁ μὲν Μακεδὼν ἐκ συμμέτρου
διαστήματος λόγχην ἠκόντισεν, ὁ δ᾿ ἕτερος
βραχὺ παρεγκλίνας τὴν ἐπιφερομένην πληγὴν ἐξένευσεν.
εἶθ᾿ ὁ μὲν τὴν Μακεδονικὴν σάρισαν
προβεβλημένος ἐπεπορεύετο, ὁ δ᾿ ἐγγίσαντος αὐτοῦ
7τῷ ῥοπάλῳ πατάξας τὴν σάρισαν ἀπέθραυσεν. ὁ δὲ
δυσὶν ἐλαττώμασι περιπεσὼν ἐπὶ τὴν ἀπὸ τοῦ ξίφους
μάχην κατήντησεν. μέλλοντος δ᾿ αὐτοῦ σπᾶσθαι
τὴν μάχαιραν ἔφθασε προπηδήσας καὶ τῇ μὲν
εὐωνύμῳ κατέλαβε τὴν ἕλκουσαν τὸ ξίφος χεῖρα,
τῇ δ᾿ ἄλλῃ κινήσας ἐκ τῆς βάσεως τὸν ἀντίπαλον
8ὑπέσυρε τὰ σκέλη. ῥιφέντος δ᾿ ἐπὶ γῆν ἐπιβὰς ἐπὶ
τὸν τράχηλον τῷ ποδὶ καὶ τὸ ῥόπαλον ἀνατεινάμενος
ἀνέβλεψεν πρὸς τοὺς θεωμένους.
101. Ἀναβοήσαντος δὲ τοῦ πλήθους διά τε τὸ
παράδοξον καὶ τὴν ὑπερβολὴν τῆς ἀνδραγαθίας ὁ
μὲν βασιλεὺς προσέταξεν ἀφεῖναι καὶ τὴν θέαν διαλύσας
ἀπηλλάγη, δυσφορῶν ἐπὶ τῇ τοῦ Μακεδόνος
2ἥττῃ. ὁ δὲ Διώξιππος ἀφεὶς τὸν πεπτωκότα
καὶ περιβόητον νίκην ἀπενεγκάμενος ἀπῄει ταινιούμενος
ὑπὸ τῶν ὁμοφύλων, ὡς κοινὴν πᾶσι τοῖς
Ἕλλησι παρεσχημένος εὐδοξίαν. οὐ μὴν ἡ τύχη γε
εἴασεν ἐπὶ πολὺν χρόνον καυχήσασθαι τὸν ἄνδρα
τῇ νίκῃ.
3Ὅ τε γὰρ βασιλεὺς ἀλλοτριώτερον αἰεὶ διετέθη
πρὸς αὐτόν, οἵ τε φίλοι τοῦ Ἀλεξάνδρου καὶ
πάντες οἱ περὶ τὴν αὐλὴν Μακεδόνες, φθονοῦντες
αὐτοῦ τῇ ἀρετῇ, ἔπεισαν μὲν τὸν ἐπὶ τῆς διακονίας
τεταγμένον ὑποβαλεῖν ὑπὸ τὸ προσκεφάλαιον χρυσοῦν
ποτήριον, αὐτοὶ δὲ κατὰ τὸν ἑξῆς πότον
καταιτιασάμενοι κλοπὴν καὶ ποτήριον εὑρηκέναι
προσποιηθέντες εἰς αἰσχύνην καὶ ἀδοξίαν ἤγαγον
408Book XVII
As they approached each other, the Macedonian 326/5 b.c. flung his javelin from a proper distance, but the other inclined his body slightly and avoided its impact. Then the Macedonian poised his long lance and charged, but the Greek, when he came within reach, struck the spear with his club and shattered it. After these two defeats, Coragus was reduced to continuing the battle with his sword, but as he reached for it, the other leaped upon him and seized his swordhand with his left, while with his right hand the Greek upset the Macedonian’s balance and made him lose his footing. As he fell to the earth, Dioxippus placed his foot upon his neck and, holding his club aloft, looked to the spectators.
101. The crowd was in an uproar because of the stunning quickness and superiority of the man’s skill, and the king signed to let Coragus go, then broke up the gathering and left. He was plainly annoyed at the defeat of the Macedonian. Dioxippus released his fallen opponent, and left the field winner of a resounding victory and bedecked with ribands by his compatriots, as having brought a common glory to all Greeks. Fortune, however, did not allow him to boast of his victory for long.
The king continued more and more hostile to him, and Alexander’s friends and all the other Macedonians about the court, jealous of the accomplishment, persuaded one of the butlers to secrete a golden cup under his pillow1; then in the course of the next symposium they accused him of theft, and pretending to find the cup, placed Dioxippus in a shameful and

1That is to say, the pillow upon his banqueting couch.409