Diodorus of Sicily

τῆς δυνάμεως ἀπολέσας ἐπὶ τῆς Λιβύης μικρῷ
2μέρει τοὺς προνενικηκότας κατεπολέμησεν. καὶ
τὰς μὲν ἐν τῇ Σικελίᾳ πόλεις ἁπάσας ἀποβαλὼν
πρὸς Συρακούσσαις ἐπολιορκεῖτο, κατὰ δὲ τὴν
Λιβύην πασῶν τῶν ἄλλων πόλεων ἐγκρατὴς γενόμενος
εἰς πολιορκίαν κατέκλεισε τοὺς Καρχηδονίους,
τῆς τύχης ὥσπερ ἐπίτηδες ἐπιδεικνυμένης τὴν
3ἰδίαν δύναμιν ἐπὶ τῶν ἀπηλπισμένων. εἰς τηλικαύτην
δ᾿ ὑπεροχὴν ἐλθόντος αὐτοῦ καὶ τὸν Ὀφέλλαν
φονεύσαντος, ὄντα φίλον καὶ ξένον, φανερῶς ἐπεσημήνατο
τὸ δαιμόνιον ὡς διὰ τὴν εἰς τοῦτον παρανομίαν
τῶν ὕστερον αὐτῷ γεγενημένων τὰ θεῖον1
ἐπιστήσαι· τοῦ γὰρ αὐτοῦ μηνὸς καὶ τῆς αὐτῆς
ἡμέρας Ὀφέλλαν ἀνελὼν παρέλαβε τὴν δύναμιν
καὶ πάλιν τοὺς υἱοὺς ἀπολέσας ἀπέβαλε τὸ στρατόπεδον.
4καὶ τὸ πάντων ἰδιώτατον, ὁ θεὸς ὥσπερ
ἀγαθὸς νομοθέτης διπλῆν ἔλαβε παρ᾿ αὐτοῦ τὴν
κόλασιν· ἕνα γὰρ φίλον ἀδίκως φονεύσας δυεῖν υἱῶν
ἐστερήθη, τῶν μετ᾿ Ὀφέλλα παραγενομένων προσενεγκάντων
τὰς χεῖρας τοῖς νεανίσκοις. ταῦτα μὲν
οὖν ἡμῖν εἰρήσθω πρὸς τοὺς καταφρονοῦντας τῶν
τοιούτων.
71. Ὁ δ᾿ Ἀγαθοκλῆς ἐπειδὴ διεκομίσθη ταχέως
ἐκ τῆς Λιβύης εἰς τὴν Σικελίαν, μεταπεμψάμενος
μέρος τῆς δυνάμεως παρῆλθεν εἰς τὴν τῶν Αἰγεσταίων
πόλιν οὖσαν σύμμαχον. ἀπορούμενος δὲ
χρημάτων εἰσφέρειν ἠνάγκαζε τοὺς εὐπόρους τὸ
πλεῖον μέρος τῆς ὑπάρξεως, οὔσης τῆς πόλεως τότε
2μυριάνδρου. πολλῶν δ᾿ ἐπὶ τούτοις ἀγανακτούντων
καὶ συντρεχόντων αἰτιασάμενος τοὺς Αἰγεσταίους
1τὴν θωὴν Fischer.330Book XX

part of his army, in Libya with a small portion of 307 b.c. his forces he defeated those who had previously been victorious. And after he had lost all the cities in Sicily, he was besieged at Syracuse; but in Libya, after becoming master of all the other cities, he confined the Carthaginians by a siege, Fortune, as if of set purpose, displaying her peculiar power when a situation has become hopeless. After he had come to such a position of superiority and had murdered Ophelias1 although he was a friend and a guest, the divine power clearly showed that it established through his impious acts against Ophelias a portent of that which later befell him; for in the same month and on the same day on which he murdered Ophelias and took his army, he caused the death of his own sons and lost his own army. And what is most peculiar of all, the god like a good lawgiver exacted a double punishment from him; for when he had unjustly slain one friend, he was deprived of two sons, those who had been with Ophelias laying violent hands upon the young men. Let these things, then, be said as our answer to those who scorn such matters.
71. When with all speed Agathocles had crossed from Libya into Sicily, he summoned a part of his army and went to the city of Segesta, which was an ally. Because he was in need of money, he forced the well-to-do to deliver to him the greater part of their property, the city at that time having a population of about ten thousand. Since many were angry at this and were holding meetings, he charged the



1Cp. chap. 42.331