Diodorus of Sicily

ἡγησάμενοι μέχρι τῶν καιρῶν τούτων ὑπῆρχον
6ἀνίκητοι. ὁ δ᾿ οὖν Δημήτριος παρακαλέσας τὰ
πλήθη τοῖς οἰκείοις λόγοις καὶ δωρεάς τε δώσειν
κατὰ τὴν ἀξίαν καὶ τὰ λάφυρα συγχωρήσειν ἐπαγγειλάμενος
ἐξέταξε τὴν δύναμιν εἰς τὴν μάχην.
82. Ἐπὶ μὲν οὖν τὸ λαιὸν κέρας ἔταξε,1 καθ᾿ ὃ
τὸν κίνδυνον αὐτὸς ἤμελλε ποιεῖσθαι, πρώτους μὲν
τοὺς περὶ αὐτὸν ἱππεῖς ἐπιλέκτους διακοσίους, ἐν
οἷς ἦσαν οἵ τε ἄλλοι φίλοι πάντες καὶ Πίθων
ὁ συνεστρατευμένος μὲν Ἀλεξάνδρῳ, συγκαθιστάμενος
δὲ ὑπ᾿ Ἀντιγόνου στρατηγὸς καὶ τῶν ὅλων
2μέτοχος. πρόταγμα δὲ τρεῖς εἴλας ἱππέων ἔταξεν
καὶ πλαγιοφυλάκους τὰς ἴσας καὶ χωρὶς ἔξω τοῦ
κέρατος ἀπολελυμένας τρεῖς Ταραντίνων, ὥστ᾿ εἶναι
τοὺς περὶ τὸ σῶμα τεταγμένους ἱππεῖς ξυστοφόρους
μὲν πεντακοσίους Ταραντίνους δὲ ἑκατόν.
3ἑξῆς δ᾿ ἔταξε τῶν ἱππέων τοὺς καλουμένους
μὲν ἑταίρους, ὄντας δὲ τὸν ἀριθμὸν ὀκτακοσίους,
μετὰ δὲ τούτους παντοδαποὺς ἱππεῖς οὐκ ἐλάττους
τῶν χιλίων πεντακοσίων. πρὸ παντὸς δὲ τοῦ κέρατος
ἔστησε τῶν ἐλεφάντων τριάκοντα καὶ τὰ
διαστήματα αὐτῶν ἐπλήρωσε τοῖς ψιλικοῖς τάγμασιν,
ὧν ἦσαν ἀκοντισταὶ μὲν καὶ τοξόται χίλιοι,
4σφενδονῆται δὲ Πέρσαι πεντακόσιοι. τὸ μὲν οὖν
εὐώνυμον κέρας οὕτω κατασκευάσας διενοεῖτο
τούτῳ κρίνειν2 τὴν μάχην. ἐχομένην δ᾿ ἔστησε τὴν
τῶν πεζῶν φάλαγγα, συνεστῶσαν ἐξ ἀνδρῶν μυρίων
χιλίων· τούτων δὲ ἦσαν Μακεδόνες μὲν δισχίλιοι,


1ἔταξε editors: ἐξέταξε.2κρίνειν Sintenis: κρινεῖν, κινεῖν.58Book XIX

often led armies independently, were unconquered 312 b.c. up to this time. At all events, Demetrius, after encouraging the crowd with words suitable to the occasion and promising to give gifts to them as they were deserved and to yield the booty to the soldiers, drew up his army for the battle.
82. On the left wing, where he himself was going to take part in the battle, he placed first the two hundred selected horsemen of his guard, among whom were all his other friends and, in particular, Pithon, who had campaigned with Alexander and had been made by Antigonus co-general and partner in the whole undertaking.1 As an advanced guard he drew up three troops of cavalry and the same number as guards on the flank, and in addition to these and stationed separately outside the wing, three troops of Tarentines2; thus those that were drawn up about his person amounted to five hundred horsemen armed with the lance and one hundred Tarentines. Next he posted those of the cavalry who were called the Companions, eight hundred in number, and after them no less than fifteen hundred horsemen of all kinds. In front of the whole wing he stationed thirty of his elephants, and he filled the intervals between them with units of light-armed men, of whom a thousand were javelin-throwers and archers and five hundred were Persian slingers. In this fashion then he formed the left wing, with which he intended to decide the battle. Next to it he drew up the infantry phalanx composed of eleven thousand men, of whom two thousand were Macedonians,


1Cp. chap. 69. 1 and note.2Light cavalry armed with javelins. The origin of the name and the connection, if any, with Tarentum, are unknown. Cp. chap. 29. 2.59