Diodorus of Sicily

Πελοπόννησον, ἔχων μεθ᾿ ἑαυτοῦ τὸν ἀδελφὸν
Μεγακλῆν καὶ Ἡρακλείδην1 τὸν ἐπὶ τῶν στρατιωτῶν
5τεταγμένον ὑπὸ τοῦ τυράννου. καταπλεύσας
δ᾿ εἰς τὴν Κόρινθον τοὺς μὲν Κορινθίους ἠξίου
συνεπιλαβέσθαι τῆς ἐλευθερώσεως2 τῶν Συρακοσίων,
αὐτὸς δὲ μισθοφόρους συνῆγε καὶ πανοπλίας
συνήθροιζε. ταχὺ δὲ πολλῶν ὑπακουόντων πανοπλίας
τε παρεσκευάζετο καὶ μισθοφόρους συχνούς,
καὶ φορτηγοὺς δύο ναῦς μισθωσάμενος τά τε ὅπλα
καὶ τοὺς μισθοφόρους ἐνθέμενος αὐτὸς μὲν ταύτας
τὰς φορτίδας ἔχων ἐξέπλευσεν ἐκ Ζακύνθου τῆς
πρὸς Κεφαλληνίαν εἰς τὴν Σικελίαν, Ἡρακλείδην3
δὲ ἀπέλιπεν τριήρεις τινὰς καὶ ἑτέρας φορτηγοὺς4
ἄξοντα κατόπιν εἰς τὰς Συρακούσσας.
7. Ἅμα δὲ τούτοις πραττομένοις Ἀνδρόμαχος ὁ
Ταυρομενίτης, Τιμαίου μὲν τοῦ τὰς ἱστορίας συγγράψαντος
πατὴρ ὤν, πλούτῳ δὲ καὶ ψυχῆς λαμπρότητι
διαφέρων ἤθροισε τοὺς ἐκ τῆς Νάξου τῆς
κατασκαφείσης ὑπὸ Διονυσίου περιλειφθέντας. οἰκίσας
δὲ τὸν ὑπὲρ τῆς Νάξου λόφον τὸν ὀνομαζόμενον
Ταῦρον καὶ μείνας κατ᾿ αὐτὸν πλείω χρόνον
ἀπὸ τῆς ἐπὶ τοῦ Ταύρου μονῆς ὠνόμασε Ταυρομένιον.






1So Simson and Wesseling (cp. chap. 16. 2 and Plutarch,
Dion, 12, 32; Nepos, Dion, 5): Χαρικλείδην.2Fischer (cp. chap. 10. 3): ἐλευθερίας.3Ἡρακλείδη PX, Χαρικλείδην or -δη cet.4So MSS.; Fischer conjectures τριήρεις εἴκοσι (cp. chap.
16. 2) καί τινας ἑτέρας φ.252Book XVI

then escaped from Sicily to the Peloponnese in the 358/7 b.c. company of his brother Megacles and of Heracleides who had been appointed commandant of the garrison by the tyrant. When he landed at Corinth, he besought the Corinthians1 to collaborate with him in setting free the Syracusans, and he himself began to gather mercenary troops and to collect suits of armour.2 Soon many gave ear to his pleas and he gradually accumulated large supplies of armour and many mercenaries,3 then, hiring two merchantmen, he loaded on board arms and men, while he himself with these transports sailed from Zacynthus, which is near Cephallenia, to Sicily, but he left Heracleides behind to bring up later some triremes as well as merchantmen to Syracuse.
7. While these things were going on, Andromachus of Tauromenium,4 who was the father of Timaeus, the author of the Histories, and distinguished for his wealth and nobility of spirit, gathered together the men who had survived the razing of Naxos by Dionysius. Having settled the hill above Naxos called Tauros and remained there a considerable time, he called it Tauromenium from his “remaining on




1Corinth was probably selected, not only because of its
favourable location, but because it was the mother-city of Syracuse and very possibly favoured the oligarchy Dion planned to set up (see Plutarch, Dion, 53).2Dion spent about ten years in Greece, 366–357 (Hack-forth, Cambridge Ancient History, 6.275), in close touch with the Academy. For preparations see Nepos, Dion, 5.3Diodorus says 1000 (chap. 9. 5), to which if 1500 under Heracleides (chap. 16. 2) are added the number 3000 is approximated (chap. 17. 3 and Anaximenes, De Rhetorica ad Alexandrum, 8. 3. 1429 b). For other details of the expedition see Plutarch, Dion, 22–24. For a critical account see Beloch, Griechische Geschichte2, 3. 1. 257 and note 3, followed by Hackforth, Cambridge Ancient History, 6. 277.4See chap. 68. 8 and Plutarch, Timoleon, 10. 4.253