Diodorus of Sicily

ἐπιβουλεύειν αὐτῷ δειναῖς περιέβαλε συμφοραῖς τὴν
πόλιν· τοὺς μὲν γὰρ ἀπορωτάτους προαγαγὼν ἐκτὸς
τῆς πόλεως παρὰ τὸν Σκάμανδρον ποταμὸν
ἀπέσφαξεν, τοὺς δὲ δοκοῦντας οὐσίαν κεκτῆσθαι
μείζονα βασανίζων ἠνάγκαζε λέγειν ὁπόσα ἔχων
τις τυγχάνει χρήματα, καὶ τοὺς μὲν αὐτῶν ἐτρόχιζε
τοὺς δὲ εἰς τοὺς καταπέλτας ἐνδεσμεύων κατετόξευεν,
ἐνίοις δ᾿ ἀστραγάλους προστιθεὶς βιαιότερον
3δειναῖς ἀλγηδόσι περιέβαλλεν. ἐξεῦρε δὲ καὶ
ἑτέραν τιμωρίαν ἐμφερῆ τῷ Φαλάριδος ταύρῳ· κατεσκεύασε
γὰρ κλίνην χαλκῆν ἀνθρωπίνου σώματος
τύπον ἔχουσαν καὶ καθ᾿ ἕκαστον μέρος κλεισὶ διειλημμένην,
εἰς ταύτην δ᾿ ἐναρμόζων τοὺς βασανιζομένους
ὑπέκαιε ζῶντας, τούτῳ διαφερούσης τῆς
κατασκευῆς ταύτης παρὰ τὸν ταῦρον, τῷ καὶ θεωρεῖσθαι
4τοὺς ἐν ταῖς ἀνάγκαις ἀπολλυμένους. τῶν
δὲ γυναικῶν τῶν εὐπόρων τινῶν μὲν καρκίνοις
σιδηροῖς τὰ σφυρὰ πιέζων συνέτεινε, τινῶν δὲ τοὺς
τιτθοὺς ἀπέτεμνεν, ταῖς δ᾿ ἐγκύοις πλίνθους ἐπὶ
τὴν ὀσφῦν ἐπιτιθεὶς τὸ ἔμβρυον ἀπὸ τοῦ βάρους
ἐξέθλιβεν. τούτῳ δὲ τῷ τρόπῳ τὰ χρήματα πάντα
τοῦ τυράννου ζητοῦντος καὶ μεγάλου φόβου τὴν
πόλιν ἐπέχοντος τινὲς μὲν αὑτοὺς συγκατέκαυσαν
5ταῖς οἰκίαις, τινὲς δὲ ἀγχόνῃ τὸ ζῆν ἐξέλιπον. ἡ
μὲν οὖν Αἴγεστα τυχοῦσα μιᾶς ἡμέρας ἀτυχοῦς ἡβηδὸν
ἐθανατώθη. ὁ δ᾿ Ἀγαθοκλῆς παρθένους μὲν
καὶ παῖδας εἰς τὴν Ἰταλίαν διακομίσας ἀπέδοτο τοῖς
Βρεττίοις, τῆς δὲ πόλεως οὐδὲ τὴν προσηγορίαν
332Book XX

people of Segesta with conspiring against him and 307 b.c. visited the city with terrible disasters. For instance, the poorest of the people he brought to a place outside the city beside the river Scamander and slaughtered them; but those who were believed to have more property he examined under torture and compelled each to tell him how much wealth he had; and some of them he broke on the wheel, others he placed bound in the catapults and shot forth, and by applying knucklebones with violence to some, he caused them severe pain.1 He also invented another torture similar to the bull of Phalaris: that is, he prepared a brazen bed that had the form of a human body and was surrounded on every side by bars; on this he fixed those who were being tortured and roasted them alive, the contrivance being superior to the bull in this respect, that those who were perishing in anguish were visible. As for the wealthy women, he tortured some of them by crushing their ankles with iron pincers, he cut off the breasts of others, and by placing bricks on the lower part of the backs of those who were pregnant, he forced the expulsion of the foetus by the pressure. While the tyrant in this way was seeking all the wealth, great panic prevailed throughout the city, some burning themselves up along with their houses, and others gaining release from life by hanging. Thus Segesta, encountering a single day of disaster, suffered the loss of all her men from youth upward. Agathocles then took the maidens and children across to Italy and sold them to the Bruttians, leaving not even the name

1It is possible that the ἀστράγαλοι are whips studded with bits of bone. Cp. Lucian, Ass, 38; Plutarch, Moralia, 1127 c.333