Diodorus of Sicily

τοὺς Ἀχαιοὺς καί τινας ἄλλας πόλεις προσηγάγετο,1
Δύμην δὲ καὶ Ναύπακτον καὶ Καλυδῶνα
φρουρουμένην ὑπ᾿ Ἀχαιῶν ἠλευθέρωσεν. ἐστράτευσαν
δὲ καὶ εἰς Θετταλίαν Βοιωτοί, καὶ Πελοπίδαν
ἐκομίσαντο παρ᾿ Ἀλεξάνδρου τοῦ Φερῶν
3τυράννου. Φλιασίοις δὲ πολεμουμένοις ὑπ᾿ Ἀργείων
Χάρης ὑπ᾿ Ἀθηναίων πεμφθεὶς στρατηγὸς
μετὰ δυνάμεως ἐβοήθησε2· νικήσας δὲ τοὺς Ἀργείους
δυσὶ μάχαις καὶ τὴν ἀσφάλειαν περιποιήσας
τοῖς Φλιασίοις ἐπανῆλθεν εἰς τὰς Ἀθήνας.
76. Τοῦ δ᾿ ἐνιαυσίου3 χρόνου διεληλυθότος Ἀθήνησι
μὲν ἦρχε Κηφισόδωρος, ἐν Ῥώμῃ δ᾿ ἀντὶ
τῶν ὑπάτων χιλιάρχους ὁ δῆμος τέσσαρας κατέστησε,
Λεύκιον Φούριον, Παῦλον4 Μάλλιον, Σερούιον
Σουλπίκιον, Σερούιον Κορνήλιον. ἐπὶ δὲ
τούτων Θεμίσων ὁ Ἐρετρίας τύραννος Ὠρωπὸν
κατελάβετο. ταύτην δὲ τὴν πόλιν οὖσαν Ἀθηναίων
παραλόγως ἀπέβαλεν· τῶν γὰρ Ἀθηναίων
στρατευσάντων ἐπ᾿ αὐτὸν καὶ πολὺ ταῖς δυνάμεσιν
ὑπερεχόντων, οἱ Θηβαῖοι βοηθήσαντες αὐτῷ καὶ
παραλαβόντες ἐν παρακαταθήκῃ τὴν πόλιν οὐκ
ἀπέδωκαν.
2Ἅμα δὲ τούτοις πραττομένοις Κῷοι μετῴκησαν
εἰς τὴν νῦν οἰκουμένην πόλιν καὶ κατεσκεύασαν
αὐτὴν ἀξιόλογον· πλῆθός τε γὰρ ἀνδρῶν εἰς ταύτην
ἠθροίσθη καὶ τείχη πολυτελῆ κατεσκευάσθη καὶ
λιμὴν ἀξιόλογος. ἀπὸ δὲ τούτων τῶν χρόνων αἰεὶ




1προσηγάγετο Wesseling: προσήγαγεν.2τοῖς Φλιασίοις πολιορκουμένοις after ἐβοήθησε deleted by
Madvig, whom Vogel follows.3So F, Dindorf, Vogel: ἐνιαυσιαίου Vulgate, Bekker.4Αὖλον Rhodoman (cp. Livy, 6. 36. 3).160Book XV

Achaeans1 and some cities besides, and liberated 367/6 b.c. Dymê, Naupactus, and Calydon, which were held by a garrison of the Achaeans. The Boeotians invaded Thessaly also and released Pelopidas2 from the custody of Alexander, tyrant of Pherae. And to the Phliasians upon whom the Argives were waging war, Chares3 brought assistance, having been sent with an army under his command by the Athenians; he defeated the Argives in two battles, and after securing the position of the Phliasians, returned to Athens.
76. When the year ended, Cephisodorus was archon 366/5 b.c. at Athens, and at Rome the people elected four military tribunes with consular power, Lucius Furius, Paulus Manlius, Servius Sulpicius, and Servius Cornelius. During their term of office, Themison,4 tyrant of Eretria, seized Oropus. But this city, which belonged to Athens, he quite unexpectedly lost; for when the Athenians took the field against him with far superior forces, the Thebans, who had come to aid him and had taken over from him the city for safekeeping, did not give it back.
While these things were going on, the Coans transferred their abode to the city they now inhabit and made it a notable place5; for a large population was gathered into it, and costly walls and a considerable harbour were constructed. From this time on its





1See Xenophon, Hell. 7. 1. 41 f., who places this march after the peace conference (chap. 76. 3 infra), probably wrongly (Cary, Cambridge Ancient History, 6. 94–95).2See Plutarch, Pelopidas, 29. 2–6. Following this rescue Pelopidas went to Susa as envoy from Thebes.3See Xenophon, Hell. 7. 2. 18 ff. under year 366.4See Xenophon, Hell. 7. 4. 1; Demosthenes, 18. 99; Aeschines, On the Embassy, 164; Against Ctesiphon, 85.5See Strabo, 14. 2. 19.161