Diodorus of Sicily

ὄρος, τῶν δὲ Ἀργείων ἀποχωρησάντων ἐπανῆλθον
εἰς τὴν πατρίδα. μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα κατὰ τὸν Ἰλιακὸν
πόλεμον ἐκστρατευσάντων τῶν Θηβαίων εἰς
τὴν Ἀσίαν οἱ καταλειφθέντες ἐξέπεσον μετὰ τῶν
8ἄλλων Βοιωτῶν ὑπὸ Πελασγῶν. οὐκ ὀλίγοις δὲ
μετὰ ταῦτα περιπεσόντες συμπτώμασι μόγις μετὰ
τετάρτην γενεὰν κατὰ τὸν γενόμενον ἐπὶ τῶν κοράκων
χρησμὸν ἀπῆλθον εἰς τὴν Βοιωτίαν καὶ τὰς
Θήβας κατῴκησαν. ἀπὸ δὲ τούτων τῶν χρόνων
διαμενούσης τῆς πόλεως ἐπ᾿ ἔτη σχεδὸν ὀκτακόσια
καὶ τὸ μὲν πρῶτον τῶν Θηβαίων τοῦ παρ᾿ αὑτῶν1
ἔθνους προστάντων, μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα τῆς τῶν Ἑλλήνων
ἡγεμονίας ἀμφισβητησάντων Ἀλέξανδρος ὁ
Φιλίππου κατὰ κράτος ἐκπολιορκήσας κατέσκαψεν.
54. Εἰκοστῷ δ᾿ ἔτει ὕστερον Κάσανδρος φιλοδοξῆσαι
βουλόμενος καὶ πείσας τοὺς Βοιωτοὺς
ἀνέστησε τὴν πόλιν τοῖς διασωζομένοις τῶν Θηβαίων.
2συνεπελάβοντο δὲ καὶ τῶν Ἑλληνίδων
πόλεων τοῦ συνοικισμοῦ πολλαὶ διά τε τὸν πρὸς
τοὺς ἠτυχηκότας ἔλεον καὶ διὰ τὴν δόξαν τῆς
πόλεως· Ἀθηναῖοι μὲν γὰρ τὸ πολὺ μέρος τοῦ
τείχους ἀνέστησαν καὶ τῶν ἄλλων οἱ μὲν ᾠκοδόμησαν
κατὰ δύναμιν, οἱ δὲ καὶ χρήματα πρὸς
τὰς κατεπειγούσας χρείας ἀπέστειλαν οὐ μόνον
τῶν ἐκ τῆς Ἑλλάδος, ἀλλὰ καὶ Σικελίας, ἔτι δ᾿
3Ἰταλίας. Θηβαῖοι μὲν οὖν τοῦτον τὸν τρόπον
ἐκομίσαντο τὴν πατρίδα.
1αὑτῶν Post: αὐτῶν.378Book XIX

phosium,1 but after the Argives had departed they 316 b.c. returned to their native city. After that, when the Thebans had gone to Asia for the Trojan War, those who were left behind were expelled along with the rest of the Boeotians by Pelasgians.2 Thereafter they met with many misfortunes, and only with difficulty in the fourth generation according to the prophecy of the ravens did they return to Boeotia and re-establish Thebes.3 From that time the city persisted for nearly eight hundred years, the Thebans at first becoming the leaders of their own people and later disputing for the leadership of the Greeks,4 until Alexander, son of Philip, captured the city by storm and destroyed it.
54. In the twentieth year thereafter Cassander in his desire for glory, after first obtaining the consent of the Boeotians, rebuilt the city for those of the Thebans who survived. Many of the Greek cities shared in the resettlement both because of their pity for the unfortunate and because of the glory of the city. The Athenians, for example, rebuilt the greater part of the wall, and of the other Greeks, not alone from Greece itself but from Sicily and Italy as well, some erected buildings to the extent of their ability, and others sent money for the pressing needs. In this way the Thebans recovered their city.
1Both are near Haliartus on the south shore of the Copaic
Lake. Cp. Strabo, 9. 2. 27, 35. In Book 4. 67. 1 we are
told that the Cadmeans, leaving Tilphossaeum (sic), made a successful invasion of Doris, where some of them settled, the rest returning to Thebes; but Herodotus (5. 61) has these Theban fugitives take refuge among the Encheleans in Illyria (cp. § 5 above).2Cp. Strabo, 9. 2. 25, 29; Thucydides, 1. 12. 3.3The scholiast on Aristophanes, Clouds, 133, gives another version: on being driven from home by Thracians, the Thebans were told to settle where they saw a white raven.4For the Theban hegemony of Greece cp. Book 15. 25–94 passim.379