Diodorus of Sicily

καταριθμήσας τοιαύτης ἔτυχε τῆς τοῦ βίου
καταστροφῆς, ἄρξας ἔτη τέσσαρα πρὸς τοῖς εἴκοσι.
2δοκεῖ δ᾿ οὗτος ὁ βασιλεὺς ἐλαχίστας μὲν εἰς τὴν
μοναρχίαν ἀφορμὰς παρειληφέναι, μεγίστην δὲ τῶν
παρ᾿ Ἕλλησι μοναρχιῶν κατακτήσασθαι, ηὐξηκέναι
δὲ τὴν ἡγεμονίαν οὐχ οὕτω διὰ τῆς ἐν τοῖς
ὅπλοις ἀνδραγαθίας ὡς διὰ τῆς ἐν τοῖς λόγοις
3ὁμιλίας καὶ φιλοφροσύνης. φασὶ δὲ καὶ αὐτὸν τὸν
Φίλιππον σεμνύνεσθαι μᾶλλον ἐπὶ τῇ στρατηγικῇ
συνέσει καὶ τοῖς διὰ τῆς ὁμιλίας ἐπιτεύγμασιν
4ἤπερ ἐπὶ τῇ κατὰ τὰς μάχας1 ἀνδρείᾳ· τῶν μὲν
γὰρ κατὰ τοὺς ἀγῶνας κατορθωμάτων μετέχειν
ἅπαντας τοὺς στρατευομένους, τῶν δὲ διὰ τῆς
ὁμιλίας γινομένων ἐπιτευγμάτων αὐτὸν μόνον λαμβάνειν
τὴν ἐπιγραφήν.
5Ἡμεῖς δ᾿ ἐπειδὴ πάρεσμεν ἐπὶ τὴν Φιλίππου
τελευτήν, ταύτην μὲν τὴν βίβλον αὐτοῦ περιγράψομεν
κατὰ τὴν ἐν ἀρχῇ πρόθεσιν, τῆς δ᾿ ἐχομένης
ἀρχὴν2 τὴν Ἀλεξάνδρου παράληψιν τῆς βασιλείας
ποιησάμενοι πειρασόμεθα περιλαβεῖν ἁπάσας αὐτοῦ
τὰς πράξεις ἐν μιᾷ βίβλῳ.
1μάχας Reiske: συμμαχίας.2τὴν ἀρχὴν PX; ἀρχῆς cet. Hertlein deleted τὴν.102Book XVI

He had ruled twenty-four years. He is known to 386/5 b.c. fame as one who with but the slenderest resources to support his claim to a throne won for himself the greatest empire in the Greek world, while the growth of his position was not due so much to his prowess in arms as to his adroitness and cordiality in diplomacy. Philip himself is said to have been prouder of his grasp of strategy and his diplomatic successes than of his valour in actual battle. Every member of his army shared in the successes which were won in the field but he alone got credit for victories won through negotiation.1
Now that we have come to the death of Philip, we shall conclude this book here according to our original statement.2 Beginning the next one with Alexander’s accession as king we shall try to include all of his career in one book.
1Diodorus mentions none of the suspicion which attached to Olympias and Alexander concerning the assassination of Philip, and his judgement on Philip is more favourable than that of others. Cp. Justin, 9. 7–8, and for the suspicion, Plutarch, Alexander, 9–10; Arrian, 3. 6. 5.2Stated in chap, 1, 1–3.103