Diodorus of Sicily

Καλλαντιανῶν πόλιν περιστρατοπεδεύσας συνεστήσατο
πολιορκίαν, φιλοτιμούμενος ἐκ παντὸς τρόπου
6κολάσαι τοὺς αἰτίους τῆς ἀποστάσεως. περὶ
ταῦτα δ᾿ ὄντος αὐτοῦ παρῆσάν τινες ἀπαγγέλλοντες
ὅτι δύο δυνάμεις ἀπέσταλκεν Ἀντίγονος ἐπὶ βοήθειαν
τοῖς Καλλαντιανοῖς, τὴν μὲν πεζῇ, τὴν δὲ
κατὰ θάλασσαν, καὶ διότι τῷ μὲν στόλῳ Λύκων ὁ
στρατηγὸς παραπέπλευκεν εἰς τὸν Πόντον, Παυσανίας
δ᾿ ἔχων οὐκ ὀλίγους στρατιώτας περὶ τὸ
7καλούμενον Ἱερὸν κατεστρατοπέδευσεν. ἐφ᾿ οἷς ὁ
Λυσίμαχος διαταραχθεὶς ἐπὶ μὲν τῆς πολιορκίας
ἀπέλιπεν τοὺς ἱκανοὺς στρατιώτας, τὸ δὲ κράτιστον
τῆς δυνάμεως ἀναλαβὼν αὐτὸς ἠπείγετο, σπεύδων
8συνάψαι τοῖς πολεμίοις. παραγενόμενος δὲ ἐπὶ τὴν
κατὰ τὸν Αἷμον ὑπερβολὴν εὗρε Σεύθην τὸν βασιλέα
τῶν Θρᾳκῶν ἀφεστηκότα πρὸς Ἀντίγονον μετὰ
πολλῶν στρατιωτῶν φυλάσσοντα τὰς παρόδους.
9συνάψας δ᾿ αὐτῷ μάχην ἐφ᾿ ἱκανὸν χρόνον τῶν τε
ἰδίων ἀπέβαλεν οὐκ ὀλίγους καὶ τῶν πολεμίων
10ἀνελὼν παμπληθεῖς ἐβιάσατο τοὺς βαρβάρους. ἐπιφανεὶς
δὲ καὶ τοῖς περὶ τὸν Παυσανίαν καὶ καταλαβὼν
αὐτοὺς εἰς δυσχωρίας συμπεφευγότας ταύτας
τ᾿ ἐξεπολιόρκησε καὶ Παυσανίαν ἀνελὼν τῶν στρατιωτῶν
οὓς μὲν ἐλύτρωσεν, οὓς δὲ εἰς τὰς ἰδίας
τάξεις διένειμεν.
Τὰ μὲν οὖν περὶ Λυσίμαχον ἐν τούτοις ἦν.
74. Ὁ δ᾿ Ἀντίγονος ἀποτυχὼν ταύτης τῆς ἐπιβολῆς
ἐξέπεμψε Τελεσφόρον εἰς Πελοπόννησον,
δοὺς αὐτῷ πεντήκοντα ναῦς καὶ στρατιώτας τοὺς


34Book XIX

Then, encamping about the city of the Callantians, 313 b.c. he laid siege to it, since he was very eager to chastise in every way those who were responsible for the revolt. While he was thus engaged, there came certain men bringing word that Antigonus had sent two expeditions to the support of the Callantians, one by land and one by sea, that the general Lycon with the fleet had sailed through into the Pontus, and that Pausanias with a considerable number of soldiers was in camp at a place called Hieron.1 Perturbed at this, Lysimachus left an adequate body of soldiers to carry on the siege2; but with the strongest part of the army he himself pushed on, intent on making contact with the enemy. When, however, he reached the pass over the Haemus, he found Seuthes, the Thracian king, who had gone over to Antigonus, guarding the crossing with many soldiers. Engaging him in a battle that lasted a considerable time, Lysimachus lost not a few of his own men; but he destroyed a vast number of the enemy and overpowered the barbarians. He also came suddenly upon the forces of Pausanias, catching them after they had taken refuge in a place difficult of access. This he captured; and, after slaying Pausanias, he dismissed some of the soldiers on receiving ransom and enrolled others in his own army.
This was the situation of Lysimachus.
74. Antigonus, after he had failed in this undertaking, dispatched Telesphorus3 into the Peloponnesus, giving him fifty ships and a suitable force of


1i.e. the Temple, or Sacred Place. The exact location
is not known.2We do not know the outcome of the siege. In 310 b.c. the Callantians are still resisting Lysimachus although hard pressed (Book 20. 25. 1).3Probably a nephew of Antigonus (Diogenes Laertius, 5. 79; cp. Beloch, Griechische Geschichte2, 4. 1. 122, note 3).35