Diodorus of Sicily

συνενεχθέντες τῇ τῶν Θετταλῶν κρίσει συμμαχίαν
προθύμως πρὸς αὐτὸν ἐποιήσαντο.
70. Ἐπ᾿ ἄρχοντος δ᾿ Ἀθήνησι Πυθοδότου Ῥωμαῖοι
κατέστησαν ὑπάτους Γάιον Πλαύτιον καὶ
Τίτον Μάλλιον. ἐπὶ δὲ τούτων Τιμολέων καταπληξάμενος
Διονύσιον τὸν τύραννον ἔπεισεν αὐτὸν
παραδοῦναι τὴν ἀκρόπολιν καὶ τὴν ἀρχὴν ἀποθέμενον
ἀπελθεῖν εἰς Πελοπόννησον ὑπόσπονδον,
2ἔχοντα τὰ ἴδια χρήματα. οὗτος μὲν οὖν δι᾿ ἀνανδρίαν
καὶ ταπεινότητα ψυχῆς τήν τε περιβόητον
τυραννίδα καὶ δεδεμένην, ὡς ἔφασαν, ἀδάμαντι τὸν
εἰρημένον τρόπον ἀπέλιπε καὶ κατεβίωσεν ἀπορούμενος
ἐν Κορίνθῳ, τὸν δ᾿ ἴδιον βίον καὶ τὴν μεταβολὴν
ἔσχε παράδειγμα τοῖς καυχωμένοις ἀφρόνως
3ἐπὶ ταῖς εὐτυχίαις· ὁ γὰρ ἔχων τετρακοσίας1
τριήρεις μετ᾿ ὀλίγον ἐν μικρῷ στρογγύλῳ πλοίῳ
κατέπλευσεν εἰς τὴν Κόρινθον, περίβλεπτον ἔχων
τὴν τῆς μεταβολῆς ὑπερβολήν.
4Τιμολέων δὲ παραλαβὼν τὴν Νῆσον καὶ φρούρια
τὰ τῷ Διονυσίῳ πρότερον ὑπακούοντα τὰς κατὰ
τὴν Νῆσον2 ἀκροπόλεις καὶ τὰ τυραννεῖα κατέσκαψε,
τοῖς δὲ φρουρίοις ἀπέδωκε τὴν ἐλευθερίαν.
5εὐθὺς δὲ καὶ νομογραφεῖν ἤρξατο, τιθεὶς δημοκρατικοὺς
νόμους καὶ τὰ περὶ τῶν ἰδιωτικῶν συμβολαίων 




1τετρακοσίας] τριακοσίας PX.2τὴν Νῆσον Rhodoman; τὰς νήσους PXR; τῆς νήσου
Fischer.36Book XVI

themselves with the decision of the Thessalians 344/3 b.c. and became his enthusiastic allies.1
70. When Pythodotus was archon at Athens, the 343/2 b.c. Romans elected as consuls Gaius Plautius and Titus Manlius.2 In this year3 Timoleon frightened the tyrant Dionysius into surrendering the citadel, resigning his office and retiring under a safe-conduct to the Peloponnese, but retaining his private possessions. Thus, through cowardice and meanness, he lost that celebrated tyranny which had been, as people said, bound with fetters of steel,4 and spent the remaining years of his life in poverty at Corinth, furnishing in his life and misfortune an example to all who vaunt themselves unwisely on their successes. He who had possessed four hundred triremes5 arrived shortly after in Corinth in a small tub of a freighter,6 conspicuously displaying the enormity of the change in his fortunes.
Timoleon took over the Island and the forts which had formerly belonged to Dionysius. He razed the citadel and the tyrant’s palace on the Island, and restored the independence of the fortified towns. Straightway he set to work on a new code of laws, converting the city into a democracy, and specified





1This operation continued earlier movements of Philip in
Thessaly (chaps. 35. 1; 38. 1; 52. 9). For Philip’s relations
with the tyrants of Pherae cp. H. D. Westlake, Thessaly
in the Fourth Century b.c. (1935), 191–193; Marta Sordi,
La Lega Tessala fino al Alessandro Magno (1958), 275–293.2Pythodotus was archon at Athens from July 343 to June 342 b.c. C Plautius Venno and T. Manlius Imperiosus Torquatus were the consuls of 347 b.c. (Broughton, 1. 130).3Plutarch, Timoleon, 13. 2–5.4This was an oft-quoted metaphor credited to the elder Dionysius; cp. above, chap. 5. 4; Plutarch, Dion, 7. 3 and 10. 3.5The same figure in chap. 9. 2; Plutarch, Dion, 14. 2. Nepos, Dion, 5. 3, mentions five hundred.6This term is traceable to Theopompus (Polybius, 12. 4a, 2; Jacoby, Fragmente der griechischen Historiker, no. 115, F 341), where Timaeus used ναῦς.37