Diodorus of Sicily
6τοῖς παρασπονδουμένοις. τοῦ δὲ Βαγώου
φυγόντος πρὸς τὸν βασιλέα καὶ κατηγοροῦντος τοῦ
Λακράτους ὁ Ἀρταξέρξης ἔκρινε δίκαια πεπονθέναι
τοὺς περὶ τὸν Βαγώαν καὶ τῶν Περσῶν τοὺς
αἰτίους τῆς ἁρπαγῆς ἀπέκτεινεν. τὸ μὲν οὖν Πηλούσιον
τοῦτον τὸν τρόπον παρεδόθη τοῖς Πέρσαις.
7Μέντωρ δὲ ὁ τοῦ τρίτου μέρους ἡγούμενος Βούβαστον
καὶ πολλὰς ἄλλας πόλεις χειρωσάμενος ὑπηκόους
ἐποίησε τῷ βασιλεῖ δι᾿ ἑνὸς στρατηγήματος.
πασῶν γὰρ τῶν πόλεων φρουρουμένων ὑπὸ δυεῖν
ἐθνῶν, Ἑλλήνων1 τε καὶ Αἰγυπτίων, ὁ Μέντωρ
διέδωκε λόγον εἰς τοὺς στρατιώτας ὅτι βασιλεὺς
Ἀρταξέρξης τοῖς μὲν ἑκουσίως παραδιδοῦσι τὰς
πόλεις φιλανθρώπως χρήσασθαι διέγνωκε, τοῖς δὲ
βίᾳ κρατηθεῖσι τὴν αὐτὴν ἀπονέμειν τιμωρίαν
ἥνπερ τοῖς Σιδωνίοις ἐπέστησε· καὶ τοῖς φυλάττουσι
τὰς πύλας παρήγγειλεν ἐᾶν τοὺς βουλομένους
8παρ᾿ αὐτῶν αὐτομολεῖν. διόπερ ἀκωλύτως τῶν
ἡλωκότων Αἰγυπτίων ἀπιόντων ἐκ τῆς παρεμβολῆς
ταχέως εἰς ἁπάσας τὰς κατὰ τὴν Αἴγυπτον πόλεις
ὁ λόγος ὁ προειρημένος διεσπάρη. εὐθὺς οὖν οἱ
μισθοφόροι πρὸς τοὺς ἐγχωρίους πανταχῇ διεφέροντο
καὶ στάσεως αἱ πόλεις ἐπληροῦντο. ἑκάτεροι
γὰρ ἰδίᾳ διεφιλοτιμοῦντο παραδιδόναι τὰ φρούρια
καὶ τῆς χάριτος ταύτης ἰδίας ἀγαθῶν ἐλπίδας
ἠλλάττοντο2· ὅπερ καὶ περὶ πρώτην τὴν Βούβαστον
συνέβη γενέσθαι.
50. Ὡς γὰρ οἱ περὶ τὸν Μέντορα καὶ Βαγώαν
πλησίον αὐτῆς κατεστρατοπέδευσαν, οἱ μὲν Αἰγύπτιοι
λάθρᾳ τῶν Ἑλλήνων ἐξέπεμψάν τινα πρὸς


1So Reiske: Ἑλληνικῶν.2So Stephanus: ἐλπίδος ἠλαττοῦντο.376Book XVI

standing by the Greeks, the sufferers from the broken 350/49 b.c. pledges. But when Bagoas fled to the King and brought accusation against Lacrates, Artaxerxes decided that Bagoas’ contingent had met with their just deserts and put to death the Persians who were responsible for the robbery. So it was in this fashion that Pelusium was delivered over to the Persians.
Mentor, who was in command of the third contingent, captured Bubastus and many other cities and made them subject to the King by a single strategic device. For since all the cities were garrisoned by two peoples, Greeks and Egyptians, Mentor passed the word around to the soldiers that King Artaxerxes had decided to treat magnanimously those who voluntarily surrendered their cities, but to mete out the same penalty to those who were overcome by force as he had imposed on the people of Sidon; and he instructed those who guarded the gates to give free passage to any who wished to desert from the other side. Accordingly, since the captured Egyptians were leaving the barracks without hindrance, the aforementioned word was quickly scattered amongst all the cities of Egypt. Immediately, therefore, the mercenaries were everywhere at variance with the natives and the cities were filled with strife; for each side was privately endeavouring to surrender its posts and nursing private hopes of gain in exchange for this favour; and this is what actually happened in the case of the city of Bubastus first.
50. When, namely, the forces of Mentor and Bagoas were encamped near Bubastus, the Egyptians, without the knowledge of the Greeks, sent an envoy
377