Diodorus of Sicily

καὶ φιλικῆς ἐκοινώνει παρρησίας ὡς τῆς Ὀλυμπιάδος
ἀλλοτρίως ἐχούσης πρὸς αὐτὸν διὰ τὸν
φθόνον καὶ κατὰ τὰς ἐπιστολὰς ἐπιτιμώσης αὐτῷ
σκληρότερον καὶ ἀπειλούσης τά τε ἄλλα γράψαι
πρὸς αὐτὴν ἐπιπληκτικῶς καὶ κατὰ τὴν ἐπιστολὴν
ἐπὶ τελευτῆς θεῖναι ταῦτα· Καὶ πρὸς ἡμᾶς παύου
διαβαλλομένη καὶ μὴ χαλέπαινε μηδὲ ἀπείλει· εἰ δὲ
μή, μετρίως ἡμῖν μελήσει· οἶδας γὰρ ὅτι Ἀλέξανδρος
κρείττων ἁπάντων.
4Ὁ δ᾿ οὖν βασιλεὺς τὰ πρὸς τὴν ἐκφορὰν παρασκευαζόμενος
ταῖς μὲν πλησίον πόλεσι προσέταξε
κατὰ δύναμιν συμβάλλεσθαι πρὸς τὸν τῆς ἐκφορᾶς
κόσμον, πᾶσι δὲ τοῖς κατὰ τὴν Ἀσίαν οἰκοῦσι
προσέταξεν τὸ παρὰ τοῖς Πέρσαις ἱερὸν πῦρ καλούμενον
ἐπιμελῶς σβέσαι, μέχρι ἂν τελέσῃ τὴν ἐκφοράν·
τοῦτο δὲ εἰώθασιν οἱ Πέρσαι ποιεῖν κατὰ
5τὰς τῶν βασιλέων τελευτάς. τὸ δὲ πλῆθος χαλεπὸν
οἰωνὸν ἐτίθετο τὸ πρόσταγμα καὶ τὸ θεῖον ὑπελάμβανον
προσημαίνειν τὸν τοῦ βασιλέως θάνατον.
ἐγένετο δὲ καὶ ἄλλα σημεῖα παράδοξα προδηλοῦντα
τὴν Ἀλεξάνδρου τελευτήν, περὶ ὧν μικρὸν ὕστερον
ἐροῦμεν, ὅταν τὸν περὶ τῆς ἐκφορᾶς λόγον ἀποδῶμεν.
115. Τῶν γὰρ ἡγεμόνων καὶ φίλων ἕκαστος στοχαζόμενος
εἴδωλα δι᾿ ἐλέφαντος καὶ χρυσοῦ καὶ τῶν ἄλλων
τῶν θαυμαζομένων παρ᾿ ἀνθρώποις, αὐτὸς δὲ τοὺς
ἀρχιτέκτονας ἀθροίσας καὶ λεπτουργῶν πλῆθος τοῦ


456Book XVII

power and freedom of speech based on this friendship 324/3 b.c. that when Olympias was estranged from him because of jealousy and wrote sharp criticisms and threats against him in her letters, he felt strong enough to answer her reproachfully and ended his letter as follows: “Stop quarrelling with us and do not be angry or menacing. If you persist, we1 shall not be much disturbed. You know that Alexander means more to us than anything.”
As part of the preparations for the funeral, the king ordered the cities of the region to contribute to its splendour in accordance with their ability, and he proclaimed to all the peoples of Asia that they should sedulously quench what the Persians call the sacred fire, until such time as the funeral should be ended. This was the custom of the Persians when their kings died, and people thought that the order was an ill omen, and that heaven was foretelling the king’s own death. There were also at this time other strange signs pointing to the same event, as we shall relate shortly, after we have finished the account of the funeral.2
115. Each of the generals and Friends tried to meet the king’s desires and made likenesses of Hephaestion in ivory and gold and other materials which men hold in high regard.3 Alexander collected artisans and an army of workmen and tore down the city wall to a


1Hephaestion’s usage here suggests the pluralis majestatis.
He can hardly mean anyone but himself.2A similar account of Hephaestion’s funeral was probably given by Curtius and is now lost from the manuscript of book 10. The references in Justin (12. 12. 12), Plutarch (Alexander, 72), and Arrian (7. 14) are briefer, and locate it before, not after, the Cossaean campaign. See Addenda.3These were probably medallions or small images to be worn in wreaths, as one wore images of the gods. It was a common ancient practice, employed later in the case of the Hellenistic kings and the Roman emperors.457