Diodorus of Sicily

τραύμασι περιπεσὼν εἴς τινα κρημνώδη τόπον συνεκλείσθη·
οὐκ ἔχων δὲ διέξοδον καὶ φοβούμενος
τὴν ἐκ τῆς αἰχμαλωσίας αἰκίαν ἑαυτὸν κατεκρήμνισε
καὶ τοῦτον τὸν τρόπον δοὺς τῷ δαιμονίῳ
5δίκας κατέστρεψε τὸν βίον. ὁ δὲ συνάρχων αὐτῷ
στρατηγὸς Ὀνόμαρχος διαδεξάμενος τὴν ἡγεμονίαν
καὶ μετὰ τῆς ἀνασωζομένης δυνάμεως ἀναχωρήσας
ἀνελάμβανε τοὺς ἐκ τῆς φυγῆς ἐπανιόντας.
6Ἅμα δὲ τούτοις πραττομένοις Φίλιππος ὁ τῶν
Μακεδόνων βασιλεὺς Μεθώνην μὲν ἐκπολιορκήσας
καὶ διαρπάσας κατέακαψε, Παγασὰς1 δὲ χειρωσάμενος
ἠνάγκασεν ὑποταγῆναι. κατὰ δὲ τὸν Πόντον
Λεύκων ὁ τοῦ Βοσπόρου βασιλεὺς ἐτελεύτησεν
ἄρξας ἔτη τεσσαράκοντα, τὴν δὲ ἀρχὴν διαδεξάμενος
Σπάρτακος2 ὁ υἱὸς ἐβασίλευσεν ἔτη πέντε.
7Ῥωμαίοις δὲ πρὸς Φαλίσκους συνέστη πόλεμος
καὶ μέγα μὲν οὐδὲν οὐδ᾿ ἄξιον μνήμης ἐπετελέσθη,
καταδρομαὶ δὲ καὶ πορθήσεις τῆς χώρας τῶν Φαλίσκων
ἐγίνοντο. κατὰ δὲ τὴν Σικελίαν Δίωνος
τοῦ στρατηγοῦ σφαγέντος ὑπὸ Ζακυνθίων τινῶν3
μισθοφόρων τὴν ἡγεμονίαν διεδέξατο Κάλλιππος ὁ
τούτους πρὸς τὸν φόνον παρασκευάσας καὶ ἦρξε
μῆνας τρεισκαίδεκα.
1So Gemistius: Πάγας.2Σπάρτακος regularly in Diodorus: Σπαρτάκης X. Properly
Σπάρτοκος (see note below).3So Dindorf: τῶν.324Book XVI

wounds, was driven into a precipitous area and there 354/3 b.c. hemmed in, and since there was no exit from it and he feared the torture after capture, he hurled himself over the cliff and having thus made atonement to the gods ended his life. Onomarchus, his colleague in the generalship, having succeeded to the command and retreated with such of his force as survived, collected any who returned from the flight.
While these things were going on, Philip, king of the Macedonians, after taking Methonê1 by storm and pillaging it, razed it to the ground, and having subdued Pagasae forced it to submit. In the region of the Black Sea Leucon, the king of the Bosporus, died after ruling forty years, and Spartacus,2 his son, succeeding to the throne, reigned for five years. A war took place between the Romans and Faliscans3 and nothing important or memorable was accomplished; only raids and pillaging of the territory of the Faliscans went on. In Sicily after Dion the general had been slain by some mercenaries from Zacynthos, Callippus,4 who had procured them for the assassination, succeeded him and ruled thirteen months.
1The last city on the coast of Philip’s possessions still
belonging to Athens. Diodorus repeats the notice of its
capture in chap. 34. 4 f. For the date see Beloch, op. cit.
3. 2. 269 and Pickard-Cambridge, Cambridge Ancient History,
6. 219.2The correct spelling is Spartocus (Σπάρτοκος) according to Latyschew, Inscr. Ant. Orae Sept. Ponti Eux. p. xviii. Diodorus is probably wrong as to the dates of these reigns. For a discussion see Beloch, op. cit. 3. 2. 91 ff., with whom Cary, Cambridge Ancient History, 6. 71 disagrees.3See Livy, 7. 16. 2–6.4Callippus was a member of Plato’s Academy (cf. Athenaeus,
11. 508 e; Diogenes Laertius, 3. 46; Suidas; only
“an Athenian” in Plato, Ep. 7. 333 e, quoted by Plutarch, Dion, 54) who accompanied his friend Dion to Syracuse. Claiming that Dion was substituting one tyranny for another but actually wishing to get power himself, Callippus effected his assassination. (See Beloch, op. cit. 3. 1. 261 and note, and Hackforth, Cambridge Ancient History, 6. 284 f.) Parallel accounts are Plutarch, Dion, 54–57; Nepos, Dion, 8–10 (Callicrates sic).325