Diodorus of Sicily

σὺν αὐτοῖς τοῖς ἀνδράσιν οὐκ ἐλάττω τῶν τεσσαράκοντα·
αἱ δὲ λοιπαὶ κατέφυγον εἰς τὸν τῶν Χαλκηδονίων
λιμένα.
5Τοιαύτης δ᾿ εὐημερίας γενομένης τοῖς περὶ τὸν
Κλεῖτον οὗτος μὲν ὑπέλαβε μηκέτι τολμήσειν τοὺς
πολεμίους ναυμαχήσειν διὰ τὸ μέγεθος τῆς ἥττης,
ὁ δ᾿ Ἀντίγονος πυθόμενος τὰ περὶ τὸν στόλον
ἐλαττώματα παραδόξως διὰ τῆς ἰδίας ἀγχινοίας
καὶ στρατηγίας ἀνεμαχέσατο τὸ γεγονὸς ἐλάττωμα.
6παρὰ γὰρ Βυζαντίων μεταπεμψάμενος νυκτὸς ναῦς
ὑπηρετικὰς ταύταις μὲν διεβίβαζεν εἰς τὸ πέραν
τοξότας τε καὶ σφενδονήτας καὶ τῶν ἄλλων τῶν
ψιλικῶν ταγμάτων τοὺς ἱκανούς. οὗτοι δὲ πρὸ
ἡμέρας ἐπιθέμενοι τοῖς ἐκ τῶν πολεμίων νεῶν
ἀποβεβηκόσιν ἐπὶ τὴν γῆν καὶ πεζῇ κατεστρατοπεδευκόσι
κατεπλήξαντο τοὺς περὶ τὸν Κλεῖτον.
ταχὺ δὲ πάντων διὰ τὸν φόβον τεταραγμένων καὶ
εἰς τὰς ναῦς ἐμπηδώντων πολὺς ἐγένετο θόρυβος διά
τε τὰς ἀποσκευὰς καὶ τὸ πλῆθος τῶν αἰχμαλώτων.
7ἐν τοσούτῳ δὲ Ἀντίγονος ἐξαρτύσας τὰς μακρὰς
ναῦς καὶ τῶν ἀλκιμωτάτων πεζῶν πολλοὺς ἐπιβάτας
ἐπιστήσας ἀπέστειλε, παρακαλέσας τεθαρρηκότως
ἐπιθέσθαι τοῖς πολεμίοις, ὡς πάντως καθ᾿
8ἑαυτοὺς ἐσομένου τοῦ νικήματος. τοῦ δὲ Νικάνορος
νυκτὸς ἀναχθέντος καὶ διαφωσκούσης τῆς
ἡμέρας οὗτοι μὲν ἐπιπεσόντες ἄφνω τοῖς πολεμίοις
τεθορυβημένοις εὐθὺς κατὰ τὸν πρῶτον ἐπίπλουν
ἐτρέψαντο καὶ τὰς μὲν τοῖς ἐμβόλοις τύπτοντες
ἀνέρρηττον, ὧν δὲ τοὺς ταρσοὺς παρέσυρον, ὧν δὲ
αὐτάνδρων παραδιδομένων ἀκινδύνως ἐκυρίευον·
τέλος δὲ πλὴν μιᾶς τῆς ναυαρχίδος τῶν λοιπῶν
9πασῶν αὐτάνδρων ἐκυρίευσαν. ὁ δὲ Κλεῖτος φυγὼν
208Book XVIII

than forty together with their crews, but the rest31
escaped to the harbour of Chalcedon.1
After such a victory Cleitus believed that the enemy would no longer dare fight at sea owing to the severity of their defeat, but Antigonus, after learning of the losses that the fleet had suffered, unexpectedly made good by his own keen wit and generalship the setback that he had encountered. Gathering auxiliary vessels from Byzantium by night, he employed them in transporting bowmen, slingers, and a sufficient number of other light-armed troops to the other shore. Before dawn they fell upon those who had disembarked from the ships of the enemy and were encamped on the land, spreading panic in the forces of Cleitus. At once these were all thrown into a tumult of fear, and when they leaped into the ships, there was great confusion because of the baggage and the large number of prisoners. At this point Antigonus, who had made his warships ready and had placed in them as marines many of his bravest infantry, sent them into the fight, urging them to fall on the enemy with confidence, since the victory would depend entirely upon them. During the night Nicanor had put to sea, and, as dawn appeared, his men fell suddenly upon the confused enemy and at once put them to flight at the first attack, destroying some of the ships by ramming them with the beaks, sweeping off the oars of others, and gaining possession of certain of them without danger when they surrendered with their crews. They finally captured all the ships together with their crews save for the one that carried the commander. Cleitus fled to

1Cp. Marmor Parium for 317/16.209