Diodorus of Sicily

ἐφεξῆς δὲ ῥητέον ἡμῖν τὰ πραχθέντα κατὰ τοὺς
συνεχεῖς τῆς Ἰταλίας τόπους.
5Ῥωμαῖοι μὲν καὶ Σαμνῖται διαπρεσβευσάμενοι
πρὸς ἀλλήλους εἰρήνην συνέθεντο, πολεμήσαντες
ἔτη εἴκοσι δύο καὶ μῆνας ἕξ· τῶν δ᾿ ὑπάτων
Πόπλιος Σεμπρώνιος μετὰ δυνάμεως ἐμβαλὼν εἰς
τὴν τῶν Αἰκλῶν χώραν ἐχειρώσατο τετταράκοντα
πόλεις ἐν ἡμέραις ταῖς πάσαις πεντήκοντα, ἀναγκάσας
δὲ πᾶν τὸ ἔθνος ὑποτάττεσθαι Ῥωμαίοις
ἐπανῆλθε καὶ θρίαμβον κατήγαγεν ἐπαινούμενον.
ὁ δὲ δῆμος ὁ Ῥωμαίων πρός τε Μαρσοὺς καὶ
Παλιγνούς,1 ἔτι δὲ Μαρρουκίνους, συμμαχίαν
ἐποιήσατο.
102. Τοῦ δ᾿ ἐνιαυσίου χρόνου διεληλυθότος Ἀθήνησι
μὲν ἦρχε Λεώστρατος, ἐν Ῥώμῃ δ᾿ ὑπῆρχον
ὕπατοι Σερούιος Κορνήλιος καὶ Λεύκιος Γενούκιος.
ἐπὶ δὲ τούτων Δημήτριος εἶχε πρόθεσιν πρὸς μὲν
τοὺς περὶ Κάσανδρον διαπολεμεῖν, τοὺς δ᾿ Ἕλληνας
ἐλευθεροῦν· καὶ πρῶτον τὰ κατὰ τὴν Ἑλλάδα
διοικεῖν, ἅμα μὲν νομίζων δόξαν οἴσειν αὐτῷ μεγάλην
τὴν τῶν Ἑλλήνων αὐτονομίαν, ἅμα δὲ καὶ
τοὺς περὶ Πρεπέλαον ἡγεμόνας τοῦ Κασάνδρου
πρότερον συντρῖψαι καὶ τότε προσάγειν δεῖν2 ἐπ᾿
αὐτὴν τὴν Μακεδονίαν,3 εἰ μὴ ἐπ᾿ αὐτὸν πορεύοιτο
2ὁ Κάσανδρος.4 τῆς δὲ τῶν Σικυωνίων πόλεως




1Παλιγνούς Rhodoman: Παλλινοὺς R, Παλλίνους X, Πεληνοὺς F.2δεῖν added by Post.3Μακεδονίαν Reiske: ἡγεμονίαν.4εἰ μὴ . . . ὁ Κάσανδρος Post: ἢ . . . τὸν Κάσανδρον.412Book XX

must now tell of events in the adjacent parts of 304 b.c. Italy.1
The Romans and the Samnites interchanged envoys and made peace after having fought for twenty-two years and six months2; and one of the consuls, Publius Sempronius, invading the country of the Aecli3 with an army, captured forty cities in a total of fifty days, and after forcing the entire tribe to submit to Rome, returned home and celebrated a triumph with great applause. The Roman people made alliances with the Marsi, the Paligni, and the Marrucini.4
102. When the year had come to its end, Leostratus 303 b.c. was archon in Athens, and in Rome the consuls were Servius Cornelius and Lucius Genucius.5 While these held office Demetrius proposed to carry on his war with Cassander and to free the Greeks; and first he planned to establish order in the affairs of Greece, for he believed that the freeing of the Greeks would bring him great honour, and at the same time he thought it necessary to wipe out Prepelaüs6 and the other leaders before attacking Cassander, and then to go on against Macedonia itself if Cassander did not march against him. Now






1The next reference to Sicilian affairs is in Book 21. 2. 1.2Cp. Livy, 9. 45. 1–4: the narrative is continued from chap. 90. 4.3The Aequi or Aequiculi in Latin writers; usually called the Aikoi or Aikanoi by the Greek historians. Cp. Livy, 9. 45. 5–18.4Continued in chap. 104. 1.5Leostratus was archon in 303/2. Livy, 10. 1. 1, gives as consuls for 303 b.c. L. Genucius and Ser. Cornelius. In the Fasti Capitolini only Lentulus, the cognomen of Cornelius, can be read. The narrative is continued from chap. 100. 6. Cp. Plutarch, Demetrius, 25.6Cp. Book 19. 64. 3.413