Diodorus of Sicily

ταχέως συνάψειν, τοῦ δ᾿ ἱκανωτάτου τῶν
6στρατηγῶν ὑπὸ τῆς νόσου πιεζουμένου. οὐ μὴν
ἀλλὰ τοῦ πάθους κριθέντος ἐπειδὴ βραχέως αὑτὸν
προσανέλαβε, προῆγε μετὰ τῆς δυνάμεως ἀφηγουμένου
Πευκέστου καὶ Ἀντιγένους, αὐτὸς δὲ φορίῳ
κομιζόμενος ἐπηκολούθει τοῖς οὐραγοῦσιν, ὅπως μὴ
διὰ τὸν θόρυβον καὶ τὴν στενοχωρίαν παρενοχλοῖτο.
25. Ὡς δ᾿ ἡμέρας ὁδὸν ἀπέσχον ἀπ᾿ ἀλλήλων τὰ
στρατόπεδα, κατασκόπους ἔπεμψαν ἀμφότεροι καὶ
μαθόντες τὰ πλήθη καὶ τὰς προαιρέσεις τῶν πολεμίων
παρεσκευάσαντο μὲν πρὸς τὸν κίνδυνον,
2διελύθησαν δὲ χωρὶς μάχης· προβεβλημένοι γὰρ
ἀμφότεροι ποταμόν τινα καὶ χαράδραν ἐξέταξαν
μὲν τὰς δυνάμεις, διὰ δὲ τὰς τῶν τόπων δυσχωρίας
οὐκ ἠδυνήθησαν διαγωνίσασθαι. καταστρατοπεδεύσαντες
δ᾿ ἀλλήλων ἀπὸ σταδίων τριῶν ἐπὶ μὲν
ἡμέρας τέσσαρας ἀκροβολιζόμενοι καὶ προνομεύοντες
τὴν χώραν διετέλεσαν, πάντων σπανίζοντες,
τῇ πέμπτῃ δ᾿ Ἀντίγονος πρεσβευτὰς ἐξαπέστειλε
πρός τε τοὺς σατράπας καὶ τοὺς Μακεδόνας,
ἀξιῶν Εὐμενεῖ μὲν μὴ προσέχειν ἑαυτῷ δὲ πιστεύειν·
3συγχωρήσειν γὰρ ἔφη τοῖς μὲν σατράπαις
ἔχειν τὰς ἰδίας σατραπείας, τῶν δὲ ἄλλων
τοῖς μὲν χώραν πολλὴν δώσειν, τοὺς δὲ εἰς τὰς
πατρίδας ἀποστελεῖν μετὰ τιμῆς καὶ δωρεῶν, τοὺς
δὲ στρατεύεσθαι βουλομένους διανεμεῖν1 εἰς τὰς
4ἑκάστῳ καθηκούσας τάξεις. τῶν δὲ Μακεδόνων
οὐ προσεχόντων τοῖς λόγοις, ἀλλὰ καὶ προσαπειλούντων
τοῖς πρεσβευταῖς Εὐμενὴς παρελθὼν ἐπῄνεσέν
τε αὐτοὺς καὶ λόγον εἶπε τῶν παραδεδομένων
μὲν καὶ παλαιῶν, οὐκ ἀνοίκειον δὲ τῆς περιστάσεως.
5ἔφη γὰρ ἐρασθέντα λέοντα παρθένου διαλεχθῆναι
1διανεμεῖν Wesseling: διανέμειν.296Book XIX

engage them shortly and the ablest of their generals 317b.c. was handicapped by his illness. Nevertheless, when the attack had passed its crisis and he had recovered a little, Eumenes advanced with the army, which Peucestes and Antigenes were leading, while he himself, carried in a litter, followed the rearguard so that he might not be disturbed by the confusion and the congestion of the road.
25. When the armies were a day’s march from each other, they both sent scouts, and after learning the size and the intentions of the enemy, they both made ready for the fray; but they separated without a battle; for each had drawn up his army with a river and a ravine in front of him, and because of the difficulty of the terrain they were not able to come to blows. The armies, encamped at a distance of three stades1 from each other for four days, continued to skirmish and to plunder the country, for they were entirely without supplies; but on the fifth day Antigonus sent envoys to the satraps and the Macedonians, urging them not to obey Eumenes but to put trust in himself. He said that he would allow the satraps to keep their own satrapies, that to some of the Macedonians he would give a large gift of land, would send back others to their homes with honours and gifts, and would assign to appropriate posts those who wished to serve in his army. When, however, the Macedonians paid no heed to these offers and even threatened the envoys, Eumenes came forward and praised them and told them a tale, one of the traditional time-worn stories, it is true, but one not unsuited to the situation. He said that a



1About 1800 feet.297