Diodorus of Sicily

ἀπέλιπεν, αὐτὸς δὲ διὰ τῆς μεσογείου ποιούμενος
τὴν πορείαν ἐπεβάλετο μὲν νυκτὸς εἰς τὰ Κεντόριπα
παρεισπεσεῖν εἰσδεχομένων αὐτόν τινων πολιτικῶν
ἀνδρῶν, καταφανοῦς δὲ τῆς ἐπιβουλῆς γενομένης
καὶ τῶν φρουρῶν παραβοηθησάντων ἐξέπεσεν ἐκ
τῆς πόλεως, ἀποβαλὼν τῶν στρατιωτῶν πλείους
4πεντακοσίων. μετὰ δὲ ταῦτά τινων ἐκ τῆς Ἀπολλωνίας
μεταπεμπομένων αὐτὸν καὶ τὴν πατρίδα
προδώσειν ἐπαγγελλομένων ἧκε πρὸς τὴν πόλιν·
τῶν δὲ προδοτῶν καταφανῶν γενομένων καὶ κολασθέντων
κατὰ μὲν πρώτην ἡμέραν πολιορκήσας
ἄπρακτος ἐγένετο, τῇ δ᾿ ὑστεραίᾳ πολλὰ κακοπαθήσας
καὶ συχνοὺς ἀποβαλὼν μόλις εἷλε τὴν
πόλιν καὶ τῶν Ἀπολλωνιατῶν τοὺς πλείστους
ἀποσφάξας διήρπασε τὰς κτήσεις.
57. Τούτου δὲ περὶ ταῦτ᾿ ὄντος Δεινοκράτης ὁ
τῶν φυγάδων ἡγούμενος ἀναλαβὼν τὴν Ἀκραγαντίνων
προαίρεσιν καὶ προστάτην αὑτὸν ἀναδείξας
τῆς κοινῆς ἐλευθερίας ἐποίησε πολλοὺς ἁπανταχόθεν
2συνδραμεῖν πρὸς αὐτόν· οἱ μὲν γὰρ διὰ τὴν ἔμφυτον
πᾶσιν ἐπιθυμίαν τῆς αὐτονομίας, οἱ δὲ διὰ τὸν
Ἀγαθοκλέους φόβον προθύμως ὑπήκουον τοῖς παραγγελλομένοις.
ἠθροισμένων δ᾿ αὐτῷ1 πεζῶν μὲν
οὐ πολὺ ἐλάττων δισμυρίων, ἱππέων δὲ χιλίων καὶ
πεντακοσίων καὶ πάντων τούτων ἐν φυγαῖς καὶ
μελέταις τοῦ πονεῖν συνεχῶς γεγονότων κατεστρατοπέδευσεν
ἐν ὑπαίθρῳ, προκαλούμενος τῇ μάχῃ
3τὸν δυνάστην. τοῦ δ᾿ Ἀγαθοκλέους λειπομένου
πολὺ ταῖς δυνάμεσι καὶ φυγομαχοῦντος ἐκ ποδὸς
ἠκολούθει συνεχῶς, ἀκονητὶ περιπεποιημένος τὴν
νίκην.
Ἀπὸ δὲ τούτων τῶν καιρῶν τοῖς περὶ τὸν Ἀγαθοκλέα
1αὐτῷ Dindorf: αὐτῶν.298Book XX

through the interior and attempted to slip by night 307 b.c. into Centoripa, where some of the citizens were to admit him. When their plan was discovered, however, and the guard came to the defence, he was thrown out of the city, losing more than five hundred of his soldiers. Thereupon, men from Apollonia having invited him and promised to betray their fatherland, he came to that city. As the traitors had become known and had been punished, he attacked the city but without effect for the first day, and on the next, after suffering heavily and losing a large number of men, he barely succeeded in taking it. After slaughtering most of the Apolloniates, he plundered their possessions.
57. While Agathocles was engaged on these matters, Deinocrates, the leader of the exiles, taking over the policy of the Acragantines and proclaiming himself champion of the common liberty, caused many to flock to him from all sides; for some eagerly gave ear to his appeals because of the desire for independence inborn in all men, and others because of their fear of Agathocles. When Deinocrates had collected almost twenty thousand foot-soldiers and fifteen hundred mounted men, all of them men who had had uninterrupted experience of exile and hardship, he camped in the open, challenging the tyrant to battle. However, when Agathocles, who was far inferior in strength, avoided battle, he steadily followed on his heels, having secured his victory without a struggle.
From this time on the fortunes of Agathocles, not


299