Diodorus of Sicily

ἑνὶ1 τῶν Ἀλεξάνδρου φίλων κατ᾿ ἰδίαν ἐντυχὼν καὶ
τὰ κατὰ μέρος ἀπαγγείλας ἠξίου δηλῶσαι τῷ
4βασιλεῖ. ὁ δ᾿ Ἀλέξανδρος ἀκούσας παρὰ τοῦ
Νεάρχου τὴν τῶν Χαλδαίων πρόρρησιν κατεπλάγη
καὶ μᾶλλον ἀεὶ τὴν ἀγχίνοιαν τῶν ἀνδρῶν καὶ
δόξαν ἀναλογιζόμενος ἐταράττετο τὴν ψυχήν. τέλος
δὲ τοὺς πολλοὺς τῶν φίλων ἀποστείλας εἰς τὴν
πόλιν αὐτὸς εἰς ἄλλην ἀτραπὸν μεταβαλὼν2 παρήλλαξε
τὴν Βαβυλῶνα καὶ καταστρατοπεδεύσας ἀπὸ
σταδίων διακοσίων ἡσυχίαν εἶχεν.
Πάντων δὲ θαυμαζόντων ἧκον πρὸς αὐτὸν ἄλλοι
τε πλείους τῶν Ἑλλήνων καὶ τῶν φιλοσόφων οἱ
5περὶ τὸν Ἀνάξαρχον. οὗτοι δὲ μαθόντες τὴν αἰτίαν
καὶ τοῖς ἐκ φιλοσοφίας χρησάμενοι λόγοις ἐνεργῶς
τοσοῦτον μετέθηκαν αὐτὸν ὥστε καταφρονῆσαι μὲν
πάσης μαντικῆς, μάλιστα δὲ τῆς παρὰ Χαλδαίοις
προτιμωμένης. διόπερ ὁ βασιλεύς, ὡσπερεὶ τετρωμένος
τὴν ψυχὴν καὶ τοῖς τῶν φιλοσόφων ὑγιασθεὶς
λόγοις,3 εἰς τὴν Βαβυλῶνα μετὰ τῆς δυνάμεως
6εἰσῆλθεν. τῶν δ᾿ ἐγχωρίων, καθάπερ καὶ πρότερον,
φιλανθρώπως ὑποδεχομένων τοὺς στρατιώτας ἅπαντες
ὥρμησαν πρὸς ἄνεσιν καὶ τρυφήν, πολλῆς τῶν
ἐπιτηδείων παρεσκευασμένης δαψιλείας.
Ταῦτα μὲν οὖν ἐπράχθη κατὰ τοῦτον τὸν ἐνιαυτόν.
1δέ τινι F.2εἰς ἄλλην ἀτραπὸν παρήλλαξε RX; εἰς ἄλλην ἀτραπὸν μεταπαρήλλαξε
F. Some participle such as μεταβαλὼν (Fischer)
had apparently been lost.3ὑπαχθεὶς λόγοις RX; λόγοις ὑγιασθείς F.450Book XVII

Nearchus, one of Alexander’s Friends, and told him 325/4 b.c. everything in detail, requesting him to make it known to the king. When Alexander, accordingly, learned from Nearchus1 about the Chaldaeans’ prophecy, he was alarmed and more and more disturbed, the more he reflected upon the ability and high reputation of these people. After some hesitation, he sent most of his Friends into Babylon, but altered his own route so as to avoid the city and set up his headquarters in a camp at a distance of two hundred furlongs.2
This act caused general astonishment and many of the Greeks came to see him, notably among the philosophers Anaxarchus.3 When they discovered the reason for his action, they plied him with arguments drawn from philosophy and changed him to the degree that he came to despise all prophetic arts, and especially that which was held in high regard by the Chaldaeans.4 It was as if the king had been wounded in his soul and then healed by the words of the philosophers, so that he now entered Babylon with his army. As on the previous occasion,5 the population received the troops hospitably, and all turned their attention to relaxation and pleasure, since everything necessary was available in profusion.
These were the events of this year.
1Plutarch, Alexander, 73. 1.2Arrian does not think that Alexander heeded the warnings of the Chaldeans, but quotes Aristobulus (7. 17. 5–6) to the effect that Alexander did wish to avoid the city, but could not pass it because of the swamps.3Justin, 12. 13. 5. This was the celebrated philosopher of Abdera, of the school of Democritus. He had been with Alexander throughout the campaign.4That is, astrology. It is odd that Diodorus should speak so well of Greek rationalism, when in this case the Chaldaeans knew better.5Cp. chap. 64. 4.451