Diodorus of Sicily
6τὴν τῶν Τεγεατῶν χώραν. ὑπολαβὼν οὖν
ἔρημον εἶναι στρατιωτῶν τὴν Σπάρτην, ἐπεβάλετο
μὲν μέγα τι πρᾶξαι, τὴν δὲ τύχην ἔσχεν ἀντιπράττουσαν.
αὐτὸς μὲν γὰρ νυκτὸς ὥρμησεν ἐπὶ τὴν
Σπάρτην, ὁ δὲ βασιλεὺς τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων Ἆγις
ὑποπτεύσας τὴν ἀγχίνοιαν τὴν Ἐπαμεινώνδου κατεστοχάσατο
μὲν τὸ μέλλον ἐμφρόνως, ἐξέπεμψε1
δέ τινας Κρῆτας ἡμεροδρόμους, δι᾿ ὧν καταταχήσας
τὸν Ἐπαμεινώνδαν τοῖς ἀπολελειμμένοις ἐν τῇ
Σπάρτῃ ἐδήλωσε, διότι Βοιωτοὶ συντόμως ἥξουσιν
ἐπὶ τὴν Λακεδαίμονα πορθήσοντες τὴν πόλιν, αὐτὸς
δ᾿ ὡς ἂν τάχιστα δύναιτο μετὰ τῆς δυνάμεως ἥξει
βοηθήσων τῇ πατρίδι. ἐκέλευεν οὖν2 τοῖς ἐν τῇ
Σπάρτῃ παραφυλάττειν τὴν πόλιν μηδὲν καταπεπληγμένους·
ταχὺ γὰρ αὐτὸν ἐπιφανέντα
βοηθήσειν.
83. Τῶν δὲ Κρητῶν συντόμως τὸ παραγγελθὲν
ποιησάντων, παραδόξως οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι τὴν
ἅλωσιν τῆς πατρίδος ἐξέφυγον· μὴ προδηλωθείσης
γὰρ τῆς ἐπιθέσεως ἔλαθεν ἂν ὁ Ἐπαμεινώνδας
εἰσπεσὼν εἰς τὴν Σπάρτην. τὴν μὲν οὖν ἐπίνοιαν
τῶν στρατηγῶν ἀμφοτέρων δικαίως ἄν τις ἀποδέξαιτο,
συνετωτέραν δὲ στρατηγίαν τὴν τοῦ Λάκωνος3
2ἡγήσαιτο. οὐ μὴν ἀλλ᾿ ὁ Ἐπαμεινώνδας
ὅλην τὴν νύκτα διαγρυπνήσας καὶ τὸ διάστημα τῆς
ὁδοῦ κατὰ σπουδὴν διανύσας ἅμ᾿ ἡμέρᾳ προσῆγε
τῇ Σπάρτῃ. ὁ δ᾿ ἐπὶ τῆς φυλακῆς ἀπολελειμμένος
Ἀγησίλαος ὀλίγῳ πρότερον χρόνῳ τῶν Κρητῶν
ἀκούσας τὰ κατὰ μέρος, εὐθὺς μετὰ πολλῆς



1ἐξέπεμψε Wurm: ἥξειν πέμψαι PA, ἥξειν πέμψας FKL,
ἥξειν ἔπεμψε cet.2Dindorf: ἐκέλευε γοῦν.3Rhodoman: Λακεδαίμονος.182Book XV

of Tegea. Supposing then that Sparta was stripped 363/2 b.c. of soldiers, he planned a great stroke, but fortune worked against him. He himself set out by night to Sparta, but the Lacedaemonian king Agis, suspecting the cunning of Epameinondas, shrewdly guessed what he would do, and sent out some Cretan runners and through them forestalling Epameinondas got word to the men who had been left behind in Sparta that the Boeotians would shortly appear in Lacedaemon to sack the city, but that he himself would come as quickly as possible with his army to bring aid to his native land.1 So he gave orders for those who were in Sparta to watch over the city and be terrified at nothing, for he himself would soon appear with help.
83. The Cretans speedily carried out their orders, and the Lacedaemonians miraculously avoided the capture of their native land; for had not the attack been disclosed in advance, Epameinondas would have burst into Sparta undetected. We can justly praise the ingenuity of both generals, but should deem the strategy of the Laconian the shrewder. It is true that Epameinondas, without resting the entire night, covered the distance at top speed and at daybreak attacked Sparta. But Agesilaüs, who had been left on guard and had learned only shortly before from the Cretans all about the enemy’s plan, straightway

1See Xenophon, Hell. 7. 5. 4–17; Polybius, 9. 8; Plutarch, Agesilaiüs, 34. Diodorus’ account diverges from the other three in that it is Agesilaüs who is represented by them as already on the way to Mantineia and forced to return to protect Sparta. Except for the well-known bias of Xenophon for Agesilaüs, one could unhesitatingly suspect Diodorus, especially since no Spartan king Agis is known for this date. Cleomenes, brother of Agesipolis and son of Cleombrotus, succeeded the former in 370 and still ruled (see chap. 60. 4 and note 2 on p. 119).183