Diodorus of Sicily

φυγόντος εἰς τὴν Βακτριανὴν ἐπανῆλθεν ἀπογνοὺς
τὸν τῶν πολεμίων διωγμόν.
Καὶ τὰ μὲν κατὰ τὴν Ἀσίαν ἐν τούτοις ἦν.
5Κατὰ δὲ τὴν Εὐρώπην Λακεδαιμόνιοι μὲν ἐπταικότες
μεγάλῃ παρατάξει διὰ τὴν συμφορὰν ἠναγκάσθησαν
διαπρεσβεύεσθαι πρὸς Ἀντίπατρον·
ἐκείνου δὲ ἐπὶ τὸ κοινὸν τῶν Ἑλλήνων συνέδριον
τὴν ἀπόκρισιν ἀποστείλαντος οἱ μὲν σύνεδροι συνήχθησαν
εἰς Κόρινθον καὶ πολλῶν ῥηθέντων λόγων
πρὸς ἑκάτερον μέρος ἔδοξεν αὐτοῖς ἀκέραιον τὴν
6κρίσιν ἐπὶ τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον ἀναπέμψαι. ὁ μὲν οὖν
Ἀντίπατρος ὁμήρους ἔλαβε τοὺς ἐπιφανεστάτους
τῶν Σπαρτιατῶν πεντήκοντα, οἱ δὲ Λακεδαιμόνιοι
πρέσβεις ἐξέπεμψαν εἰς τὴν Ἀσίαν, ἀξιοῦντες αὐτοῖς
δοῦναι συγγνώμην ἐπὶ τοῖς ἠγνοημένοις.
74. Τοῦ δ᾿ ἔτους τούτου διεληλυθότος Ἀθήνησι
μὲν ἦρχε Κηφισοφῶν, ἐν Ῥώμῃ δὲ κατεστάθησαν
ὕπατοι Γάιος Οὐαλλέριος1 καὶ Μάρκος Κλώδιος.
ἐπὶ δὲ τούτων Βῆσσος μὲν μετὰ τὴν Δαρείου τελευτὴν
μετὰ Ναβάρνου2 καὶ Βαρξάεντος καὶ πολλῶν
ἄλλων διαφυγὼν τὰς Ἀλεξάνδρου χεῖρας διήνυσε
μὲν εἰς τὴν Βακτριανήν, ἀποδεδειγμένος δὲ ταύτης
σατράπης ὑπὸ Δαρείου καὶ τοῖς πλήθεσι γεγονὼς
γνώριμος διὰ τὴν ἀρχὴν παρεκάλει τὰ πλήθη τῆς




1Οὐαλέριος F.2Rhodoman corrected to Ναβαρ<ζά>νου.328Book XVII

got away into Bactria, so Alexander suspended the 330/29 b.c. chase and returned.1
That was the situation in Asia.
In Europe the Lacedaemonians were forced by their defeat in a decisive battle to make overtures to Antipater.2 He referred his reply to the council of the Hellenic League.3 When the delegates came together in Corinth, there was a long discussion on both sides, and they decided to pass the issue on without a decision to Alexander. Antipater took as hostages fifty of the most notable of the Spartiates, and the Lacedaemonians sent envoys4 to Asia asking forgiveness for their mistakes.
74. After this year was over, Cephisophon became 320/8 b.c. archon at Athens, and Gaius Valerius and Marcus Clodius consuls in Rome.5In this year, now that Dareius was dead, Bessus with Nabarnes and Barxaës6 and many others of the Iranian nobles got to Bactria, eluding the hands of Alexander. Bessus had been appointed satrap of this region by Dareius and being known to everyone because of his administration, now called upon the population to defend their free






1Diodorus does scant justice to the dramatic story of
Dareius’s flight, overtaking, and death; cp. Curtius, 5. 8–13;
Justin, 11. 15; Plutarch, Alexander, 42. 3–43. 3; Arrian,
3. 19–22. The standard version in all is that Dareius was still
living when discovered, but died before Alexander saw him.
Plutarch, De Fortuna aut Virtute Alexandri, on the other hand, has Alexander covering Dareius with his own cloak (1. 11. 332 f).2Continued from chaps, 48. 1 and 62. 6–63. 4.3Curtius (6. 1. 19) suggests that this was due to Antipater’s fear of Alexander.4Curtius. 6. 1. 20. This delegation is to be distinguished from the Spartan envoys to Dareius whom Alexander arrested (Curtius, 6. 5. 7; Arrian, 3. 24. 4).5Cephisophon was archon at Athens from July of 329 to June of 328 b.c. The Roman consuls of 331 b.c were C. Valerius Potitus and M. Claudius Marcellus (Broughton, 1. 143).6These names appear as Nabarzanes and Barsaëntes in Curtius and Arrian.329