Diodorus of Sicily
59. Ὡς δ᾿ ἤγγισαν ἀλλήλαις αἱ δυνάμεις καὶ διὰ
τῶν τόξων καὶ σφενδονῶν, ἔτι δὲ τῶν ἀκοντιζομένων
σαυνίων τὰ ῥιπτούμενα βέλη παρανήλωτο,
2πρὸς τὴν ἐκ χειρὸς μάχην κατήντησαν. καὶ πρῶτον
τῶν ἱππέων συστησαμένων ἀγῶνα καὶ τῶν Μακεδόνων
τῷ δεξιῷ κέρατι διαγωνιζομένων ὁ μὲν
Δαρεῖος τοῦ λαιοῦ κέρατος ἡγούμενος συναγωνιστὰς
εἶχε τοὺς συγγενεῖς ἱππεῖς, ἐπιλέκτους ταῖς ἀρεταῖς
καὶ ταῖς εὐνοίαις, χιλίους ἐν μιᾷ περιειλημμένους
3εἴλῃ. οὗτοι δὲ θεατὴν ἔχοντες τῆς ἰδίας ἀνδραγαθίας
τὸν βασιλέα τὸ πλῆθος τῶν ἐπ᾿ αὐτὸν φερομένων
βελῶν προθύμως ἐξεδέχοντο. συνῆσαν δὲ
τούτοις οἵ τε μηλοφόροι, διάφοροι1 ταῖς ἀνδραγαθίαις
καὶ πολλοὶ κατὰ τὸ πλῆθος, πρὸς δὲ τούτοις
Μάρδοι καὶ Κοσσαῖοι,2 ταῖς τε τῶν σωμάτων ὑπεροχαῖς
καὶ ταῖς λαμπρότησι τῶν ψυχῶν θαυμαζόμενοι.
4συνηγωνίζοντο δὲ τούτοις οἵ τε περὶ τὰ
βασίλεια διατρίβοντες καὶ τῶν Ἰνδῶν οἱ κράτιστοι
κατ᾿ ἀνδρείαν. οὗτοι μὲν οὖν μετὰ πολλῆς βοῆς
ἐπιρράξαντες τοῖς πολεμίοις ἐκθύμως ἠγωνίζοντο
καὶ τῷ πλήθει κατεπόνουν τοὺς Μακεδόνας.
5Μαζαῖος δὲ τὸ δεξιὸν ἔχων κέρας καὶ μετὰ τῶν
ἀρίστων ἱππέων διαγωνιζόμενος εὐθὺς κατὰ τὴν
πρώτην ἔφοδον τῶν ἀνθεστώτων ἀνεῖλεν οὐκ ὀλίγους,
δισχιλίους δὲ Καδουσίους καὶ χιλίους τῶν
Σκυθῶν ἱππεῖς ἐπιλέκτους ἐξέπεμψε, προστάξας
περιιππεῦσαι τὸ κέρας τὸ τῶν πολεμίων καὶ προσελάσαντας
τῇ παρεμβολῇ τῆς ἀποσκευῆς κυριεῦσαι.




1διάφοροι supplied by Hertlein.2Κισσαῖοι RX.286Book XVII
59. As the main bodies now neared each other and, 331/0 b.c. employing bows and slings and throwing javelins, expended their missiles, they turned to hand to hand fighting. The cavalry first joined battle, and as the Macedonians were on the right wing, Dareius, who commanded his own left, led his kinsman cavalry against them. These were men chosen for courage and for loyalty, the whole thousand included in one squadron.1 Knowing that the king was watching their behaviour, they cheerfully faced all of the missiles which were cast in his direction. With them were engaged the Apple Bearers,2 brave and numerous, and in addition to these Mardi and Cossaei, who were admired for their strength and daring, as well as all the household troops belonging to the palace and the best fighters among the Indians. They all raised a loud battle cry and, attacking, engaged the enemy valiantly and pressed hard upon the Macedonians because of their superior numbers.
Mazaeus was in command of the Persian right wing with the best of the cavalry under him and killed not a few of his opponents at the first onslaught, but sent off two thousand Cadusii and a thousand picked Scythian horsemen with orders to ride around the enemy’s flank and to continue on to their camp and


1Curtius, 4. 15. 24–25. This was the royal chiliarchy,
commanded by the chiliarch or grand vizier. The members had the court rank of Royal Relatives. Like Diodorus, Curtius (4. 12) writes only of left and right wings in the Persian army, with the king in the former position (4. 14. 8). Arrian (3. 11. 5) places the king correctly in the centre.2So called from the fact that the butts of their spears were carved in the likeness of apples. They constituted the royal foot guards. Arrian (3. 11. 3–4) gives from an official list captured after the battle Kinsmen, Melophoroi, Indians, Carians, and Mardi. The Cossaei are named by Curtius also (4. 12. 10), certainly in error, since they were not subjects of the king (chap. 111. 4).287