Diodorus of Sicily

ἀγχινοίᾳ στρατηγικῇ, Διόφαντον τὸν Ἀθηναῖον καὶ
Λάμιον τὸν Σπαρτιάτην, διὰ τούτων ἅπαντα κατώρθωσε·
τότε δ᾿ ὑπολαμβάνων ἑαυτὸν ἱκανὸν εἶναι
στρατηγὸν οὐδενὶ τῆς ἡγεμονίας μετεδίδου καὶ διὰ
τὴν ἀπειρίαν οὐδὲν ἠδύνατο πράττειν τῶν ἐν τῷ
3πολέμῳ χρησίμων. τὰ μὲν οὖν πολίσματα φρουραῖς
ἀξιολόγοις διαλαβὼν παρεφύλαττεν, αὐτὸς δὲ
τῶν Αἰγυπτίων ἔχων τρισμυρίους, τῶν δ᾿ Ἑλλήνων
πεντακισχιλίους, τῶν δὲ Λιβύων τοὺς ἡμίσεις
ταῖς εὐκαιροτάταις τῶν εἰσβολῶν ἐφήδρευεν. τοιαύτης
δὲ παρ᾿ ἀμφοτέροις οὔσης τῆς διατάξεως
Νικόστρατος μὲν ὁ τῶν Ἀργείων στρατηγὸς ἔχων
ἡγεμόνας Αἰγυπτίους ὧν ἦσαν ὅμηροι παῖδες παρὰ
τοῖς Πέρσαις καὶ γυναῖκες, παρέπλευσε μετὰ τοῦ
στόλου διά τινος διώρυγος εἰς τόπον κεκρυμμένον,
ἐκβιβάσας δὲ τοὺς στρατιώτας καὶ παρεμβολὴν
4ὀχυρωσάμενος κατεστρατοπέδευσεν. οἱ δὲ τὸν πλησίον
τόπον παραφυλάττοντες μισθοφόροι τῶν Αἰγυπτίων
ὡς ᾔσθοντο τὴν τῶν πολεμίων παρουσίαν
εὐθὺς ἐξεβοήθουν, ὄντες οὐκ ἐλάττους τῶν ἑπτακισχιλίων.
5ἔχων δ᾿ αὐτῶν τὴν ἡγεμονίαν Κλείνιος
ὁ Κῷος συνέταξε τὴν δύναμιν εἰς μάχην. ἀντιταχθέντων
δὲ τῶν καταπεπλευκότων ἐγένετο καρτερὰ
μάχη· καθ᾿ ἣν οἱ μετὰ τῶν Περσῶν Ἕλληνες
ἀγωνισάμενοι λαμπρῶς τόν τε στρατηγὸν Κλείνιον
ἐφόνευσαν καὶ τῶν ἄλλων στρατιωτῶν κατέκοψαν
6πλείους τῶν πεντακισχιλίων. Νεκτανεβὼς δ᾿ ὁ
τῶν Αἰγυπτίων βασιλεὺς ἀκούσας τὴν τῶν ἰδίων
ἀπώλειαν κατεπλάγη, νομίσας καὶ τὴν λοιπὴν τῶν
372Book XVI

and in sagacity in the art of war, Diophantus1 the 350/49 b.c. Athenian and Lamius the Spartan, and it was because of them that he had been victorious in all respects. At this time, however, since he supposed that he himself was a competent general, he would not share the command with anyone and so, because of his inexperience, was unable to execute any of the moves that would have been useful in this war. Now when he had provided the towns here and there with considerable garrisons, he maintained a strict guard there, and having in his own command thirty thousand Egyptians, five thousand Greeks, and half the Libyans, he held them in reserve to defend the most exposed approaches. Such being the disposition of the forces on both sides, Nicostratus, the general of the Argives, having as guides Egyptians whose children and wives were held as hostages by the Persians, sailed by with his fleet through a canal into a hidden district and, disembarking his men and fortifying a site for a camp, encamped there. The mercenaries of the Egyptians who were keeping a strict guard in the neighbourhood, observing the presence of the enemy, straightway made a sally in number not less than seven thousand. Cleinius the Coan, their commander, drew up his force in line of battle. And when those who had sailed in were drawn up opposite, a sharp battle ensued in the course of which the Greeks serving with the Persians, fighting brilliantly, slew the general Cleinius and cut down more than five thousand of the rest of the soldiers. Nectanebôs the Egyptian king, on hearing of the loss of his men, was terror-stricken,
thinking that the rest of the Persian army

1Cp. Isocrates, Letters, 8. 8. Diophantus was still absent from Athens at the time of this letter, 350 b.c.373