Diodorus of Sicily

διμναίους καὶ λέοντα χρυσοῦν καὶ γυναῖκα, τριά
κοντα ταλάντων χρυσοῦ σταθμὸν ἀγόντων τῶν πάντων·
ὥστε τὸ πᾶν κατακοπὲν χρυσίον εἰς ἀργυρίου
λόγον ἀναγομένων τῶν χρημάτων εὑρίσκεσθαι τάλαντα
τετρακισχίλια· τῶν δ᾿ ἀργυρῶν ἀναθημάτων
τῶν τε ὑπὸ Κροίσου καὶ τῶν ἄλλων ἁπάντων ἀνατεθέντων
τοὺς πάντας στρατηγοὺς δεδαπανηκέναι1
τάλαντα πλείω τῶν ἑξακισχιλίων, προστιθεμένων
δὲ καὶ τῶν χρυσῶν ἀναθημάτων ὑπερβάλλειν τὰ
7μύρια τάλαντα. ἔνιοι δὲ τῶν συγγραφέων φασὶν
οὐκ ἐλάττω γενέσθαι τὰ συληθέντα τῶν ἐν τοῖς
Περσικοῖς θησαυροῖς ὑπ᾿ Ἀλεξάνδρου κατακτηθέντων.
ἐπεχείρησαν δ᾿ οἱ περὶ τὸν Φάλαικον στρατηγοὶ
καὶ τὸν ναὸν ὀρύττειν, εἰπόντος τινὸς ὡς ἐν
αὐτῷ θησαυρὸς εἴη πολὺν ἔχων ἄργυρόν τε καὶ
χρυσόν· καὶ τὰ περὶ τὴν ἑστίαν καὶ τὸν τρίποδα
φιλοτίμως ἀνέσκαπτον. ὁ δὲ μηνύσας τὸν θησαυρὸν
μάρτυρα παρείχετο τὸν ἐπιφανέστατον καὶ ἀρχαιότατον
τῶν ποιητῶν Ὅμηρον ἐν οἷς λέγει
οὐδ᾿ ὅσα λάινος οὐδὸς ἀφήτορος ἐντὸς ἐέργει
Φοίβου Ἀπόλλωνος Πυθοῖ ἐνὶ πετρηέσσῃ.
8τῶν δὲ στρατιωτῶν ἐγχειρούντων σκάπτειν τὰ περὶ
τὸν τρίποδα σεισμοὶ μεγάλοι γενόμενοι τοῖς Φωκεῦσι
φόβον ἐπέστησαν, φανερῶς δὲ τῶν θεῶν προσημαινόντων
τὴν κατὰ τῶν ἱεροσύλων κόλασιν
ἀπέστησαν τῶν ἔργων. ὁ δὲ τῆς παρανομίας ταύτης
ἡγεμὼν Φίλων ὁ προειρημένος ταχὺ τῷ δαιμονίῳ
τὰς προσηκούσας δίκας ἐξέτισε.
57. Τῆς δὲ τῶν ἱερῶν χρημάτων φθορᾶς τὴν μὲν
ὅλην ἐπιγραφὴν ἔσχον Φωκεῖς, μετέσχον δὲ τῆς

1Fischer would supply φασὶ or the like after δεδαπανηκέναι.396Book XVI

golden statues of a lion and of a woman, weighing in 347/6 b.c. all thirty talents of gold, so that the sum total of gold that was coined into money, referred to the standard of silver, is found to be four thousand talents, while of the silver offerings, those dedicated by Croesus and all the others, all three generals had spent more than six thousand talents’ worth, and if to these were added the gold dedications, the sum surpassed ten thousand talents. Some of the historians say that the pillaged property was not less than the sums acquired by Alexander1 in the treasure chambers of the Persians. The generals on the staff of Phalaecus took steps even to dig up the temple, because some one said that there was a treasure chamber in it containing much gold and silver, and they zealously dug up the ground about the hearth and the tripod. The man who gave information about the treasure offered as witness the most famous and ancient of poets Homer, who says in a certain passage2:
“Nor all the wealth beneath the stony floor that lies
Where Phoebus, archer god, in rocky Pytho dwells.”
But as the soldiers attempted to dig about the tripod, great earthquakes occurred and roused fear in the hearts of the Phocians, and since the gods clearly indicated in advance the punishment they would visit upon the temple-robbers, the soldiers desisted from their efforts. The leader of this sacrilege, the aforementioned Philon, was promptly punished as he deserved for his crime against the god.
57. Although the loss of the sacred property was ascribed entirely to the Phocians, the Athenians and


1See Book 17, 66 and 71.2Iliad, 9. 404–405.397