Diodorus of Sicily
40. Ἐπ᾿ ἄρχοντος δ᾿ Ἀθήνησι Νικηράτου Ῥωμαῖοι
κατέστησαν ὑπάτους Μάρκον Ἀτίλιον καὶ
Μάρκον Οὐαλέριον, ὀλυμπιὰς δ᾿ ἤχθη δευτέρα πρὸς
ταῖς ἑκατὸν καὶ δέκα, καθ᾿ ἣν ἐνίκα Γρύλος1
Χαλκιδεύς. ἐπὶ δὲ τούτων Ἀλέξανδρος μετὰ τὴν
ἐν Ἰσσῷ νίκην τοὺς μὲν τελευτήσαντας ἔθαψεν, ἐν
οἷς καὶ τῶν πολεμίων τοὺς ἐν ταῖς ἀνδραγαθίαις
θαυμασθέντας· μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα τοῖς θεοῖς μεγαλοπρεπεῖς
θυσίας συντελέσας καὶ τοὺς ἐν τῇ μάχῃ κατ᾿
ἀρετὴν διαφόρους γενομένους τιμήσας ταῖς ἀξίαις
ἑκάστους δωρεαῖς ἐφ᾿ ἡμέρας τινὰς ἀνέλαβε τὴν
2δύναμιν. ἔπειτα προάγων ἐπ᾿ Αἰγύπτου καὶ καταντήσας
εἰς τὴν Φοινίκην τὰς μὲν ἄλλας πόλεις
παρέλαβεν, ἑτοίμως τῶν ἐγχωρίων προσδεξαμένων
αὐτόν.
Οἱ δὲ Τύριοι βουλομένου τοῦ βασιλέως τῷ
Ἡρακλεῖ τῷ Τυρίῳ θῦσαι προπετέστερον διεκώλυσαν
3αὐτὸν τῆς εἰς τὴν πόλιν εἰσόδου. τοῦ δ᾿
Ἀλεξάνδρου χαλεπῶς ἐνέγκαντος καὶ διαπειλησαμένου
πολεμήσειν τὴν πόλιν οἱ Τύριοι τεθαρρηκότως
ὑπέμενον τὴν πολιορκίαν, ἅμα μὲν Δαρείῳ
χαριζόμενοι καὶ τὴν πρὸς αὐτὸν εὔνοιαν βεβαίαν
τηροῦντες καὶ νομίζοντες μεγάλας δωρεὰς ἀντὶ
ταύτης τῆς χάριτος ἀντιλήψεσθαι παρὰ τοῦ βασιλέως,
ἐπισπώμενοι μὲν τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον εἰς
πολυχρόνιον καὶ ἐπικίνδυνον πολιορκίαν, διδόντες
δ᾿ ἄνεσιν τῷ Δαρείῳ πρὸς τὰς παρασκευάς, ἅμα δὲ
καὶ πιστεύοντες τῇ τε ὀχυρότητι τῆς νήσου καὶ ταῖς



1So RX; Πρύαλος F (Γρύλλος in margin by 2nd hand).230Book XVII
40. When Niceratus was archon at Athens, the 332/1 b.c. Romans elected as consuls Marcus Atilius and Marcus Valerius, and the one hundred and twelfth Olympic Games were held, in which Grylus of Chalcis was the victor.1 In this year, Alexander buried the dead from his victory at Issus, including even those of the Persians who had distinguished themselves by courage. Then he performed rich sacrifices to the gods and rewarded those who had borne themselves well in battle with gifts appropriate to each, and rested the army for some days. Then he marched on towards Egypt, and as he came into Phoenicia, received the submission of all the other cities, for their inhabitants accepted him willingly.
At Tyre, however, when the king wished to sacrifice to the Tyrian Heracles,2 the people overhastily barred him from entering the city; Alexander became angry and threatened to resort to force, but the Tyrians cheerfully faced the prospect of a siege. They wanted to gratify Dareius and keep unimpaired their loyalty to him, and thought also that they would receive great gifts from the king in return for such a favour. They would draw Alexander into a protracted and difficult siege and give Dareius time for his military preparations, and at the same time they had confidence in the strength of their island and the


1Nicetes was archon at Athens from July 332 to June
331 b.c. (Arrian, 2. 24. 6, calls him Anicetus). The consuls of
335 b.c. (Broughton, 1. 139) were M. Atilius Regulus Ca- lenus and M. Valerius Corvus. The 112th Olympic Games were held in July 332 b.c.2For this Heracles cp. B. C. Brundage, Journal of Near Eastern Studies, 17 (1958), 225–236. The siege of Tyre is described by Curtius (4. 2. 1–4. 18; Justin, 11. 10. 10–14; Plutarch, Alexander, 24. 2–25. 2; Arrian, 2. 16–24). It was the time of the great annual festival of the god (Curtius, 4. 2. 10), and the Tyrians may have felt that to allow Alexander to sacrifice at that time would have meant acknowledging his sovereignty.231