Diodorus of Sicily

φρουρουμένην ὑπὸ Ἀλεξάνδρου τοῦ Μακεδόνος,
ταύτην μὲν παρέλαβεν, εἰς δὲ τὴν Μακεδονίαν
παρελθὼν καὶ συμμαχίαν ποιησάμενος πρὸς Ἀλέξανδρον
τὸν τῶν Μακεδόνων βασιλέα, ὅμηρον ἔλαβε
παρ᾿ αὐτοῦ τὸν ἀδελφὸν Φίλιππον, ὃν ἐξέπεμψεν
εἰς τὰς Θήβας. τὰ δὲ κατὰ τὴν Θετταλίαν διοικησάμενος
ὥς ποτ᾿ ἔδοξεν αὐτῷ συμφέρειν τοῖς
Βοιωτοῖς, ἐπανῆλθεν εἰς τὴν οἰκείαν.
68. Τούτων δὲ πραχθέντων Ἀρκάδες καὶ Ἀργεῖοι
καὶ Ἠλεῖοι συμφρονήσαντες ἔγνωσαν στρατεύειν
ἐπὶ τοὺς Λακεδαιμονίους, καὶ πρεσβεύσαντες
πρὸς Βοιωτοὺς ἔπεισαν αὐτοὺς κοινωνεῖν τοῦ πολέμου·
οἱ δ᾿ Ἐπαμεινώνδαν καταστήσαντες ἡγεμόνα
μετ᾿ ἄλλων βοιωταρχῶν, ἐξέπεμψαν στρατιώτας
πεζοὺς μὲν ἑπτακισχιλίους, ἱππεῖς δ᾿ ἑξακοσίους.
Ἀθηναῖοι δὲ πυθόμενοι τὴν Βοιωτῶν στρατιὰν
παριοῦσαν εἰς τὴν Πελοπόννησον, ἐξέπεμψαν δύναμιν
2καὶ στρατηγὸν ἐπ᾿ αὐτοὺς Χαβρίαν. οὗτος
δὲ παρελθὼν εἰς Κόρινθον, καὶ προσλαβόμενος καὶ
παρὰ Μεγαρέων καὶ Πελληνέων, ἔτι δὲ Κορινθίων
στρατιώτας, στρατόπεδον συνεστήσατο ἀνδρῶν μυρίων·
μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα Λακεδαιμονίων καὶ τῶν ἄλλων
συμμάχων παραγενομένων εἰς Κόρινθον συνήχθησαν
3οἱ σύμπαντες οὐκ ἐλάττους δισμυρίων. ἔδοξεν οὖν
αὐτοῖς ὀχυρώσασθαι τὰς παρόδους καὶ διακωλύειν
τοὺς Βοιωτοὺς τῆς εἰς Πελοπόννησον εἰσβολῆς.
ἀρξάμενοι δ᾿ ἀπὸ Κεγχρεῶν μέχρι Λεχαίου σταυρώμασι
σ


140Book XV

of Macedon,1 he obtained its surrender. 369/8 b.c. Then proceeding into Macedon, where he made an alliance with Alexander the Macedonian king, he took from him as a hostage his brother Philip, whom he sent to Thebes.2 When he had settled Thessalian affairs as he thought fit in the interest of the Boeotians, he returned home.
68. After these events, Arcadians, Argives, and Eleians, making common cause, decided to take the field against the Lacedaemonians, and having sent a commission to the Boeotians prevailed on them to join in the war. They appointed Epameinondas commander3 along with other boeotarchs and dispatched seven thousand foot and six hundred horse. The Athenians, hearing that the Boeotian army was about to pass into the Peloponnese, dispatched an army and Chabrias as general against them. He arrived in Corinth, added to his number Megarians,4 Pellenians,5 and also Corinthians, and so gathered a force of ten thousand men. Later, when the Lacedaemonians and other allies arrived at Corinth, there were assembled no less than twenty thousand men all told. They decided to fortify the approaches and prevent the Boeotians from invading the Peloponnese. From Cenchreae6 to Lechaeum they fenced off the area




1See chap. 61. 4, 5.2For a different account concerning Philip see Book 16.
2.2. Cary, Cambridge Ancient History, 6. 86, disagrees with
both passages in Diodorus. See Aeschines, On the Embassy, 28.3An account of this expedition is in Xenophon, Hell. 7. 1. 15–22. See also Pausanias, 9. 15. 4.4According to Isocrates (On the Peace, 118), Megara remained neutral. It is obvious here that she afforded passage to both parties.5Pellene was the easternmost town of Achaïa, slightly north-west of Sicyon and Corinth.6The line from Cenchreae (on the Saronic Gulf) to Lechaeum (on the Corinthian Gulf) crossed the neck of the isthmus close to the Peloponnese and just included the city of Corinth. Mentioned in Book 11. 16. 3.141