Diodorus of Sicily

ἐν αὐτῇ παρασκευαῖς, ἔτι δὲ τοῖς ἀπογόνοις αὐτῶν
Καρχηδονίοις.
4Ὁ δὲ βασιλεὺς ὁρῶν κατὰ θάλατταν μὲν δυσπολιόρκητον
οὖσαν τὴν πόλιν διά τε τὴν παρασκευὴν
τῶν κατὰ τὸ τεῖχος ἔργων καὶ τὴν ὑπάρχουσαν ἐν
αὐτῇ δύναμιν ναυτικήν, κατὰ δὲ γῆν σχεδὸν ἀπραγμάτευτον
οὖσαν διὰ τὸ τέτταρσι σταδίοις διείργεσθαι
τῆς ἠπείρου ὅμως ἔκρινε συμφέρειν πάντα
κίνδυνον καὶ πόνον ὑπομένειν ὑπὲρ τοῦ μὴ καταφρονηθῆναι
τὴν τῶν Μακεδόνων δύναμιν ὑπὸ μιᾶς
5καὶ τῆς τυχούσης πόλεως. εὐθὺς οὖν καθαιρῶν τὴν
παλαιὰν λεγομένην Τύρον καὶ πολλῶν μυριάδων
κομιζουσῶν τοὺς λίθους χῶμα κατεσκεύαζε δίπλεθρον
τῷ πλάτει. πανδημεὶ δὲ προσλαβόμενος τοὺς
κατοικοῦντας τὰς πλησίον πόλεις ταχὺ διὰ τὰς1
πολυχειρίας ἠνύετο τὰ τῶν ἔργων.
41. Οἱ δὲ Τύριοι τὸ μὲν πρῶτον προσπλέοντες
τῷ χώματι κατεγέλων τοῦ βασιλέως, εἰ τοῦ Ποσειδῶνος
ἑαυτὸν δοκεῖ περιέσεσθαι· μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα
παραδόξως τοῦ χώματος αὐξομένου τέκνα μὲν καὶ
γυναῖκας καὶ τοὺς γεγηρακότας εἰς Καρχηδόνα
διακομίζειν ἐψηφίσαντο, τοὺς δ᾿ ἀκμάζοντας ταῖς
ἡλικίαις ἐπέλεξαν πρὸς τὴν τειχομαχίαν καὶ ναυμαχίαν
ἑτοίμως παρεσκεύαζον, ἔχοντες τριήρεις
2ὀγδοήκοντα. τέλος δὲ τῶν τέκνων καὶ γυναικῶν
μέρος μὲν ἔφθασαν ὑπεκθέμενοι πρὸς τοὺς Καρχηδονίους,
καταταχούμενοι δ᾿ ὑπὸ τῆς πολυχειρίας
καὶ ταῖς ναυσὶν οὐκ ὄντες ἀξιόμαχοι συνηναγκάσθησαν



1τὰς Fischer: τῆς codd.232Book XVII

military forces in it. They also hoped for help from 332/1 b.c. their colonists, the Carthaginians.1
The king saw that the city could hardly be taken by sea because of the engines mounted along its walls and the fleet that it possessed, while from the land it was almost unassailable because it lay four furlongs away from the coast.2 Nevertheless he determined to run every risk and make every effort to save the Macedonian army from being held in contempt by a single undistinguished city. Immediately he demolished what was called Old Tyre3 and set many tens of thousands of men to work carrying stones to construct a mole two plethra in width.4 He drafted into service the entire population of the neighbouring cities and the project advanced rapidly because the workers were numerous.
41. At first, the Tyrians sailed up to the mole and mocked the king, asking if he thought that he would get the better of Poseidon.5 Then, as the work proceeded with unexpected rapidity, they voted to transport their children and women and old men to Carthage, assigned the young and able-bodied to the defence of the walls, and made ready for a naval engagement with their eighty triremes. They did succeed in getting a part of their children and women to safety with the Carthaginians,6 but they were outstripped by the abundance of Alexander’s labour force, and, not being able to stop his advance with their ships, were compelled to stand the siege with





1Justin, 11 10. 12. Curtius (4. 3. 19) reports that the
Carthaginians were unable to send reinforcements.2Curtius, 4. 2. 7.3Curtius, 4. 2. 18.4Two hundred feet.5Curtius, 4. 2. 20.6Curtius, 4. 3. 20; Justin, 11. 10. 14. Below, in chap. 46.4, Diodorus states that most of these persons were actually removed to safety.233