Diodorus of Sicily

ἡμέρας ἔχοντες ἀρκοῦσαν τὴν βοήθειαν καὶ διελθόντες
ἡμέρας τέσσαρας διεξεπέρασαν1 τὴν ἄνυδρον.
ἀδήλου δὲ τῆς ὁδοῦ καθεστώσης διὰ τὸ πλῆθος τῆς
ἄμμου οἱ καθηγούμενοι τῆς ὁδοῦ προσήγγειλαν τῷ
βασιλεῖ διότι κόρακες δεξιοὶ κλάζοντες τὴν τρίβον
τῆς ἐπὶ τὸ ἱερὸν φερούσης ἀτραποῦ προσημαίνουσιν.
6οἰωνισάμενος δὲ τὸ συμβαῖνον ὁ Ἀλέξανδρος
καὶ διαλαβὼν δέχεσθαι τὸν θεὸν ἀσμένως τὴν παρουσίαν
αὐτοῦ προῆγε κατὰ σπουδήν. καὶ τὸ μὲν
πρῶτον κατήνυσεν ἐπὶ τὴν πικρὰν καλουμένην λίμνην,
μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα πορευθεὶς σταδίους ἑκατὸν
παρήλλαξε τὰς ἐπικαλουμένας Ἄμμωνος πόλεις·
ἐντεῦθεν δ᾿ ὁδοιπορήσας μίαν ἡμέραν συνήγγισε τῷ
τεμένει.
50. Ἡ δὲ περὶ τὸ ἱερὸν τοῦτο χώρα περιέχεται
ὑπὸ ἐρήμου καὶ ἀνύδρου τῆς ἀμμώδους,2 πάσης
φιλανθρωπίας ἐστερημένης.3 αὐτὴ δ᾿ ἐπὶ μῆκος
καὶ πλάτος ἐπὶ σταδίους πεντήκοντα παρήκουσα
πολλοῖς μὲν καὶ καλοῖς ὕδασι ναματιαίοις διαρρεῖται,
δένδρων δὲ παντοδαπῶν καὶ μάλιστα καρπίμων
πληθύει· καὶ τὸν μὲν ἀέρα τῇ κράσει παραπλήσιον
ἔχει ταῖς ἐαριναῖς ὥραις, τόποις δὲ καυματώδεσι
περιεχομένη μόνη παρηλλαγμένην παρέχεται τοῖς
2ἐνδιατρίβουσι τὴν εὐκρασίαν. τὸ μὲν οὖν τέμενός
φασιν ἱδρύσασθαι Δαναὸν τὸν Αἰγύπτιον, τὴν δὲ
ἱερὰν τοῦ θεοῦ χώραν περιοικοῦσι κατὰ μὲν τὴν
μεσημβρίαν καὶ δύσιν Αἰθίοπες, κατὰ δὲ τὴν ἄρκτον

1διεξεπέρασαν Post (cp. Herodotus, 3. 4. 3); διεξεπεσαν
codd.2ἀμμώδους codd.; ἄμμου RX, which may be better.3ἐστερημένης Cospius; ἐστερημένη codd.260Book XVII

days’ supply in hand marched for four days and came 331/0 b.c. out of the desert.1 At one point, when their road could not be traced because of the sand dunes, the guide pointed out to the king that crows cawing on their right were calling their attention to the route which led to the temple.2 Alexander took this for an omen, and thinking that the god was pleased by his visit pushed on with speed. First he came to the so-called Bitter Lake, and then, proceeding another hundred furlongs, he passed by the Cities of Ammon.3 Then, after a journey of one day, he approached the sanctuary.
50. The land where this temple lies is surrounded by a sandy desert and waterless waste, destitute of anything good for man. The oasis is fifty furlongs in length and breadth and is watered by many fine springs, so that it is covered with all sorts of trees, especially those valued for their fruit. It has a moderate climate like our spring and, surrounded as it is by very hot regions, alone furnishes to its people a contrasting mildness of temperature.4 It is said that the sanctuary was built by Danaus the Egyptian. The land, which is sacred to the god, is occupied on the south and west by Ethiopians, and on the north by







1The four days are mentioned by Curtius, 4. 7. 15.2The crows come from Aristobulus; Arrian, 3. 3. 6; cp. Curtius, 4. 7. 15; Plutarch, Alexander, 27. 2–3.3These localities are not mentioned by the other sources, and the first looks like a mistake for the salt lakes at the Wadi Natrun. There is a small oasis between Mersa Matruh and Siwah, but this could hardly be the “Cities of Ammon,” The total map distance from the coast to Siwah is about 90 miles,4Curtius, 4. 7. 17.261