Diodorus of Sicily

τινὰς ἀπέλυσεν, ἐλθούσης περὶ τούτων πρεσβείας
παρ᾿ Ἀντιγόνου. αὐτὸς δὲ παρῆλθεν ἐπὶ τὸ καλούμενον
Ἔκρηγμα κἀκεῖ συνελθὼν εἰς λόγους Ἀντιγόνῳ
πάλιν ἀπῆλθεν, οὐ συγχωροῦντος Ἀντιγόνου
τὰ ἀξιούμενα.
65. Ἡμεῖς δὲ διεληλυθότες τὰ πραχθέντα τῶν
Ἑλλήνων τῆς Εὐρώπης περὶ τὴν Ἑλλάδα καὶ Μακεδονίαν
ἐν μέρει διέξιμεν περὶ τῶν πρὸς ἑσπέραν
νευόντων μερῶν. Ἀγαθοκλῆς γὰρ ὁ τῶν Συρακοσίων
δυνάστης κατέχων φρούριον τῶν Μεσσηνίων
ἐπηγγείλατο λαβὼν παρ᾿ αὐτῶν τριάκοντα
2τάλαντα παραδώσειν τὸν τόπον. δόντων δὲ τῶν
Μεσσηνίων τἀργύριον1 οὐ μόνον διεψεύσατο τοὺς
πιστεύσαντας τῆς ἐπαγγελίας, ἀλλὰ καὶ τὴν Μεσσήνην
αὐτὴν ἐπεχείρησε καταλαβέσθαι. πυθόμενος
γὰρ μέρος τι τοῦ τείχους ἐν αὐτῇ πεπτωκέναι πεζῇ
μὲν τοὺς ἱππεῖς ἀπέστειλεν ἐκ Συρακουσσῶν, αὐτὸς
δ᾿ ἀναλαβὼν ναῦς ἡμιολίας νυκτὸς κατέπλευσε
3πλησίον τῆς πόλεως. προαισθομένων δὲ τῶν ἐπιβουλευομένων2
ταύτης μὲν τῆς ἐπιβολῆς ἀπέτυχεν,
ἐπὶ δὲ τὰς Μύλας πλεύσας καὶ πολιορκήσας τὸ
φρούριον δι᾿ ὁμολογίας παρέλαβε. καὶ τότε μὲν εἰς
Συρακούσσας ἐχωρίσθη, κατὰ δὲ τὰς τῶν καρπῶν
συγκομιδὰς πάλιν ἐστράτευσεν ἐπὶ τὴν Μεσσήνην.
4πλησίον δὲ τῆς πόλεως στρατοπεδεύσας καὶ προσβολὰς
συνεχεῖς ποιούμενος οὐδὲν ἀξιόλογον ἴσχυσε
βλάψαι τοὺς πολεμίους· καὶ γὰρ τῶν ἐκ Συρακουσσῶν





1τἀργύριον Reiske: ἀργύριον.2ἐπιβουλευομένων Reiske: προεπιβουλευομένων.410Book XIX

of the other captives when an envoy in their behalf 315 b.c. came from Antigonus. He himself went to Ecregma,1 as it is called, where he conferred with Antigonus, returning again since Antigonus would not agree to his demands.2
65. Now that we have related the deeds of the European Greeks in Greece and Macedonia, we shall consider in due order the history of the western regions.3 Agathocles, the dynast of Syracuse, who was holding a fort of the Messenians,4 promised to surrender the position on receiving from them thirty talents; but when the Messenians gave him the money, he not only failed to keep his promise to those who had put faith in him, but he also undertook to capture Messene itself. On learning that a certain section of the wall of the city was in ruins, he sent his cavalry by land from Syracuse while he himself sailed close to the city by night with light vessels.5 Since, however, the intended victims of the plot learned of it beforehand, this attack failed; but he sailed to Mylae and besieged the fort, which surrendered by capitulation. He then departed for Syracuse, but at the time of the harvest he made another expedition against Messene. He camped near the city and made repeated attacks, but he was not able to inflict any considerable damage upon his enemies, for many of the exiles from Syracuse had



1The “Outbreak” between Lake Sirbonis and the sea
east of the Delta of the Nile.2Continued in chap. 66.3Continued from chap. 10.4i.e. the people of Messenê (or Messana) in north-eastern Sicily.5The ναῦς ἡμιολία, however it may have received its name (literally, a ship of one and a half), was a light swift vessel, found useful by Alexander on the rivers of India (Arrian, Anabasis, 6. 1. 1, 18. 3), but apparently used in the Mediterranean chiefly by pirates (Book 16. 61.4; Arrian, Anabasis, 3. 2. 4).411