Diodorus of Sicily
Ἡ γενομένη ἐν Ἀρείοίς μονομαχία καὶ παράληψις τοῦ
ἔθνους.
Βήσσου τοῦ ἀνελόντος Δαρεῖον θάνατος.
Ὡς Ἀλέξανδρος διὰ τῆς ἀνύδρου πορευθεὶς πολλοὺς
ἀπέβαλε τῶν στρατιωτῶν.
Ὡς τοὺς Βραγχίδας τὸ παλαιὸν ὑπὸ Περσῶν μετοικισθέντας
εἰς τὰ ἔσχατα τῆς βασιλείας ὡς προδότας τῶν
Ελλήνων ἀνεῖλεν Ἀλέξανδρος.
Ὡς ὁ βασιλεὺς ἐπὶ Σογοδιανοὺς καὶ Σκύθας ἐστράτευσεν.
Ὡς οἱ πρωτεύοντες Σογδιανῶν ἀπαγόμενοι πρὸς τὸν
θάνατον παραδόξως ἐσώθησαν.
Ὡς Ἀλέξανδρος ἀποστάντας τοὺς Σογδιανοὺς κατεπολέμησε
καὶ κατέσφαξεν αὐτῶν πλείους τῶν δώδεκα
μυριάδων.
Ὡς Βακτριανοὺς ἐκόλασε καὶ Σογδιανοὺς τὸ δεύτερον
ἐχειρώσατο καὶ πόλεις ἔκτισεν εὐκαίρως πρὸς τὰς τῶν
ἀφισταμένων κολάσεις.
Ἀπόστασις τρίτη Σογδιανῶν καὶ ἅλωσις τῶν εἰς τὴν
Πέτραν καταφυγόντων.
Περὶ τοῦ ἐν Βασίστοις1 κυνηγίου καὶ τοῦ πλήθους τῶν
ἐν αὐτῷ θηρίων.
Περὶ τῆς εἰς τὸν Διόνυσον ἁμαρτίας καὶ τῆς παρὰ τὸν
πότον ἀναιρέσεως Κλείτου.
Περὶ τῆς Καλλισθένους τελευτῆς.
Στρατεία τοῦ βασιλέως εἰς τοὺς καλουμένους Ναύτακας2
καὶ φθορὰ τῆς δυνάμεως ὑπὸ πολλῆς χιόνος.
Ὡς Ἀλέξανδρος ἐρασθεὶς Ῥωξάνης τῆς Ὀξυάρτου ἔγημεν
αὐτὴν καὶ τῶν φίλων πολλοὺς ἔπεισε γῆμαι τὰς τῶν
ἐπισήμων βαρβάρων θυγατέρας.
1Bazaira in Curtius, 8. 1. 10.2Nautaca in Curtius, 8. 2. 19.110Book XVII
The single combat that took place in the territory of the Areii and their annexation (chap. 83. 1–6).
The death of Bessus, the murderer of Dareius (chap. 83. 7–9).
How Alexander marched through the desert and lost many of his men (this and the subsequent chapters are missing).
How the Branchidae, who of old had been settled by the Persians on the borders of their kingdom, were slain by Alexander as traitors to the Greeks.
How the king led his troops against the Sogdiani and Scythians.
How the chieftains of the Sogdiani, who were being led off to execution, were unexpectedly saved.
How Alexander defeated the Sogdiani who had revolted and slew more than one hundred and twenty thousand of them.
How he punished the Bactriani and subdued the Sogdiani a second time and founded cities in suitable places to restrain any who rebelled.
The third rebellion of the Sogdiani and capture of those who took refuge in the “Rock.”
Concerning the hunt in Basista and the abundance of game there.
Concerning the sin against Dionysus and the slaying of Cleitus at the drinking bout.
Concerning the death of Callisthenes.
The campaign of the king against the people called Nautaces and the destruction of the army in heavy snow.
How Alexander, enamoured of Roxanê, daughter of Oxyartes, married her and persuaded numbers of his friends to marry the daughters of the prominent Iranians.
111