Diodorus of Sicily

ὁμιλίαις ἐξιδιοποιησάμενος προετρέψατο πρὸς τοὺς
ἐπιφερομένους κινδύνους. παραγγείλας δὲ ἑτοίμους
εἶναι πρὸς ἀναζυγὴν ὥρμησε μετὰ τῆς δυνάμεως
ἀφ᾿ ἑσπέρας, οὐδενὶ δηλώσας τὸν τόπον εἰς ὃν
6διεγνωκὼς ἦν καταντᾶν. τὴν δὲ νύκτα πᾶσαν ὁδοιπορήσας
ἐν τάχει κατεστρατοπέδευσε παρὰ τὸν
Νεῖλον πλησίον φρουρίου τινὸς ὃ προσηγορεύετο
Καμήλων τεῖχος. διαφαινούσης δὲ τῆς ἡμέρας
διεβίβαζε τὴν δύναμιν ἡγουμένων μὲν1 τῶν ἐλεφάντων,
ἐπακολουθούντων δὲ τῶν ὑπασπιστῶν καὶ
κλιμακοφόρων καὶ τῶν ἄλλων δι᾿ ὧν ἔμελλε τὴν
τειχομαχίαν ποιεῖσθαι. ἐπὶ πᾶσι δὲ ἐπεβάλοντο οἱ
κράτιστοι τῶν ἱππέων, οὓς διενοεῖτο ἐπιπέμπειν2
τοῖς περὶ τὸν Πτολεμαῖον, ἐὰν τύχωσιν ἐπιφαινόμενοι.
34. Μεσοπορούντων δ᾿ αὐτῶν ἐπεφάνησαν οἱ
περὶ τὸν Πτολεμαῖον δρόμῳ προσιόντες πρὸς τὴν
τοῦ πολίσματος ἐπικουρίαν. φθασάντων δ᾿ αὐτῶν
καὶ παρεισπεσόντων εἰς τὸ χωρίον καὶ διά τε
τῶν σαλπίγγων καὶ βοῆς φανερὰν ποιησάντων τὴν
ἑαυτῶν παρουσίαν, οἱ μὲν περὶ τὸν Περδίκκαν
οὐ κατεπλάγησαν, ἀλλὰ τολμηρῶς προσῆγον τοῖς
2τειχίσμασιν. εὐθὺ δ᾿ οἱ μὲν ὑπασπισταὶ προσθέμενοι
τὰς κλίμακας ἀνέβαινον, οἱ δ᾿ ἐπὶ τῶν
ἐλεφάντων τὸν χάρακα διέσπων καὶ τὰς ἐπάλξεις
ἐρρίπτουν. ὁ δὲ Πτολεμαῖος ἔχων περὶ αὐτὸν3 τοὺς
ἀρίστους καὶ βουλόμενος προτρέψασθαι τοὺς ἄλλους
ἡγεμόνας καὶ φίλους προσιέναι τοῖς δεινοῖς αὐτὸς
ἀναλαβὼν τὴν σάρισαν καὶ στὰς ἐπ᾿ ἄκρου τοῦ
προτειχίσματος τὸν μὲν ἡγούμενον τῶν ἐλεφάντων
ἐξετύφλωσεν, ὑπερδέξιον ἔχων τὴν στάσιν, τὸν
δὲ ἐπικαθήμενον Ἰνδὸν τραυματίαν ἐποίησεν, τοὺς
1μὲν added by Rhodoman.2ἐπιπέμπειν Wesseling, Fischer: πέμπειν.3αὑτὸν Dindorf.106Book XVIII

over to his service and inspired them to meet the 321 b.c. coming dangers. After warning them to be ready to break camp, he set out with his army at evening, disclosing to no one the point to which he intended to go. After marching all night at top speed he made camp beside the Nile near a certain fortified post that is called the Fort of Camels. And as day was dawning, he began to send the army across, the elephants in the van, then following them the shield-bearers and the ladder-carriers, and the others whom he expected to use in the attack on the fort. Last of all came the bravest of the cavalry, whom he planned to send against the troops of Ptolemy if they happened to appear.
34. When they were halfway over, Ptolemy and his troops did appear, coming at a run to the defence of the post. Although these got the start of the attackers, threw themselves into the fort, and made their arrival known by blasts of the trumpet and by shouts, the troops of Perdiccas were not frightened, but boldly assaulted the fortifications. At once the shield-bearers set up the scaling ladders and began to mount them, while the elephant-borne troops were tearing the palisades to pieces and throwing down the parapets. Ptolemy, however, who had the best soldiers near himself and wished to encourage the other commanders and friends to face the dangers, taking his long spear and posting himself on the top of the outwork, put out the eyes of the leading elephant, since he occupied a higher position, and wounded its Indian mahout. Then, with utter contempt




107