Diodorus of Sicily

αὐτοῖς κατὰ νοῦν προχωρούντων, δύναμιν
ἐξέπεμψαν εἰς τὴν Εὔβοιαν τὴν παραφυλάξουσαν
μὲν τοὺς συμμάχους, καταπολεμήσουσαν δὲ τοὺς
3ἐναντίους. κατὰ δὲ τὴν Εὔβοιαν βραχὺ μὲν πρὸ
τούτων τῶν χρόνων Νεογένης τις ὄνομα μετ᾿ Ἰάσονος
τοῦ Φεραίου συλλέξας στρατιώτας κατελάβετο
τήν τε ἀκρόπολιν τῶν Ἑστιαιέων, καὶ τύραννον
ἑαυτὸν ἀπέδειξε ταύτης τῆς χώρας καὶ τῆς τῶν
Ὠρειτῶν1 πόλεως. ἄρχοντος δ᾿ αὐτοῦ βιαίως καὶ
ὑπερηφάνως Λακεδαιμόνιοι Θηριπίδην ἀπέστειλαν
4ἐπ᾿ αὐτόν. ὁ δὲ τὸ μὲν πρῶτον ἐπεχείρει λόγοις
πεῖσαι τὸν τύραννον ἐκχωρεῖν ἐκ τῆς ἀκροπόλεως·
ὡς δ᾿ οὐ προσεῖχε, παρακαλέσας τοὺς ἐγχωρίους
πρὸς τὴν ἐλευθερίαν ἐξεπολιόρκησε2 τὸ χωρίον καὶ
τοῖς Ὠρείταις1 τὴν ἐλευθερίαν ἀποκατέστησεν, δι᾿ ἣν
αἰτίαν οἱ τὴν Ἑστιαιέων καλουμένην χώραν οἰκοῦντες
οἰκείως διετέθησαν πρὸς τοὺς Σπαρτιάτας, καὶ
5βεβαίως ἐτήρουν τὴν φιλίαν. τῆς δ᾿ ὑπὸ τῶν
Ἀθηναίων ἐκπεμφθείσης δυνάμεως ἡγούμενος Χαβρίας
ἐπόρθησε τὴν Ἑστιαιῶτιν χώραν, καὶ τὴν
καλουμένην μὲν Μητρόπολιν, κειμένην δ᾿ ἐπί τινος
ἐρυμνοῦ λόφου, τειχίσας, ἀπέλιπεν ἐν αὐτῇ φρουράν,
αὐτὸς δὲ ταῖς Κυκλάσι νήσοις ἐπιπλέων προσηγάγετο
Πεπάρηθον καὶ Σκίαθον καί τινας ἄλλας
τεταγμένας ὑπὸ Λακεδαιμονίοις.
31. Οἱ δὲ ὁρῶντες τὴν τῶν συμμάχων ὁρμὴν
πρὸς τὴν ἀπόστασιν ἀκατάσχετον οὖσαν, ἐπαύσαντο
τῆς προϋπαρχούσης βαρύτητος καὶ ταῖς




1Ὠρειτῶν Palmer: ὠρωπίων.2ἐξεπολιόρκησε Dindorf: ἐπολιόρκησε.30Book XV

affairs proceeding to their liking, dispatched a 377/6 b.c. force to Euboea to serve at once as a protection for their allies and to subdue the opposition. In Euboea a short time before this a certain Neogenes with the assistance of Jason of Pherae had gathered soldiers and occupied the citadel of Hestiaea,1 and so appointed himself tyrant of this country and of the city of the Oreitans. Because of his violent and arrogant rule the Lacedaemonians had then dispatched Theripides
against him. Theripides at first endeavoured to prevail upon the tyrant by reasoning with him to leave the citadel; but when the tyrant paid no heed to him, he rallied the people of the district to the cause of freedom, took the place by storm, and restored their freedom to the people of Oreüs. For this reason the people who inhabit what is known as the country of the Hestiaeans continued to be loyal to the Spartans and preserved intact their friendship. Chabrias, in command of the force dispatched by the Athenians,2 laid waste Hestiaeotis, and, fortifying its Metropolis, as it is called, which is situated on a naturally steep hill, left a garrison in it, and then sailed to the Cyclades and won over Peparethos and Sciathos and some other islands which had been subject to the Lacedaemonians.
31. The Spartans, perceiving that the impulse of their allies to secede was not to be checked, put an end to their former severity and began to treat the


1Hestiaea, more often written Histiaea, a city on the
north coast of Euboea, had a deme named Oreüs (Theopom. in Strabo, 445), situated to the west a few miles, which in Pericles’ time received two thousand cleruchs and was officially known as Histiaea. The names became confused in antiquity. (See Richard Kiepert, p. 6 of text to Map XIV, Formae O.A.)2According to Plutarch, De Gloria Atheniensium, 8, Timotheüs, not Chabrias, freed Euboea.31