Diodorus of Sicily
2χωρὶς τοῦ πατρός. συναγαγόντος δ᾿ ἐν
τοῖς ὅπλοις ἐκκλησίαν αὐτοῦ καὶ στάντος ἐπί τινος
ἀναστήματος μετὰ ἀγωνίας καὶ διατροπῆς ὁ μὲν
ὄχλος ἀνεβόησε μιᾷ φωνῇ θαρρεῖν καὶ πρὸ τοῦ τὸν
κήρυκα καταπαῦσαι τοὺς θορυβοῦντας ἅπαντες σιωπὴν
3παρείχοντο. οὔτε γὰρ στρατιωτικὸν ἔγκλημα
ὑπῆρχε περὶ αὐτὸν οὔτε πολιτικόν, ἅτε προσφάτως
ἐφ᾿ ἡγεμονίας τεταγμένον· ὅπερ εἴωθε γίγνεσθαι
τοῖς παλαιοῖς στρατηγοῖς ὅταν ἐκ πολλῶν προφάσεων
ἓν ἔγκλημα πρὸς ἕνα καιρὸν ἀθροίζηται· τὸ
γὰρ πλῆθος ἀεὶ δυσάρεστον ἐπὶ τῶν αὐτῶν μένον
καὶ πᾶν τὸ μὴ πλεονάζον κεχαρισμένην ἔχει τὴν
μεταβολήν· τοῦ τε πατρὸς ἤδη γεγηρακότος αἱ τῆς
βασιλείας ἐλπίδες εἰς τὴν τούτου διαδοχὴν ἦγον
4ἅμα τὴν ἀρχὴν καὶ τῶν ὄχλων εὔνοιαν. ἦν δὲ
καὶ τῷ κάλλει καὶ τῷ μεγέθει διάφορος, ἔτι δὲ κεκοσμημένος
ὅπλοις βασιλικοῖς εἶχε πολλὴν ὑπεροχὴν
καὶ κατάπληξιν, δι᾿ ἧς εἰς ἐλπίδας ἁδρὰς
ἦγε τοὺς πολλούς· πρὸς δὲ τούτοις πρᾳότης τις ἦν
περὶ αὐτόν, ἁρμόζουσα νέῳ βασιλεῖ, δι᾿ ἧς εἰς προθυμίαν
ἐξεκαλεῖτο πάντας, ὥστε καὶ τοὺς ἐκτὸς
τάξεως συνδραμεῖν ἐπὶ τὴν ἀκρόασιν, συναγωνιῶντας
τῇ νεότητι καὶ τῇ μελλούσῃ γίνεσθαι κρίσει
5διὰ τῆς παρατάξεως. οὐ μόνον γὰρ πρὸς πλείονας
ἤμελλε διακινδυνεύειν, ἀλλὰ καὶ πρὸς ἡγεμόνας
σχεδὸν μεγίστους, Πτολεμαῖον καὶ Σέλευκον· οὗτοι
γὰρ πάντας τοὺς πολέμους Ἀλεξάνδρῳ συστρατευσάμενοι
καὶ πολλάκις καθ᾿ αὑτοὺς δυνάμεων


56Book XIX

apart from his father.1 When he had called together 312 b.c. an assembly under arms and, anxious and agitated, had taken his position on a raised platform, the crowd shouted with a single voice, bidding him be of good courage; and then, before the herald bade the shouting men cease their tumult, they all became silent. For, because he had just been placed in command, neither soldiers nor civilians had for him any ill will such as usually develops against generals of long standing when at a particular time many minor irritations are combined in a single mass grievance; for the multitude becomes exacting when it remains under the same authority, and every group that is not preferred welcomes change. Since his father was already an old man, the hopes of the kingdom, centring upon his succession, were bringing him the command and at the same time the goodwill of the multitude. Moreover, he was outstanding both in beauty and in stature, and also when clad in royal armour he had great distinction and struck men with awe, whereby he created great expectations in the multitude. Furthermore, there was in him a certain gentleness becoming to a youthful king, which won for him the devotion of all, so that even those outside the ranks ran together to hear him, feeling sympathetic anxiety on account of his youth and the critical struggle that impended. For he was about to fight a decisive battle not only against more numerous forces, but also against generals who were almost the greatest, Ptolemy and Seleucus. Indeed, these generals, who had taken part with Alexander in all his wars and had

1In the late summer of 314 b.c., when he was sent to
Syria, he was 22 years old (chap. 69. 1). For the following battle cp. the brief accounts in Justin, 15. 1. 6–9, and Plutarch, Demetrius, 5.57