Plutarch’s Lives

ἕκτῃ, καθ᾿ ἣν ἡμέραν ὁ τῆς Ἐφεσίας Ἀρτέμιδος
ἐνεπρήσθη νεώς· ᾧ γ᾿ Ἡγησίας ὁ Μάγνης ἐπιπεφώνηκεν
ἐπιφώνημα κατασβέσαι τὴν πυρκαϊὰν
ἐκείνην ὑπὸ ψυχρίας δυνάμενον· εἰκότως γὰρ
ἔφη καταφλεχθῆναι τὸν νεὼν τῆς Ἀρτέμιδος
ἀσχολουμένης περὶ τὴν Ἀλεξάνδρου μαίωσιν.
4ὅσοι δὲ τῶν μάγων ἐν Ἐφέσῳ διατρίβοντες666
ἔτυχον, τὸ περὶ τὸν νεὼν πάθος ἡγούμενοι πάθους
ἑτέρου σημεῖον εἶναι, διέθεον τὰ πρόσωπα τυπτόμενοι
καὶ βοῶντες ἄτην ἅμα καὶ συμφορὰν
μεγάλην τῇ Ἀσίᾳ τὴν ἡμέραν ἐκείνην τετοκέναι.
Φιλίππῳ δὲ ἄρτι Ποτίδαιαν ᾑρηκότι τρεῖς ἧκον
5ἀγγελίαι κατὰ τὸν αὐτὸν χρόνον· ἡ μὲν Ἰλλυριοὺς
ἡττᾶσθαι μάχῃ μεγάλῃ διὰ Παρμενίωνος, ἡ δὲ
Ὀλυμπίασιν ἵππῳ κέλητι νενικηκέναι, τρίτη δὲ
περὶ τῆς Ἀλεξάνδρου γενέσεως. ἐφ᾿ οἷς ἡδόμενον,
ὡς εἰκός, ἔτι μᾶλλον οἱ μάντεις ἐπῆραν ἀποφαινόμενοι
τὸν παῖδα τρισὶ νίκαις συγγεγεννημένον
ἀνίκητον ἔσεσθαι.


IV. Τὴν μὲν οὖν ἰδέαν τοῦ σώματος οἱ Λυσίππειοι
μάλιστα τῶν ἀνδριάντων ἐμφαίνουσιν, ὑφ᾿
οὗ μόνου καὶ αὐτὸς ἠξίου πλάττεσθαι. καὶ γὰρ
μάλισθ᾿ ἃ πολλοὶ τῶν διαδόχων ὕστερον καὶ τῶν
φίλων ἀπεμιμοῦντο, τήν τε ἀνάτασιν τοῦ αὐχένος
εἰς εὐώνυμον ἡσυχῆ κεκλιμένου καὶ τὴν ὑγρότητα
τῶν ὀμμάτων, διατετήρηκεν ἀκριβῶς ὁ τεχνίτης.
2Ἀπελλῆς δὲ γράφων τὸν κεραυνοφόρον οὐκ
ἐμιμήσατο τὴν χρόαν, ἀλλὰ φαιότερον καὶ πεπινωμένον
ἐποίησεν. ἦν δὲ λευκός, ὥς φασιν· ἡ δὲ
230Alexander, iv.

which is Loüs, on the sixth day of the month, and on this day the temple of Ephesian Artemis was burnt. It was apropos of this that Hegesias the Magnesian made an utterance frigid enough to have extinguished that great conflagration. He said, namely, it was no wonder that the temple of Artemis was burned down, since the goddess was busy bringing Alexander into the world. But all the Magi who were then at Ephesus, looking upon the temple’s disaster as a sign of further disaster, ran about beating their faces and crying aloud that woe and great calamity for Asia had that day been born. To Philip, however, who had just taken Potidaea, there came three messages at the same time: the first that Parmenio had conquered the Illyrians in a great battle, the second that his race-horse had won a victory at the Olympic games, while a third announced the birth of Alexander. These things delighted him, of course, and the seers raised his spirits still higher by declaring that the son whose birth coincided with three victories would be always victorious.


IV. The outward appearance of Alexander is best represented by the statues of him which Lysippus made, and it was by this artist alone that Alexander himself thought it fit that he should be modelled. For those peculiarities which many of his successors and friends afterwards tried to imitate, namely, the poise of the neck, which was bent slightly to the left, and the melting glance of his eyes, this artist has accurately observed. Apelles, however, in painting him as wielder of the thunder-bolt, did not reproduce his complexion, but made it too dark and swarthy. Whereas he was of a fair colour, as they say, and his
231