Plutarch’s Lives
2Ἕλλησιν ὑπὲρ τῆς ἐλευθερίας παρέσχον. ἔπεμψε
δὲ καὶ Κροτωνιάταις εἰς Ἰταλίαν μέρος τῶν
λαφύρων, τὴν Φαΰλλου τοῦ ἀθλητοῦ τιμῶν προθυμίαν
καὶ ἀρετήν, ὃς περὶ τὰ Μηδικὰ τῶν ἄλλων
Ἰταλιωτῶν ἀπεγνωκότων τοὺς Ἕλληνας ἰδιόστολον
ἔχων ναῦν ἔπλευσεν εἰς Σαλαμῖνα, τοῦ κινδύνου
τι μεθέξων. οὕτω τις εὐμενὴς ἦν πρὸς
ἅπασαν ἀρετὴν καὶ καλῶν ἔργων φύλαξ καὶ
οἰκεῖος.


XXXV. Ἐπιὼν δὲ τὴν Βαβυλωνίαν ἅπασαν
εὐθὺς ἐπ᾿ αὐτῷ γενομένην ἐθαύμασε μάλιστα τό
τε χάσμα τοῦ πυρὸς ὥσπερ ἐκ πηγῆς συνεχῶς
ἀναφερομένου, καὶ τὸ ῥεῦμα τοῦ νάφθα λιμνάζοντος
διὰ τὸ πλῆθος οὐ πόρρω τοῦ χάσματος, ὃς
τἆλλα μὲν ἀσφάλτῳ προσέοικεν, οὕτω δὲ εὐπαθὴς
πρὸς τὸ πῦρ ἐστιν ὥστε, πρὶν ἢ θιγεῖν τὴν φλόγα,
δι᾿ αὐτῆς τῆς περὶ τὸ φῶς ἐξαπτόμενος αὐγῆς τὸν
2μεταξὺ πολλάκις ἀέρα συνεκκαίειν. ἐπιδεικνύμενοι
δὲ τὴν φύσιν αὐτοῦ καὶ δύναμιν οἱ βάρβαροι
τὸν ἄγοντα πρὸς τὴν κατάλυσιν τοῦ βασιλέως
στενωπὸν ἐλαφρῷ τῷ φαρμάκῳ κατεψέκασαν·
εἶτα στάντες ἐπ᾿ ἄκρῳ τοὺς λαμπτῆρας τοῖς
βεβρεγμένοις προσέθηκαν· ἤδη γὰρ συνεσκόταζε.
τῶν δὲ πρώτων εὐθὺς ἁψαμένων οὐκ ἔσχεν ἡ νομὴ
χρόνον αἰσθητόν, ἀλλ᾿ ἅμα νοήματι διῖκτο πρὸς
θάτερον πέρας καὶ πῦρ ἐγεγόνει συνεχὲς ὁ στενωπός.
3ἦν δέ τις Ἀθηνοφάνης Ἀθηναῖος τῶν
περὶ ἄλειμμα καὶ λουτρὸν εἰωθότων τὸ σῶμα
θεραπεύειν τοῦ βασιλέως καὶ τὴν διάνοιαν ἐμμελῶς
ἀπάγειν ἐπὶ τὸ ῥᾴθυμον. οὗτος ἐν τῷ
λουτρῶνι τότε παιδαρίου τῷ Ἀλεξάνδρῳ παρεστῶτος
328Alexander, xxxv.

territory to the Greeks for the struggle in behalf of their freedom.1 He sent also to the people of Croton in Italy a portion of the spoils, honouring the zeal and valour of their athlete Phaÿllus, who, in the Median wars, when the rest of the Greeks in Italy refused to help their brother Greeks, fitted out a ship at his own cost and sailed with it to Salamis, that he might have some share in the peril there.2 So considerate was Alexander towards every form of valour, and such a friend and guardian of noble deeds.


XXXV. As he traversed all Babylonia, which at once submitted to him, he was most of all amazed at the chasm from which fire continually streamed forth as from a spring, and at the stream of naphtha, so abundant as to form a lake, not far from the chasm. This naphtha is in other ways like asphaltum, but is so sensitive to fire that, before the flame touches it, it is kindled by the very radiance about the flame and often sets fire also to the intervening air. To show its nature and power, the Barbarians sprinkled the street leading to Alexander’s quarters with small quantities of the liquid; then, standing at the farther end of the street, they applied their torches to the moistened spots; for it was now getting dark. The first spots at once caught fire, and without an appreciable interval of time, but with the speed of thought, the flame darted to the other end, and the street was one continuous fire. Now, there was a certain Athenophanes, an Athenian, one of those who were accustomed to minister to the person of the king when he bathed and anointed himself, and to furnish suitable diversion for his thoughts. This man, one time when there was standing by Alexander



1In 479 b.c.2Cf. Herodotus, viii. 47.329