Plutarch’s Lives

ἐπίδοξος ἦν Ἀλεξάνδρῳ πολλὰ πράγματα
καὶ μυρίας ἀντιλήψεις καὶ ἀσχολίας παρέξειν,
4ἐπερρώσθη πρὸς τὴν ἄνω στρατείαν μᾶλλον. ἤδη
δὲ καὶ Δαρεῖος ἐκ Σούσων κατέβαινεν, ἐπαιρόμενός
τε τῷ πλήθει τῆς δυνάμεως (ἑξήκοντα γὰρ
ἦγε μυριάδας στρατοῦ), καί τινος ὀνείρου θαρρύνοντος
αὐτόν, ὃν οἱ μάγοι πρὸς χάριν ἐξηγοῦντο
μᾶλλον ἢ κατὰ τὸ εἰκός. ἔδοξε γὰρ πυρὶ νέμεσθαι
πολλῷ τὴν Μακεδόνων φάλαγγα, τὸν δὲ
Ἀλέξανδρον ἔχοντα στολὴν ἣν αὐτὸς ἐφόρει πρότερον
ἀστάνδης ὢν βασιλέως, ὑπηρετεῖν αὐτῷ·
παρελθόντα δὲ εἰς τὸ τοῦ Βήλου τέμενος ἀφανῆ
5γενέσθαι. διὰ τούτων, ὡς ἔοικεν, ὑπεδηλοῦτο
παρὰ τοῦ θεοῦ λαμπρὰ μὲν γενήσεσθαι καὶ περιφανῆ
τὰ τῶν Μακεδόνων, Ἀλέξανδρον δὲ τῆς
μὲν Ἀσίας κρατήσειν, ὥσπερ ἐκράτησε Δαρεῖος
ἐξ ἀστάνδου βασιλεὺς γενόμενος, ταχὺ δὲ σὺν
δόξῃ τὸν βίον ἀπολείψειν.


XIX. Ἔτι δὲ μᾶλλον ἐθάρρησε καταγνοὺς
δειλίαν Ἀλεξάνδρου πολὺν χρόνον ἐν Κιλικίᾳ
διατρίψαντος. ἦν δὲ ἡ διατριβὴ διὰ νόσον, ἣν οἱ
μὲν ἐκ κόπων, οἱ δὲ λουσαμένῳ ἐν τῷ τοῦ Κύδνου
2ῥεύματι καταπαγέντι1 προσπεσεῖν λέγουσι. τῶν
μὲν οὖν ἄλλων ἰατρῶν οὐδεὶς ἐθάρρει βοηθήσειν,
ἀλλὰ τὸν κίνδυνον οἰόμενοι πάσης ἰσχυρότερον
εἶναι βοηθείας ἐφοβοῦντο τὴν ἐκ τοῦ σφαλῆναι
διαβολὴν πρὸς τοὺς Μακεδόνας· Φίλιππος δ᾿ ὁ

1καταπαγέντι Bekker reads καὶ καταπαγέντι (and got chilled).274Alexander, xix.

sea-board, who was thought likely to give Alexander abundant trouble and infinite annoyance, he was all the more encouraged for his expedition into the interior. Moreover, Dareius was already coming down to the coast from Susa, exalted in spirit by the magnitude of his forces (for he was leading an army of six hundred thousand men), and also encouraged by a certain dream, which the Magi interpreted in a way to please him rather than as the probabilities demanded. For he dreamed that the Macedonian phalanx was all on fire, and that Alexander, attired in a robe which he himself formerly used to wear when he was a royal courier, was waiting upon him, after which service he passed into the temple of Belus and disappeared. By this means, as it would seem, it was suggested to Dareius from Heaven that the exploits of the Macedonians would be conspicuous and brilliant, that Alexander would be master of Asia, just as Dareius became its master when he was made king instead of royal courier, and would speedily end his life with glory.


XIX. Dareius was still more encouraged by Alexander’s long delay in Cilicia, which he attributed to cowardice. The delay was due, however, to a sickness, which assailed him in consequence of fatigues, according to some,1 but according to others, because he took a bath in the river Cydnus, whose waters were icy cold. Be that as it may, none of the other physicians had the courage to administer remedies, but thinking that the danger was too great to be overcome by any remedy whatever, they were afraid of the charges which would be made against them by the Macedonians in consequence of their failure;


1So Aristobulus (Arrian, Anab. ii. 4, 7).275