Plutarch’s Lives

λευκότης ἐπεφοίνισσεν αὐτοῦ περὶ τὸ στῆθος
μάλιστα καὶ τὸ πρόσωπον. ὅτι δὲ τοῦ χρωτὸς
ἥδιστον ἀπέπνει καὶ τὸ στόμα κατεῖχεν εὐωδία
καὶ τὴν σάρκα πᾶσαν, ὥστε πληροῦσθαι τοὺς
χιτωνίσκους, ἀνέγνωμεν ἐν ὑπομνήμασιν Ἀριστοξενείοις.
3Αἰτία δὲ ἴσως ἡ τοῦ σώματος κρᾶσις πολύθερμος
οὖσα καὶ πυρώδης· ἡ γὰρ εὐωδία γίνεται
πέψει τῶν ὑγρῶν ὑπὸ θερμότητος, ὡς οἴεται
Θεόφραστος. ὅθεν οἱ ξηροὶ καὶ διάπυροι τόποι
τῆς οἰκουμένης τὰ πλεῖστα καὶ κάλλιστα τῶν
ἀρωμάτων φέρουσιν· ἐξαιρεῖ γὰρ ὁ ἥλιος τὸ ὑγρὸν
ὥσπερ ὕλην σηπεδόνος ἐπιπολάζον τοῖς σώμασιν.
4Ἀλέξανδρον δὲ ἡ θερμότης τοῦ σώματος, ὡς
ἔοικε, καὶ ποτικὸν καὶ θυμοειδῆ παρεῖχεν.
Ἔτι δὲ ὄντος αὐτοῦ παιδὸς ἥ τε σωφροσύνη
διεφαίνετο τῷ πρὸς τἆλλα ῥαγδαῖον ὄντα καὶ
φερόμενον σφοδρῶς ἐν ταῖς ἡδοναῖς ταῖς περὶ τὸ
σῶμα δυσκίνητον εἶναι καὶ μετὰ πολλῆς πρᾳότητος
5ἅπτεσθαι τῶν τοιούτων, ἥ τε φιλοτιμία παρ᾿
ἡλικίαν ἐμβριθὲς εἶχε τὸ φρόνημα καὶ μεγαλόψυχον.
οὔτε γὰρ ἀπὸ παντὸς οὔτε πᾶσαν ἠγάπα
δόξαν, ὡς Φίλιππος λόγου τε δεινότητι σοφιστικῶς
καλλωπιζόμενος καὶ τὰς ἐν Ὀλυμπίᾳ
νίκας τῶν ἁρμάτων ἐγχαράττων τοῖς νομίσμασιν,
ἀλλὰ καὶ τῶν περὶ αὐτὸν ἀποπειρωμένων εἰ
βούλοιτ᾿ ἂν Ὀλυμπίασιν ἀγωνίσασθαι στάδιον,
ἦν γὰρ ποδώκης, “Εἴ γε,” ἔφη, “βασιλεῖς
6ἔμελλον ἕξειν ἀνταγωνιστάς.” φαίνεται δὲ καὶ
καθόλου πρὸς τὸ τῶν ἀθλητῶν γένος ἀλλοτρίως
ἔχων· πλείστους γέ τοι θεὶς ἀγῶνας οὐ μόνον
232Alexander, iv.

fairness passed into ruddiness on his breast particularly, and in his face. Moreover, that a very pleasant odour exhaled from his skin and that there was a fragrance about his mouth and all his flesh, so that his garments were filled with it, this we have read in the Memoirs of Aristoxenus.
Now, the cause of this, perhaps, was the temperament of his body, which was a very warm and fiery one; for fragrance is generated, as Theophrastus thinks, where moist humours are acted upon by heat. Wherefore the dry and parched regions of the world produce the most and best spices; for the sun draws away the moisture which, like material of corruption, abounds in vegetable bodies. And in Alexander’s case, it was the heat of his body, as it would seem, which made him prone to drink, and choleric.
But while he was still a boy his self-restraint showed itself in the fact that, although he was impetuous and violent in other matters, the pleasures of the body had little hold upon him, and he indulged in them with great moderation, while his ambition kept his spirit serious and lofty in advance of his years. For it was neither every kind of fame nor fame from every source that he courted, as Philip did, who plumed himself like a sophist on the power of his oratory, and took care to have the victories of his chariots at Olympia engraved upon his coins; nay, when those about him inquired whether he would be willing to contend in the foot-race at the Olympic games, since he was swift of foot, “Yes,” said he, “if I could have kings as my contestants.” And in general, too, Alexander appears to have been averse to the whole race of athletes; at any rate, though he instituted very many contests, not only
233