Plutarch’s Lives

ταῖς χερσὶν ἀμφοτέραις ἔπαισε τὴν κεφαλὴν πρὸς
τὸν τοῖχον. αὖθις δὲ πρὸς τοὺς κατηγοροῦντας
Ἀντιπάτρου λέγειν τι βουλόμενον τὸν Κάσανδρον
ἐκκρούων, “Τί λέγεις;” ἔφη, “τοσαύτην ὁδὸν
ἀνθρώπους μηδὲν ἀδικουμένους, ἀλλὰ συκοφαντοῦντας
3ἐλθεῖν;” φήσαντος δὲ τοῦ Κασάνδρου
τοῦτο αὐτὸ σημεῖον εἶναι τοῦ συκοφαντεῖν, ὅτι
μακρὰν ἥκουσι τῶν ἐλέγχων, ἀναγελάσας ὁ Ἀλέξανδρος,
“Ταῦτα ἐκεῖνα,” ἔφη, “σοφίσματα τῶν706
Ἀριστοτέλους εἰς ἑκάτερον τὸν λόγον· οἰμωξομένων,1
ἂν καὶ μικρὸν ἀδικοῦντες τοὺς ἀνθρώπους
4φανῆτε.” τὸ δὲ ὅλον οὕτω φασὶ δεινὸν ἐνδῦναι
καὶ δευσοποιὸν ἐγγενέσθαι τῇ ψυχῇ τοῦ Κασάνδρου
τὸ δέος, ὥστε ὕστερον χρόνοις πολλοῖς, ἤδη
Μακεδόνων βασιλεύοντα καὶ κρατοῦντα τῆς Ἑλλάδος,
ἐν Δελφοῖς περιπατοῦντα καὶ θεώμενον
τοὺς ἀνδριάντας, εἰκόνος Ἀλεξάνδρου φανείσης,
ἄφνω πληγέντα φρῖξαι καὶ κραδανθῆναι τὸ σῶμα
καὶ μόλις ἀναλαβεῖν ἑαυτόν, ἰλιγγιάσαντα πρὸς
τὴν ὄψιν.


LXXV. Ὁ δ᾿ οὖν Ἀλέξανδρος ὡς ἐνέδωκε τότε
πρὸς τὰ θεῖα ταραχώδης γενόμενος καὶ περίφοβος
τὴν διάνοιαν, οὐδὲν ἦν μικρὸν οὕτως τῶν ἀήθων
καὶ ἀτόπων ὃ μὴ τέρας ἐποιεῖτο καὶ σημεῖον·
ἀλλὰ θυομένων καὶ καθαιρόντων καὶ μαντευόντων
2μεστὸν ἦν τὸ βασίλειον. οὕτως ἄρα δεινὸν
μὲν ἡ ἀπιστία πρὸς τὰ θεῖα καὶ καταφρόνησις
αὐτῶν, δεινὴ δὲ αὖθις ἡ δεισιδαιμονία, ἥ,2 δίκην
ὕδατος ἀεὶ πρὸς τὸ ταπεινούμενον καταρρέοντος,2
1οἰμωξομένων Sint. with the best MSS.; οἰμωξομένου γε Coraës; οἰμώξῃ μὲν οὖν Bekker.2ἥ, καταρρέοντος supplied by Bekker, after Coraës.430Alexander, lxxv.

the hair with both hands dashed his head against the wall. And at another time, when Cassander would have said something in opposition to those who were bringing charges against Antipater, Alexander interrupted him, saying: “What meanest thou? Would men come so long a journey if they had not been wronged and were making false charges?” And when Cassander declared that this very fact of their coming a long distance away from the proofs showed that they were making false charges, Alexander burst out laughing and said: “These are the famous sophisms of Aristotle’s disciples for either side of the question; but ye shall rue the day if it appear that ye have done these men even a slight wrong.” And in general, as we are told, Cassander’s spirit was deeply penetrated and imbued with a dreadful fear of Alexander, so that many years afterwards, when he was now king of Macedonia and master of Greece, as he was walking about and surveying the statues at Delphi, the sight of an image of Alexander smote him suddenly with a shuddering and trembling from which he could scarcely recover, and made his head swim.


LXXV. Alexander, then, since he had now become sensitive to indications of the divine will and perturbed and apprehensive in his mind, converted every unusual and strange occurrence, were it never so insignificant, into a prodigy and portent; and sacrificers, purifiers, and diviners filled his palace. So, you see, while it is a dire thing to be incredulous towards indications of the divine will and to have contempt for them, superstition is likewise a dire thing, which, after the manner of water ever seeking the
431