Plutarch’s Lives

εὐτελοῦς σφόδρα καὶ γελοίου τὴν ὄψιν,
ᾄδοντος δὲ χαριέντως, Στέφανος ἐκαλεῖτο, “Βούλει,”
φησίν, “ὦ βασιλεῦ, διάπειραν ἐν Στεφάνῳ
τοῦ φαρμάκου λάβωμεν; ἂν γὰρ ἅψηται τούτου
καὶ μὴ κατασβεσθῇ, παντάπασιν ἂν φαίην ἄμαχον
4καὶ δεινὴν αὐτοῦ τὴν δύναμιν εἶναι.” προθύμως
δέ πως καὶ τοῦ παιδαρίου διδόντος ἑαυτὸν
πρὸς τὴν πεῖραν, ἅμα τῷ περιαλεῖψαι καὶ θιγεῖν
ἐξήνθησε φλόγα τοσαύτην τὸ σῶμα καὶ πυρὶ
κατεσχέθη τὸ πᾶν ὥστε τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον εἰς πᾶν
ἀπορίας καὶ δέους ἐλθεῖν· εἰ δὲ μὴ κατὰ τύχην
πολλοὶ παρῆσαν ἀγγεῖα πρὸς τὸ λουτρὸν ὕδατος
διὰ χειρῶν ἔχοντες, οὐκ ἂν ἔφθασεν ἡ βοήθεια
5τὴν ἐπινομήν. ἀλλὰ καὶ τότε μόγις κατέσβεσαν686
τὸ σῶμα τοῦ παιδὸς δι᾿ ὅλου πῦρ γενόμενον, καὶ
μετὰ ταῦτα χαλεπῶς ἔσχεν.
Εἰκότως οὖν ἔνιοι τὸν μῦθον ἀνασώζοντες πρὸς
τὴν ἀλήθειαν τοῦτό φασιν εἶναι τὸ τῆς Μηδείας
φάρμακον, ᾧ τὸν τραγῳδούμενον στέφανον καὶ
τὸν πέπλον ἔχρισεν. οὐ γὰρ ἐξ αὐτῶν ἐκείνων
οὐδὲ ἀπ᾿ αὐτομάτου λάμψαι τὸ πῦρ, ἀλλὰ φλογὸς
ἐγγύθεν παρατεθείσης ὀξεῖαν ὁλκὴν καὶ συναφὴν
6ἄδηλον αἰσθήσει γενέσθαι. τὰς γὰρ ἀκτῖνας
καὶ τὰ ῥεύματα τοῦ πυρὸς ἄπωθεν ἐπερχόμενα
τοῖς μὲν ἄλλοις σώμασι φῶς καὶ θερμότητα προσβάλλειν
μόνον, ἐν δὲ τοῖς ξηρότητα πνευματικὴν
ἢ νοτίδα λιπαρὰν καὶ διαρκῆ κεκτημένοις ἀθροιζόμενα
καὶ πυριμανοῦντα μεταβάλλειν ὀξέως τὴν
ὕλην. παρεῖχε δὲ ἀπορίαν ἡ γένεσις . . . εἴτε
330Alexander, xxxv.

in the bath-room a youth who had a ridiculously plain countenance, but was a graceful singer (his name was Stephanus), said, “Wilt thou, O King, that we make a trial of the liquid upon Stephanus? For if it should lay hold of him and not be extinguished, I would certainly say that its power was invincible and terrible.” The youth also, strangely enough, offered himself for the experiment, and as soon as he touched the liquid and began to anoint himself with it, his body broke out into so great a flame and was so wholly possessed by fire that Alexander fell into extreme perplexity and fear; and had it not been by chance that many were standing by holding vessels of water for the bath, the youth would have been consumed before aid reached him. Even as it was, they had great difficulty in putting out the fire, for it covered the boy’s whole body, and after they had done so, he was in a sorry plight.
It is natural, then, that some who wish to bring fable into conformity with truth should say that this naphtha is the drug which Medeia used, when, in the tragedies, she anoints the crown and the robe. For it was not from these objects themselves, they say, nor of its own accord, that the fire shot up, but a flame was placed near them, which was then so swiftly drawn into conjunction with them that the senses could not take cognisance of it. For the rays and emanations of fire which come from a distance impart to some bodies merely light and warmth; but in those which are dry and porous, or which have sufficiently rich moisture, they collect themselves together, break into fierce flame, and transform the material. There has been much discussion about
331