Plutarch’s Lives

ἔσχεν, οὐχ ὥστε ποιῆσαί τι κακόν, ἀλλ᾿ αἱ φιλοφροσύναι
τὸ σφοδρὸν ἐκεῖνο καὶ στερκτικὸν οὐκ
ἔχουσαι πρὸς αὐτὸν ἀλλοτριότητος ἐγένοντο τεκμήριον.
4ὁ μέντοι πρὸς φιλοσοφίαν ἐμπεφυκὼς
καὶ συντεθραμμένος ἀπ᾿ ἀρχῆς αὐτῷ ζῆλος καὶ
πόθος οὐκ ἐξερρύη τῆς ψυχῆς, ὡς ἡ περὶ Ἀνάξαρχόν
τε τιμὴ καὶ τὰ πεμφθέντα Ξενοκράτει
πεντήκοντα τάλαντα καὶ Δάνδαμις καὶ Καλανὸς
οὕτω σπουδασθέντες μαρτυροῦσι.


IX. Φιλίππου δὲ στρατεύοντος ἐπὶ Βυζαντίους,
ἦν μὲν ἑκκαιδεκέτης Ἀλέξανδρος, ἀπολειφθεὶς δὲ
κύριος ἐν Μακεδονίᾳ τῶν πραγμάτων καὶ τῆς
σφραγῖδος, Μαίδων τε τοὺς ἀφεστῶτας κατεστρέψατο,
καὶ πόλιν ἑλὼν αὐτῶν τοὺς μὲν βαρβάρους
ἐξήλασε, συμμίκτους δὲ κατοικίσας Ἀλεξανδρόπολιν
2προσηγόρευσεν. ἐν δὲ Χαιρωνείᾳ
τῆς πρὸς τοὺς Ἕλληνας μάχης παρὼν μετέσχε,
καὶ λέγεται πρῶτος ἐνσεῖσαι τῷ ἱερῷ λόχῳ τῶν
Θηβαίων. ἔτι δὲ καὶ καθ᾿ ἡμᾶς ἐδείκνυτο παλαιὰ669
παρὰ τὸν Κηφισὸν Ἀλεξάνδρου καλουμένη δρῦς,
πρὸς ἣν τότε κατεσκήνωσε, καὶ τὸ πολυάνδριον
οὐ πόρρω τῶν Μακεδόνων ἐστίν.
3Ἐκ μὲν οὖν τούτων, ὡς εἰκός, Φίλιππος ὑπερηγάπα
τὸν υἱόν, ὥστε καὶ χαίρειν τῶν Μακεδόνων
Ἀλέξανδρον μὲν βασιλέα, Φίλιππον δὲ στρατηγὸν
καλούντων. αἱ δὲ περὶ τὴν οἰκίαν ταραχαί,
διὰ τοὺς γάμους καὶ τοὺς ἔρωτας αὐτοῦ τρόπον
τινὰ τῆς βασιλείας τῇ γυναικωνίτιδι συννοσούσης,
244Alexander, ix.

he held him in more or less of suspicion, not to the extent of doing him any harm, but his kindly attentions lacked their former ardour and affection towards him, and this was proof of estrangement. However, that eager yearning for philosophy which was imbedded in his nature and which ever grew with his growth, did not subside from his soul, as is testified by the honour in which he held Anaxarchus, by his gift of fifty talents to Xenocrates, and by the attentions which he so lavishly bestowed upon Dandamis and Calanus.1


IX. While Philip was making an expedition against Byzantium,2 Alexander, though only sixteen years of age, was left behind as regent in Macedonia and keeper of the royal seal, and during this time he subdued the rebellious Maedi, and after taking their city, drove out the Barbarians, settled there a mixed population, and named the city Alexandropolis. He was also present at Chaeroneia and took part in the battle against the Greeks,3 and he is said to have been the first to break the ranks of the Sacred Band of the Thebans. And even down to our day there was shown an ancient oak by the Cephisus, called Alexander’s oak, near which at that time he pitched his tent; and the general sepulchre of the Macedonians is not far away.
In consequence of these exploits, then, as was natural, Philip was excessively fond of his son, so that he even rejoiced to hear the Macedonians call Alexander their king, but Philip their general. However, the disorders in his household, due to the fact that his marriages and amours carried into the kingdom the infection, as it were, which reigned in the




1See chapter lxv.2In 340 b.c.3In 338 b.c.245