Plutarch’s Lives

εἶδε μὲν ὅλκια καὶ κρωσσοὺς καὶ πυέλους καὶ
ἀλαβάστρους, πάντα χρυσοῦ, ἠσκημένα περιττῶς,
ὠδώδει δὲ θεσπέσιον οἷον ὑπὸ ἀρωμάτων καὶ
μύρων ὁ οἶκος, ἐκ δὲ τούτου παρῆλθεν εἰς σκηνὴν
ὕψει τε καὶ μεγέθει καὶ τῷ περὶ τὴν στρωμνὴν
καὶ τραπέζας καὶ τὸ δεῖπνον αὐτοῦ κόσμῳ θαύματος
ἀξίαν, διαβλέψας πρὸς τοὺς ἑταίρους, “Τοῦτο
ἦν, ὡς ἔοικεν,” ἔφη, “τὸ βασιλεύειν.”


XXI. Τρεπομένῳ δὲ πρὸς τὸ δεῖπνον αὐτῷ
φράζει τις ἐν τοῖς αἰχμαλώτοις ἀγομένας μητέρα
καὶ γυναῖκα Δαρείου καὶ θυγατέρας δύο παρθένους
ἰδούσας τὸ ἅρμα καὶ τὰ τόξα κόπτεσθαι καὶ
θρηνεῖν, ὡς ἀπολωλότος ἐκείνου. συχνὸν οὖν
ἐπισχὼν χρόνον Ἀλέξανδρος, καὶ ταῖς ἐκείνων
τύχαις μᾶλλον ἢ ταῖς ἑαυτοῦ ἐμπαθὴς γενόμενος,
πέμπει Λεοννάτον, ἀπαγγεῖλαι κελεύσας ὡς οὔτε
Δαρεῖος τέθνηκεν οὔτε Ἀλέξανδρον δεδιέναι χρή·
2Δαρείῳ γὰρ ὑπὲρ ἡγεμονίας πολεμεῖν, ἐκείναις δὲ
πάντα ὑπάρξειν ὧν καὶ Δαρείου βασιλεύοντος
ἠξιοῦντο. τοῦ δὲ λόγου ταῖς γυναιξὶν ἡμέρου
καὶ χρηστοῦ φανέντος ἔτι μᾶλλον τὰ τῶν ἔργων
ἀπήντα φιλάνθρωπα. θάψαι γὰρ ὅσους ἐβούλοντο
Περσῶν ἔδωκεν, ἐσθῆτι καὶ κόσμῳ χρησαμέναις
ἐκ τῶν λαφύρων, θεραπείας τε καὶ τιμῆς
ἣν εἶχον οὐδ᾿ ὁτιοῦν ἀφεῖλε, συντάξεις δὲ καὶ μείζονας
3ἐκαρποῦντο τῶν προτέρων. ἡ δὲ καλλίστη
καὶ βασιλικωτάτη χάρις ἦν παρ᾿ αὐτοῦ γυναιξὶ
γενναίαις γενομέναις αἰχμαλώτοις καὶ σώφροσι
μήτε ἀκοῦσαί τι μήτε ὑπονοῆσαι μήτε προσδοκῆσαι
282Alexander, xxi.

saw the basins and pitchers and tubs and caskets, all of gold, and curiously wrought, while the apartment was marvellously fragrant with spices and unguents, and when he passed from this into a tent which was worthy of admiration for its size and height, and for the adornment of the couch and tables and banquet prepared for him, he turned his eyes upon his companions and said: “This, as it would seem, is to be a king.”


XXI. As he was betaking himself to supper, someone told him that among the prisoners were the mother, wife, and two unmarried daughters of Dareius,
and that at sight of his chariot and bow they beat their breasts and lamented, believing that he was dead. Accordingly, after a considerable pause, more affected by their affliction than by his own success, he sent Leonnatus, with orders to tell them that Dareius was not dead, and that they need have no fear of Alexander; for it was Dareius upon whom he was waging war for supremacy, but they should have everything which they used to think their due when Dareius was undisputed king. If this message was thought by the women to be mild and kindly, still more did the actions of Alexander prove to be humane. For he gave them permission to bury whom they pleased of the Persians, and to use for this purpose raiment and adornment from the spoils, and he abated not one jot of their honourable maintenance, nay, they enjoyed even larger allowances than before. But the most honourable and most princely favour which these noble and chaste women received from him in their captivity was that they neither heard, nor suspected, nor
283