Plutarch’s Lives

ἐβούλετο δὲ ἡ εἰκὼν ἔνδειξις εἶναι τοῦ
τὰ μέσα δεῖν μάλιστα τῆς ἀρχῆς πιέζειν καὶ μὴ
μακρὰν ἀποπλανᾶσθαι τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον.


LXVI. Ἡ δὲ διὰ τῶν ποταμῶν πρὸς τὴν θάλατταν
ὑπαγωγὴ μηνῶν ἑπτὰ χρόνον ἀνάλωσεν.
ἐμβαλὼν δὲ ταῖς ναυσὶν εἰς τὸν Ὠκεανὸν ἀνέπλευσε
πρὸς νῆσον ἣν Σκιλλοῦστιν αὐτὸς ὠνόμασεν,
ἕτεροι δὲ Ψιλτοῦκιν. ἐνταῦθα δὲ ἀποβὰς
ἔθυε τοῖς θεοῖς, καὶ τὴν φύσιν ἐπεῖδε τοῦ πελαγους
καὶ τῆς παραλίας ὅσον ἐφικτὸν ἦν. εἶτα
ἐπευξάμενος μηδένα μετ᾿ αὐτὸν ἀνθρώπων ὑπερβῆναι
2τοὺς ὅρους τῆς στρατείας ἀνέστρεφε. καὶ702
τὰς μὲν ναῦς ἐκέλευσε περιπλεῖν ἐν δεξιᾷ τὴν
Ἰνδικὴν ἐχούσας, ἡγεμόνα μὲν Νέαρχον ἀποδείξας,
ἀρχικυβερνήτην δὲ Ὀνησίκριτον· αὐτὸς δὲ
πεζῇ δι᾿ Ὠρειτῶν πορευόμενος εἰς ἐσχάτην ἀπορίαν
προήχθη καὶ πλῆθος ἀνθρώπων ἀπώλεσεν,
ὥστε τῆς μαχίμου δυνάμεως μηδὲ τὸ τέταρτον
ἐκ τῆς Ἰνδικῆς ἀπαγαγεῖν. καίτοι δώδεκα μὲν
μυριάδες ἦσαν οἱ πεζοί, τὸ δ᾿ ἱππικὸν εἰς μυρίους
3καὶ πεντακισχιλίους. ἀλλὰ καὶ νόσοι χαλεπαὶ
καὶ δίαιται πονηραὶ καὶ καύματα ξηρὰ καὶ
πλείστους ὁ λιμὸς διέφθειρεν, ἄσπορον χώραν
ἐπιόντας ἀνθρώπων κακοβίων, ὀλίγα καὶ ἀγεννῆ
πρόβατα κεκτημένων, ἃ τοὺς θαλαττίους ἰχθῦς
εἰθισμένα προσφέρεσθαι σάρκα μοχθηρὰν εἶχε
καὶ δυσώδη. μόλις οὖν ἐν ἡμέραις ἑξήκοντα
ταύτην διελθὼν καὶ τῆς Γεδρωσίας ἁψάμενος εὐθὺς
ἐν ἀφθόνοις ἦν πᾶσι, τῶν ἔγγιστα σατραπῶν
καὶ βασιλέων παρασκευασάντων.
410Alexander, lxvi.

The similitude was designed to show that Alexander ought to put most constraint upon the middle of his empire and not wander far away from it.


LXVI. His descent of the rivers to the sea consumed seven months’ time. And after emerging with his fleet into the ocean,1 he sailed out to an island to which he himself gave the name of Scillustis,
others that of Psiltucis.2 Here he landed and sacrificed to the gods, and studied the nature of the sea and of all the sea-coast that was accessible. Then, after praying that no man after him might pass beyond the bounds of his expedition, he turned to go back. His fleet he ordered to go round by sea, keeping India on the right; Nearchus was appointed admiral of the fleet, Onesicritus its chief-pilot. But he himself proceeded by land through the country of the Oreites, where he was reduced to the direst straits and lost a multitude of men, so that not even the fourth part of his fighting force was brought back from India. And yet his infantry had once numbered a hundred and twenty thousand, and his cavalry fifteen thousand. But grievous diseases, wretched food, parching heats, and, worst of all, famine destroyed them, since they traversed an un-tilled
country of men who dragged out a miserable existence, who possessed but few sheep and those of a miserable sort, since the sea-fish which they ate made their flesh unsavoury and rank. It was with difficulty, then, that Alexander passed through this country in sixty days; but as soon as he reached Gedrosia he had all things in abundance, for the nearest satraps and princes had provided them.
1In midsummer of 325 b.c.2It is Cilluta in Arrian (Anab. vi. 19, 3).411