Plutarch’s Lives
4πρὸς τὴν ἤπειρον. ὡς οὖν εἶδε τόπον
εὐφυΐᾳ διαφέροντα (ταινία γάρ ἐστιν ἰσθμῷ
πλάτος ἔχοντι σύμμετρον ἐπιεικῶς διείργουσα
λίμνην τε πολλὴν καὶ θάλασσαν ἐν λιμένι
μεγάλῳ τελευτῶσαν), εἰπὼν ὡς Ὅμηρος ἦν ἄρα
τά τε ἄλλα θαυμαστὸς καὶ σοφώτατος ἀρχιτέκτων,
ἐκέλευσε διαγράψαι τὸ σχῆμα τῆς πόλεως
5τῷ τόπῳ συναρμόττοντας. καὶ γῆ μὲν οὐ παρῆν
λευκή, τῶν δὲ ἀλφίτων λαμβάνοντες ἐν πεδίῳ
μελαγγείῳ κυκλοτερῆ κόλπον ἦγον, οὗ τὴν ἐντὸς
περιφέρειαν εὐθεῖαι βάσεις ὥσπερ ἀπὸ κρασπέδων
εἰς σχῆμα χλαμύδος ὑπελάμβανον, ἐξ ἴσου συνάγουσαι
τὸ μέγεθος. ἡσθέντος δὲ τῇ διαθέσει τοῦ680
βασιλέως αἰφνίδιον ὄρνιθες ἀπὸ τοῦ ποταμοῦ καὶ
τῆς λίμνης, πλήθει τε ἄπειροι καὶ κατὰ γένος
παντοδαποὶ καὶ μέγεθος, ἐπὶ τὸν τόπον καταίροντες
νέφεσιν ἐοικότες οὐδὲ μικρὸν ὑπέλιπον τῶν
ἀλφίτων, ὥστε καὶ τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον διαταραχθῆναι
πρὸς τὸν οἰωνόν.
6Οὐ μὴν ἀλλὰ τῶν μάντεων θαρρεῖν παραινούντων
(πολυαρκεστάτην γὰρ οἰκίζεσθαι πόλιν ὑπ᾿
αὐτοῦ, καὶ παντοδαπῶν ἀνθρώπων ἐσομένην τροφόν)
ἔργου κελεύσας ἔχεσθαι τοὺς ἐπιμελητὰς
αὐτὸς ὥρμησεν εἰς Ἄμμωνος, ὁδὸν μακρὰν καὶ
πολλὰ μὲν ἔχουσαν ἐργώδη καὶ ταλαίπωρα, κινδύνους
δὲ δύο, τὸν μὲν ἀνυδρίας, δι᾿ ἣν ἔρημός ἐστιν
οὐκ ὀλίγων ἡμερῶν, τὸν δέ, εἰ λάβρος ἐν ἄμμῳ
βαθείᾳ καὶ ἀχανεῖ πορευομένοις ἐπιπέσοι νότος,
300Alexander, xxvi.

joined to the mainland by a causeway. And when he saw a site of surpassing natural advantages (for it is a strip of land like enough to a broad isthmus, extending between a great lagoon and a stretch of sea which terminates in a large harbour), he said he saw now that Homer was not only admirable in other ways, but also a very wise architect, and ordered the plan of the city to be drawn in conformity with this site. There was no chalk at hand, so they took barley-meal1 and marked out with it on the dark soil a rounded area, to whose inner arc straight lines extended so as to produce the figure of a chlamys, or military cloak, the lines beginning from the skirts (as one may say), and narrowing the breadth of the area uniformly.2 The king was delighted with the design; but suddenly birds from the river and the lagoon, infinite in number and of every sort and size, settled down upon the place like clouds and devoured every particle of the barley-meal, so that even Alexander was greatly disturbed at the omen.
However, the seers exhorted him to be of good cheer, since the city here founded by him would have most abundant and helpful resources and be a nursing mother for men of every nation, and so he ordered those in charge of the work to proceed with it, while he himself set out for the temple of Ammon. The journey thither was long, full of toils and hardships, and had two perils. One is the dearth of water, which leaves the traveller destitute of it for many days; the other arises when a fierce south wind smites men travelling in sand of boundless depth,



1Cf. Arrian, Anab. iii. 2, 1.2See Tarbell, “The Form of the Chlamys,” Classical Philology, 1906, p. 285.301