Plutarch’s Lives

τῆς εἰς μητέρα καὶ γυναῖκα καὶ παῖδας τοὺς ἐμοὺς
ἐπιεικείας, ᾧ ταύτην δίδωμι τὴν δεξιὰν διὰ σοῦ.”
ταῦτα εἰπὼν καὶ λαβόμενος τῆς τοῦ Πολυστράτου
3χειρὸς ἐξέλιπεν. Ἀλέξανδρος δὲ ὡς ἐπῆλθεν,
ἀλγῶν τε τῷ πάθει φανερὸς ἦν καὶ τὴν ἑαυτοῦ
χλαμύδα λύσας ἐπέβαλε τῷ σώματι καὶ περιέστειλε.
καὶ Βῆσσον μὲν ὕστερον εὑρὼν διεσφενδόνησεν,
ὀρθίων δένδρων εἰς ταὐτὸ καμφθέντων
ἑκατέρῳ μέρος προσαρτήσας τοῦ σώματος, εἶτα
μεθεὶς ἑκάτερον, ὡς ὥρμητο ῥύμῃ φερόμενον, τὸ
προσῆκον αὐτῷ μέρος νείμασθαι. τότε δὲ τοῦ
Δαρείου τὸ μὲν σῶμα κεκοσμημένον βασιλικῶς
πρὸς τὴν μητέρα ἀπέστειλε, τὸν δὲ ἀδελφὸν
Ἐξάθρην εἰς τοὺς ἑταίρους ἀνέλαβεν.


XLIV. Αὐτὸς δὲ μετὰ τῆς ἀκμαιοτάτης δυνάμεως
εἰς Ὑρκανίαν κατέβαινε· καὶ πελάγους ἰδὼν
κόλπον οὐκ ἐλάττονα μὲν τοῦ Πόντου φανέντα,
γλυκύτερον δὲ τῆς ἄλλης θαλάττης, σαφὲς μὲν
οὐδὲν ἔσχε πυθέσθαι περὶ αὐτοῦ, μάλιστα δὲ
εἴκασε τῆς Μαιώτιδος λίμνης ἀνακοπὴν εἶναι.
2καίτοι τούς γε φυσικοὺς ἄνδρας οὐκ ἔλαθε τἀληθές,
ἀλλὰ πολλοῖς ἔτεσιν ἔμπροσθεν τῆς Ἀλεξάνδρου
στρατείας ἱστορήκασιν ὅτι τεσσάρων
κόλπων εἰσεχόντων ἀπὸ τῆς ἔξω θαλάσσης
βορειότατος οὗτός ἐστι, τὸ Ὑρκάνιον πέλαγος
καὶ Κάσπιον ὁμοῦ προσαγορευόμενον.
Ἐνταῦθα τῶν βαρβάρων τινὲς ἀπροσδοκήτως
περιτυχόντες τοῖς ἄγουσι τὸν ἵππον αὐτοῦ τὸν
3Βουκεφάλαν λαμβάνουσιν. ὁ δὲ ἤνεγκεν οὐ μετρίως,


352Alexander, xliv.

my mother, wife, and children; to him, through thee, I give this right hand.” With these words he took the hand of Polystratus and then expired.1 When Alexander came up, he was manifestly distressed by what had happened, and unfastening his own cloak threw it upon the body and covered it. And when, at a later time,2 he found Bessus, he had him rent asunder. Two straight trees were bent together and a part of his body fastened to each; then when each was released and sprang vigorously back, the part of the body that was attached to it followed after. Now, however, he sent the body of Dareius, laid out in royal state, to his mother,3 and admitted his brother, Exathres, into the number of his companions.


XLIV. He himself, however, with the flower of his army, marched on into Hyrcania. Here he saw a gulf of the open sea which appeared to be as large as the Euxine, but was sweeter than the Mediterranean. He could get no clear information about it, but conjectured that in all probability it was a stagnant overflow from the Palus Maeotis. And yet naturalists were well aware of the truth, and many years before Alexander’s expedition they had set forth that this was the most northerly of four gulfs which stretch inland from the outer sea, and was called indifferently the Hyrcanian or Caspian Sea.
Here some Barbarians unexpectedly fell in with those who were leading Alexander’s horse, Bucephalas,
and captured him. Alexander was angry



1These details of the death of Dareius are not to be found in Arrian (Anab. iii. 21 fin.), but in Curtius (v. 13, 28) and Diodorus (xvii. 73).2In the spring of 329 b.c. Cf. Arrian, Anab. iii. 30, 5; iv. 7, 3 ff.3“To Persepolis, with orders that it should be buried in the royal sepulchre” (Arrian, Anab. iii. 22, 1).353