Plutarch’s Lives

ἐσχόλαζεν, ἀκροώμενος τὰ περὶ τὸν πλοῦν
καὶ τὴν μεγάλην θάλατταν. τῇ δεκάτῃ φθίνοντος
ταὐτὰ ποιήσας μᾶλλον ἀνεφλέχθη, καὶ τὴν
νύκτα βαρέως ἔσχε, καὶ τὴν ἐπιοῦσαν ἡμέραν
ἐπύρεττε σφόδρα. καὶ μεταρθεὶς κατέκειτο παρὰ
τὴν μεγάλην κολυμβήθραν, ὅτε δὴ τοῖς ἡγεμόσι
διελέχθη περὶ τῶν ἐρήμων ἡγεμονίας τάξεων,
3ὅπως καταστήσωσι δοκιμάσαντες. ἑβδόμῃ σφόδρα
πυρέττων ἔθυσεν ἐξαρθεὶς πρὸς τὰ ἱερά· τῶν
δὲ ἡγεμόνων ἐκέλευε τοὺς μεγίστους διατρίβειν ἐν
τῇ αὐλῇ, ταξιάρχους δὲ καὶ πεντακοσιάρχους ἔξω
νυκτερεύειν. εἰς δὲ τὰ πέραν βασίλεια διακομισθεὶς
τῇ ἕκτῃ μικρὸν ὕπνωσεν, ὁ δὲ πυρετὸς οὐκ
ἀνῆκεν. ἐπελθόντων δὲ τῶν ἡγεμόνων ἦν ἄφωνος,
4ὁμοίως δὲ καὶ τὴν πέμπτην· διὸ καὶ τοῖς
Μακεδόσιν ἔδοξε τεθνάναι, καὶ κατεβόων ἐλθόντες
ἐπὶ τὰς θύρας, καὶ διηπειλοῦντο τοῖς ἑταίροις ἕως
ἐβιάσαντο· καὶ τῶν θυρῶν αὐτοῖς ἀνοιχθεισῶν ἐν
τοῖς χιτῶσι καθ᾿ ἕνα πάντες παρὰ τὴν κλίνην
παρεξῆλθον. ταύτης δὲ τῆς ἡμέρας οἱ περὶ Πύθωνα
καὶ Σέλευκον εἰς τὸ Σαραπεῖον ἀποσταλέντες
ἠρώτων εἰ κομίσωσιν ἐκεῖ τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον·
ὁ δὲ θεὸς κατὰ χώραν ἐᾶν ἀνεῖλε. τῇ δὲ τρίτῃ
φθίνοντος πρὸς δείλην ἀπέθανε.


LXXVII. Τούτων τὰ πλεῖστα κατὰ λέξιν ἐν
ταῖς ἐφημερίσιν οὕτω γέγραπται. φαρμακείας
δὲ ὑποψίαν παραυτίκα μὲν οὐδεὶς ἔσχεν, ἕκτῳ δὲ707
434Alexander, lxxvii.

he devoted himself to Nearchus, listening to his story of his voyage and of the great sea. The twenty-first he spent in the same way and was still more inflamed, and during the night he was in a grievous plight, and all the following day his fever was very high. So he had his bed removed and lay by the side of the great bath, where he conversed with his officers about the vacant posts in the army, and how they might be filled with experienced men. On the twenty-fourth his fever was violent and he had to be carried forth to perform his sacrifices; moreover, he ordered his principal officers to tarry in the court of the palace, and the commanders of divisions and companies to spend the night outside. He was carried to the palace on the other side of the river on the twenty-fifth, and got a little sleep, but his fever did not abate. And when his commanders came to his bedside, he was speechless, as he was also on the twenty-sixth; therefore the Macedonians made up their minds that he was dead, and came with loud shouts to the doors of the palace, and threatened his companions until all opposition was broken down; and when the doors had been thrown open to them, without cloak or armour, one by one, they all filed slowly past his couch. During this day, too, Python and Seleucus were sent to the temple of Serapis to enquire whether they should bring Alexander thither; and the god gave answer that they should leave him where he was. And on the twenty-eighth,1 towards evening, he died.


LXXVII. Most of this account is word for word as written in the “Journals.” And as for suspicions of poisoning, no one had any immediately, but five


1June 13, 323 b.c.435