Plutarch’s Lives

μεταβαλὼν καὶ ταράξας τὰ πράγματα πολὺν
σάλον ἔχοντα καὶ κίνησιν ὑπὸ ἀηθείας ἀπέλιπε.
2φοβουμένων δὲ τῶν Μακεδόνων τὸν καιρόν, καὶ
τὰ μὲν Ἑλληνικὰ πάντως ἀφεῖναι καὶ μὴ προσβιάζεσθαι
τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον οἰομένων δεῖν, τοὺς
δὲ ἀφισταμένους τῶν βαρβάρων ἀνακαλεῖσθαι
πρᾴως καὶ θεραπεύειν τὰς ἀρχὰς τῶν νεωτερισμῶν,
αὐτὸς ἀπ᾿ ἐναντίων λογισμῶν ὥρμησε τόλμῃ
καὶ μεγαλοφροσύνῃ κτᾶσθαι τὴν ἀσφάλειαν
καὶ σωτηρίαν τοῖς πράγμασιν, ὡς, κἂν ὁτιοῦν
ὑφιέμενος ὀφθῇ τοῦ φρονήματος, ἐπιβησομένων
3ἁπάντων. τὰ μὲν οὖν βαρβαρικὰ κινήματα καὶ
τοὺς ἐκεῖ πολέμους κατέπαυσεν ὀξέως ἐπιδραμὼν
στρατῷ μέχρι πρὸς τὸν Ἴστρον, ᾗ καὶ Σύρμον
ἐνίκησε μάχῃ μεγάλῃ, τὸν βασιλέα τῶν Τριβαλλῶν·
Θηβαίους δὲ ἀφεστάναι πυθόμενος καὶ συμφρονεῖν
αὐτοῖς Ἀθηναίους, εὐθὺς ἦγε διὰ Πυλῶν
τὴν δύναμιν, εἰπὼν ὅτι Δημοσθένει παῖδα μὲν
αὐτόν, ἕως ἦν ἐν Ἰλλυριοῖς καὶ Τριβαλλοῖς, ἀποκαλοῦντι,
μειράκιον δὲ περὶ Θετταλίαν γενόμενον,
βούλεται πρὸς τοῖς Ἀθηναίων τείχεσιν ἀνὴρ
φανῆναι.
4Προσμίξας δὲ ταῖς Θήβαις καὶ διδοὺς ἔτι τῶν
πεπραγμένων μετάνοιαν ἐξῄτει Φοίνικα καὶ Προθύτην,
καὶ τοῖς μεταβαλλομένοις πρὸς αὐτὸν
ἄδειαν ἐκήρυττε. τῶν δὲ Θηβαίων ἀντεξαιτούντων


252Alexander, xi.

condition of affairs there, and then left them in a great surge and commotion, owing to the strangeness of the situation. The Macedonian counsellors of Alexander had fears of the crisis, and thought he should give up the Greek states altogether and use no more compulsion there, and that he should call the revolting Barbarians back to their allegiance by mild measures and try to arrest the first symptoms of their revolutions; but he himself set out from opposite principles to win security and safety for his realm by boldness and a lofty spirit, assured that, were he seen to abate his dignity even but a little, all his enemies would set upon him. Accordingly, he put a speedy stop to the disturbances and wars among the Barbarians by overrunning their territories with an army as far as to the river Danube, where he fought a great battle with Syrmus, the king of the Triballi, and defeated him; and on learning that the Thebans had revolted and that the Athenians were in sympathy with them, he immediately led his forces through the pass of Thermopylae, declaring that since Demosthenes had called him a boy while he was among the Illyrians and Triballians, and a stripling when he had reached Thessaly, he wished to show him that before the walls of Athens he was a man.
Arrived before Thebes,1 and wishing to give her still a chance to repent of what she had done, he merely demanded the surrender of Phoenix and Prothytes, and proclaimed an amnesty for those who came over to his side. But the Thebans made


1In September, 335 b.c. Plutarch makes no mention of a previous expedition of Alexander into Southern Greece, immediately after Philip’s death, when he received the submis- sion of all the Greek states except Sparta, and was made commander-in-chief of the expedition against Persia, in Philip’s place. See Arrian, Anab. i. 1.253