Plutarch’s Lives

θύουσιν Ἑλληνικὰς θυσίας. Ἀνδρόκοττος δὲ μειράκιον
ὢν αὐτὸν Ἀλέξανδρον εἶδε, καὶ λέγεται
πολλάκις εἰπεῖν ὕστερον ὡς παρ᾿ οὐδὲν ἦλθε τὰ
πράγματα λαβεῖν Ἀλέξανδρος, μισουμένου τε
καὶ καταφρονουμένου τοῦ βασιλέως διὰ μοχθηρίαν
καὶ δυσγένειαν.


LXIII. Ἐντεῦθεν ὁρμήσας Ἀλέξανδρος τὴν
ἔξω θάλασσαν ἐπιδεῖν, καὶ πολλὰ πορθμεῖα
κωπήρη καὶ σχεδίας πηξάμενος, ἐκομίζετο τοῖς
ποταμοῖς ὑποφερόμενος σχολαίως. ὁ δὲ πλοῦς
οὐκ ἀργὸς ἦν οὐδὲ ἀπόλεμος, προσβάλλων δὲ
ταῖς πόλεσι καὶ ἀποβαίνων ἐχειροῦτο πάντα.
πρὸς δὲ τοῖς καλουμένοις Μαλλοῖς, οὕς φασιν
Ἰνδῶν μαχιμωτάτους γενέσθαι, μικρὸν ἐδέησε
2κατακοπῆναι. τοὺς μὲν γὰρ ἀνθρώπους βέλεσιν
ἀπὸ τῶν τειχῶν ἀπεσκέδασε, πρῶτος δὲ διὰ
κλίμακος τεθείσης ἀναβὰς ἐπὶ τὸ τεῖχος, ὡς ἥ τε
κλίμαξ συνετρίβη καὶ τῶν βαρβάρων ὑφισταμένων
παρὰ τὸ τεῖχος ἐλάμβανε πληγὰς κάτωθεν,
ὀλιγοστὸς ὢν συστρέψας ἑαυτὸν εἰς μέσους ἀφῆκε
τοὺς πολεμίους καὶ κατὰ τύχην ὀρθὸς ἔστη.
3τιναξαμένου δὲ τοῖς ὅπλοις, ἔδοξαν οἱ βάρβαροι
σέλας τι καὶ φάσμα πρὸ τοῦ σώματος φέρεσθαι.
διὸ καὶ τὸ πρῶτον ἔφυγον καὶ διεσκεδάσθησαν·
ὡς δὲ εἶδον αὐτὸν μετὰ δυεῖν ὑπασπιστῶν, ἐπιδραμόντες
οἱ μὲν ἐκ χειρὸς ξίφεσι καὶ δόρασι διὰ
τῶν ὅπλων συνετίτρωσκον ἀμυνόμενον, εἷς δὲ
μικρὸν ἀπωτέρω στὰς ἐφῆκεν ἀπὸ τόξου βέλος
οὕτως εὔτονον καὶ βίαιον ὥστε τὸν θώρακα διακόψαν
ἐμπαγῆναι τοῖς περὶ τὸν μασθὸν ὀστέοις.


402Alexander, lxiii.

sacrifices in the Hellenic manner. Androcottus, when he was a stripling, saw Alexander himself, and we are told that he often said in later times that Alexander narrowly missed making himself master of the country, since its king was hated and despised on account of his baseness and low birth.


LXIII. From thence, being eager to behold the ocean, and having built many passage-boats equipped with oars, and many rafts, he was conveyed down the rivers1 in a leisurely course. And yet his voyage was not made without effort nor even without war, but he would land and assault the cities on his route and subdue everything. However, in attacking the people called Malli, who are said to have been the most warlike of the Indians, he came within a little of being cut down. For after dispersing the inhabitants from the walls with missiles, he was the first to mount upon the wall by a scaling ladder, and since the ladder was broken to pieces and he was exposed to the missiles of the Barbarians who stood along the wall below, almost alone as he was, he crouched and threw himself into the midst of the enemy, and by good fortune alighted on his feet. Then, as he brandished his arms, the Barbarians thought that a shape of gleaming fire played in front of his person. Therefore at first they scattered and fled; but when they saw that he was accompanied by only two of his guards, they ran upon him, and some tried to wound him by thrusting their swords and spears through his armour as he defended himself, while one, standing a little further off, shot an arrow at him with such accuracy and force that it cut its way through his breastplate and fastened itself in his ribs at the breast. Such was
1Hydaspes, Acesines, and Indus (Arrian, Anab. vi. 1).403