Plutarch’s Lives
4“Οἱ μὲν παῖδες,” φησίν, “ὑπὸ
τῶν Μακεδόνων κατελεύσθησαν, τὸν δὲ σοφιστὴν
ἐγὼ κολάσω καὶ τοὺς ἐκπέμψαντας αὐτὸν καὶ
τοὺς ὑποδεχομένους ταῖς πόλεσι τοὺς ἐμοὶ ἐπιβουλεύοντας,”
ἄντικρυς ἔν γε τούτοις ἀποκαλυπτόμενος
πρὸς Ἀριστοτέλην· καὶ γὰρ ἐτέθραπτο
Καλλισθένης παρ᾿ αὐτῷ διὰ τὴν συγγένειαν, ἐξ
5Ἡροῦς γεγονώς, ἀνεψιᾶς Ἀριστοτέλους. ἀποθανεῖν
δὲ αὐτὸν οἱ μὲν ὑπ᾿ Ἀλεξάνδρου κρεμασθέντα
λέγουσιν, οἱ δὲ ἐν πέδαις δεδεμένον καὶ
νοσήσαντα, Χάρης δὲ μετὰ τὴν σύλληψιν ἑπτὰ
μῆνας φυλάττεσθαι δεδεμένον, ὡς ἐν τῷ συνεδρίῳ
κριθείη παρόντος Ἀριστοτέλους, ἐν αἷς δὲ ἡμέραις
Ἀλέξανδρος ἐτρώθη περὶ τὴν Ἰνδίαν, ἀποθανεῖν
ὑπέρπαχυν γενόμενον καὶ φθειριάσαντα.


LVI. Ταῦτα μὲν οὖν ὕστερον ἐπράχθη. Δημάρατος
δὲ ὁ Κορίνθιος ἤδη πρεσβύτερος ὢν
ἐφιλοτιμήθη πρὸς Ἀλέξανδρον ἀναβῆναι· καὶ
θεασάμενος αὐτὸν εἶπε μεγάλης ἡδονῆς ἐστερῆσθαι
τοὺς Ἕλληνας, ὅσοι τεθνήκασι πρὶν ἰδεῖν
Ἀλέξανδρον ἐν τῷ Δαρείου θρόνῳ καθήμενον.
οὐ μὴν ἐπὶ πλέον γε τῆς πρὸς αὐτὸν εὐνοίας τοῦ
βασιλέως ἀπέλαυσεν, ἀλλ᾿ ἐξ ἀρρωστίας ἀποθανὼν
ἐκηδεύθη μεγαλοπρεπῶς, καὶ τάφον ἔχωσεν
ὁ στρατὸς ἐπ᾿ αὐτῷ τῇ περιμέτρῳ μέγαν, ὕψος δὲ
πηχῶν ὀγδοήκοντα· τὰ δὲ λείψανα τέθριππον
κεκοσμημένον λαμπρῶς ἐπὶ θάλασσαν κατεκόμισε.


LVII. Μέλλων δὲ ὑπερβάλλειν εἰς τὴν Ἰνδικήν,
ὡς ἑώρα πλήθει λαφύρων τὴν στρατιὰν ἤδη


384Alexander, lvii.

youths were stoned to death by the Macedonians, but the sophist I will punish, together with those who sent him to me and those who harbour in their cities men who conspire against my life;” and in these words, at least, he directly reveals a hostility to Aristotle, in whose house Callisthenes, on account of his relationship, had been reared, being a son of Hero, who was a niece of Aristotle. As to the death of Callisthenes, some say that he was hanged by Alexander’s orders, others that he was bound hand and foot and died of sickness, and Chares says that after his arrest he was kept in fetters seven months, that he might be tried before a full council when Aristotle was present, but that about the time when Alexander was wounded in India, he died from obesity and the disease of lice.1


LVI. This, however, belongs to a later time.2 Meanwhile Demaratus the Corinthian, who was now well on in years, was eagerly desirous of going up to Alexander; and when he had seen him, he said that those Greeks were deprived of a great pleasure who had died before seeing Alexander seated on the throne of Dareius.3 However, he did not long enjoy the king’s good will towards him, but died from debility. His obsequies were magnificent, and the army raised in his memory a mound of great circumference and eighty cubits in height. His ashes were carried down to the sea-board on a four-horse chariot splendidly adorned.


LVII. Alexander was now about to cross the mountains into India,4 and since he saw that his army was by this time cumbered with much booty




1Cf. Arrian, Anab. iv. 14, 3f., where other accounts still are mentioned.2The spring of 327 b.c.3Cf. chapter xxxvii. 4.4In the late spring of 327 b.c.385