Plutarch’s Lives

ἐν οἴνῳ γενόμενον καὶ τὴν πρὸς Ἰνδοὺς τῶν Μακεδόνων
ἀποδειλίασιν, ὥσπερ ἀτελῆ τὴν στρατείαν
καὶ τὴν δόξαν αὐτοῦ προεμένων, εἰς μῆνιν ἀνῆγε
Διονύσου καὶ νέμεσιν. ἦν δὲ Θηβαίων οὐδεὶς τῶν
περιγενομένων ὃς ἐντυχών τι καὶ δεηθεὶς ὕστερον
οὐ διεπράξατο παρ᾿ αὐτοῦ. ταῦτα μὲν τὰ περὶ
Θήβας.


XIV. Εἰς δὲ τὸν Ἰσθμὸν τῶν Ἑλλήνων συλλεγέντων
καὶ ψηφισαμένων ἐπὶ Πέρσας μετ᾿ Ἀλεξάνδρου
στρατεύειν ἡγεμὼν ἀνηγορεύθη. πολλῶν
δὲ καὶ πολιτικῶν ἀνδρῶν καὶ φιλοσόφων ἀπηντηκότων
αὐτῷ καὶ συνηδομένων, ἤλπιζε καὶ Διογένην
τὸν Σινωπέα ταὐτὸ ποιήσειν, διατρίβοντα
2περὶ Κόρινθον. ὡς δὲ ἐκεῖνος ἐλάχιστον Ἀλεξάνδρου
λόγον ἔχων ἐν τῷ Κρανείῳ σχολὴν ἦγεν,
αὐτὸς ἐπορεύετο πρὸς αὐτόν· ἔτυχε δὲ κατακείμενος
ἐν ἡλίῳ. καὶ μικρὸν μὲν ἀνεκάθισεν, ἀνθρώπων
τοσούτων ἐπερχομένων, καὶ διέβλεψεν
εἰς τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον. ὡς δὲ ἐκεῖνος ἀσπασάμενος
καὶ προσειπὼν αὐτὸν ἠρώτησεν εἴ τινος τυγχάνει
δεόμενος, “Μικρόν,” εἶπεν, “ἀπὸ τοῦ ἡλίου μετάστηθι.”
3πρὸς τοῦτο λέγεται τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον
οὕτω διατεθῆναι καὶ θαυμάσαι καταφρονηθέντα
τὴν ὑπεροψίαν καὶ τὸ μέγεθος τοῦ ἀνδρός, ὥστε
τῶν περὶ αὐτόν, ὡς ἀπῄεσαν, διαγελώντων καὶ
σκωπτόντων, “Ἀλλὰ μὴν ἐγώ,” εἶπεν, “εἰ μὴ
Ἀλέξανδρος ἤμην, Διογένης ἂν ἤμην.”
258Alexander, xiv.

murder of Cleitus,1 which he committed in his cups, and the cowardly refusal of his Macedonians to follow him against the Indians,2 whereby they as it were robbed his expedition and his glory of their consummation, he was wont to attribute to the vengeful wrath of Dionysus.3 And there was not a Theban of those that survived who afterwards came to him with any request and did not get what he wanted from him. Thus much concerning Thebes.4


XIV. And now a general assembly of the Greeks was held at the Isthmus,5 where a vote was passed to make an expedition against Persia with Alexander, and he was proclaimed their leader. Thereupon many statesmen and philosophers came to him with their congratulations, and he expected that Diogenes of Sinope also, who was tarrying in Corinth, would do likewise. But since that philosopher took not the slightest notice of Alexander, and continued to enjoy his leisure in the suburb Craneion, Alexander went in person to see him; and he found him lying in the sun. Diogenes raised himself up a little when he saw so many persons coming towards him, and fixed his eyes upon Alexander. And when that monarch addressed him with greetings, and asked if he wanted anything, “Yes,” said Diogenes, “stand a little out of my sun.” It is said that Alexander was so struck by this, and admired so much the haughtiness and grandeur of the man who had nothing but scorn for him, that he said to his followers, who were laughing and jesting about the philosopher as they went away, “But verily, if I were not Alexander, I would be Diogenes.”
1See chapter li.2See chapter lxii.3This god was said to have been born of Semele, daughter of Cadmus the founder of Thebes.4For a full account of Alexander’s capture and destruction of Thebes, see Arrian, Anab. i. 8 f.5See the note on xi. 5.259