Plutarch’s Lives


LX. Τὰ δὲ πρὸς Πῶρον αὐτὸς ἐν ταῖς ἐπιστολαῖς
ὡς ἐπράχθη γέγραφε. φησὶ γὰρ ἐν μέσῳ
τῶν στρατοπέδων τοῦ Ὑδάσπου ῥέοντος ἀντιπόρους
ἱστάντα τοὺς ἐλέφαντας ἀεὶ τὸν Πῶρον
ἐπιτηρεῖν τὴν διάβασιν. αὑτὸν μὲν οὖν καθ᾿
ἡμέραν ἑκάστην ψόφον ποιεῖν καὶ θόρυβον ἐν τῷ
στρατοπέδῳ πολύν, ἐθίζοντα τοὺς βαρβάρους
2μὴ φοβεῖσθαι· νυκτὸς δὲ χειμερίου καὶ ἀσελήνου
λαβόντα τῶν πεζῶν μέρος, ἱππεῖς δὲ τοὺς κρατίστους,
καὶ προελθόντα πόρρω τῶν πολεμίων
διαπερᾶσαι πρὸς νῆσον οὐ μεγάλην. ἐνταῦθα
δὲ ῥαγδαίου μὲν ἐκχυθέντος ὄμβρου, πρηστήρων
δὲ πολλῶν καὶ κεραυνῶν εἰς τὸ στρατόπεδον
φερομένων, ὅμως ὁρῶν ἀπολλυμένους τινὰς καὶ
συμφλεγομένους ὑπὸ τῶν κεραυνῶν ἀπὸ τῆς
νησῖδος ἄρας προσφέρεσθαι ταῖς ἀντιπέρας ὄχθαις.
3τραχὺν δὲ τὸν Ὑδάσπην ὑπὸ τοῦ χειμῶνος
ἐπιόντα καὶ μετέωρον, ἔκρηγμα ποιῆσαι
μέγα, καὶ πολὺ μέρος ἐκείνῃ φέρεσθαι τοῦ
ῥεύματος· αὐτοὺς δὲ δέξασθαι τὸ μέσον οὐ
βεβαίως, ἅτε δὴ συνολισθάνον καὶ περιρρηγνύμενον.
ἐνταῦθα δὲ εἰπεῖν φασιν αὐτόν· “Ὦ
Ἀθηναῖοι, ἆρά γε πιστεύσαιτε ἂν ἡλίκους ὑπομένω
κινδύνους ἕνεκα τῆς παρ᾿ ὑμῖν εὐδοξίας;”
4ἀλλὰ τοῦτο μὲν Ὀνησίκριτος εἴρηκεν, αὐτὸς δέ
φησι τὰς σχεδίας ἀφέντας αὐτοὺς μετὰ τῶν
ὅπλων τὸ ἔκρηγμα διαβαίνειν ἄχρι μαστῶν βρεχομένους,
διαβὰς δὲ τῶν πεζῶν εἴκοσι σταδίους
προϊππεῦσαι, λογιζόμενος, εἰ μὲν οἱ πολέμιοι τοῖς
394Alexander, lx.


LX. Of his campaign against Porus1 he himself has given an account in his letters. He says, namely, that the river Hydaspes flowed between the two camps, and that Porus stationed his elephants on the opposite bank and kept continual watch of the crossing. He himself, accordingly, day by day caused a great din and tumult to be made in his camp, and thereby accustomed the Barbarians not to be alarmed. Then, on a dark and stormy night, he took a part of his infantry and the best of his horsemen, and after proceeding along the river to a distance from where the enemy lay, crossed over to a small island. Here rain fell in torrents, and many tornadoes and thunder-bolts dashed down upon his men; but nevertheless, although he saw that many of them were being burned to death by the thunder-bolts, he set out from the islet and made for the opposite banks. But the Hydaspes, made violent by the storm and dashing high against its bank, made a great breach in it, and a large part of the stream was setting in that direction; and the shore between the two currents gave his men no sure footing, since it was broken and slippery. And here it was that he is said to have cried: “O Athenians, can ye possibly believe what perils I am undergoing to win glory in your eyes?” This, however, is the story of Onesicritus; Alexander himself says that they left their rafts and crossed the breach with their armour on, wading breast-high in water, and that after he had crossed he led his horsemen twenty furlongs in advance of his infantry, calculating that, in case the enemy attacked with


1See Arrian, Anab. v. 9–19. It was in the spring of 326 b.c.395