Plutarch’s Lives
Λέγονται δὲ πεζοὶ μὲν δισμύριοι τῶν βαρβάρων,
ἱππεῖς δὲ δισχίλιοι πεντακόσιοι πεσεῖν. τῶν δὲ
περὶ τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον Ἀριστόβουλός φησι τέσσαρας
καὶ τριάκοντα νεκροὺς γενέσθαι τοὺς
8πάντας, ὧν ἐννέα πεζοὺς εἶναι. τούτων μὲν οὖν
ἐκέλευσεν εἰκόνας ἀνασταθῆναι χαλκᾶς, ἃς Λύσιππος
εἰργάσατο. κοινούμενος δὲ τὴν νίκην
τοῖς Ἕλλησιν ἰδίᾳ μὲν τοῖς Ἀθηναίοις ἔπεμψε
τῶν αἰχμαλώτων τριακοσίας ἀσπίδας, κοινῇ δὲ
τοῖς ἄλλοις λαφύροις ἐκέλευσεν ἐπιγράψαι φιλοτιμοτάτην
ἐπιγραφήν· “Ἀλέξανδρος ὁ Φιλίππου
καὶ οἱ Ἕλληνες πλὴν Λακεδαιμονίων ἀπὸ τῶν
βαρβάρων τῶν τὴν Ἀσίαν κατοικούντων.” ἐκπώματα
δὲ καὶ πορφύρας, καὶ ὅσα τοιαῦτα τῶν
Περσικῶν ἔλαβε, πάντα τῇ μητρὶ πλὴν ὀλίγων
ἔπεμψεν.


XVII. Οὗτος ὁ ἀγὼν μεγάλην εὐθὺς ἐποίησε
τῶν πραγμάτων μεταβολὴν πρὸς Ἀλέξανδρον,
ὥστε καὶ Σάρδεις, τὸ πρόσχημα τῆς ἐπὶ θαλάσσῃ
τῶν βαρβάρων ἡγεμονίας, παραλαβεῖν καὶ
τἆλλα προστίθεσθαι. μόνη δὲ Ἁλικαρνασσὸς
ἀντέστη καὶ Μίλητος, ἃς ἑλὼν κατὰ κράτος καὶ
τὰ περὶ αὐτὰς πάντα χειρωσάμενος ἀμφίβολος
2ἦν πρὸς τὰ λοιπὰ τῇ γνώμῃ. καὶ πολλάκις μὲν
ἔσπευδε Δαρείῳ συμπεσὼν ἀποκινδυνεῦσαι περὶ
τῶν ὅλων, πολλάκις δὲ τοῖς ἐπὶ θαλάσσῃ πράγμασι
καὶ χρήμασι διενοεῖτο πρῶτον οἷον ἐνασκήσας
καὶ ῥώσας αὑτὸν οὕτως ἀναβαίνειν ἐπ᾿


268Alexander, xvii.
Of the Barbarians, we are told, twenty thousand footmen fell, and twenty-five hundred horsemen.1 But on Alexander’s side, Aristobulus says there were thirty-four dead in all, of whom nine were footmen. Of these, then, Alexander ordered statues to be set up in bronze, and Lysippus wrought them.2 Moreover, desiring to make the Greeks partners in his victory, he sent to the Athenians in particular three hundred of the captured shields, and upon the rest of the spoils in general he ordered a most ambitious inscription to be wrought: “Alexander the son of Philip and all the Greeks except the Lacedaemonians from the Barbarians who dwell in Asia.” But the drinking vessels and the purple robes and whatever things of this nature he took from the Persians, all these, except a few, he sent to his mother.


XVII. This contest at once made a great change in the situation to Alexander’s advantage, so that he received the submission even of Sardis, the bulwark of the barbarian dominion on the sea-coast, and added the rest of the country to his conquests. Halicarnassus alone withstood him, and Miletus, which cities he took by storm3 and subdued all the territories about them. Then he was in doubt as to his future course. Many times he was eager to encounter Dareius and put the whole issue to hazard, and many times he would make up his mind to practice himself first, as it were, and strengthen himself by acquiring the regions along the sea with their resources, and



1Diodorus (xvii. 21, 6) says that more than ten thousand Persian footmen fell, and not less than two thousand horsemen; while over twenty thousand were taken prisoners.2According to Arrian (Anab. i. 16, 4), about twenty-five of Alexander’s companions, a select corps, fell at the first onset, and it was of these that Alexander ordered statues to be made by Lysippus.3The siege and capture of these cities occupied Alexander till the late autumn of 334 b.c.269