Plutarch’s Lives

μὲν παρ᾿ αὐτοῦ Φιλώταν καὶ Ἀντίπατρον,
κηρυττόντων δὲ τοὺς τὴν Ἑλλάδα βουλομένους
συνελευθεροῦν τάττεσθαι μετ᾿ αὐτῶν, οὕτως
5ἔτρεψε τοὺς Μακεδόνας πρὸς πόλεμον. ἠγωνίσθη
μὲν οὖν ὑπὲρ δύναμιν ἀρετῇ καὶ προθυμίᾳ
παρὰ τῶν Θηβαίων1 πολλαπλασίοις οὖσι τοῖς
πολεμίοις ἀντιταχθέντων· ἐπεὶ δὲ καὶ τὴν Καδμείαν
ἀφέντες οἱ φρουροὶ τῶν Μακεδόνων ἐπέπιπτον
αὐτοῖς ἐξόπισθεν, κυκλωθέντες οἱ πλεῖστοι
κατὰ τὴν μάχην αὐτὴν ἔπεσον, ἡ δὲ πόλις ἥλω
καὶ διαρπασθεῖσα κατεσκάφη, τὸ μὲν ὅλον προσδοκήσαντος
αὐτοῦ τοὺς Ἕλληνας ἐκπλαγέντας
πάθει τηλικούτῳ καὶ πτήξαντας ἀτρεμήσειν,
ἄλλως δὲ καὶ καλλωπισαμένου χαρίζεσθαι τοῖς
τῶν συμμάχων ἐγκλήμασι· καὶ γὰρ Φωκεῖς καὶ
6Πλαταιεῖς τῶν Θηβαίων κατηγόρησαν. ὑπεξελόμενος
δὲ τοὺς ἱερεῖς καὶ τοὺς ξένους τῶν Μακεδόνων
ἅπαντας καὶ τοὺς ἀπὸ Πινδάρου γεγονότας
καὶ τοὺς ὑπεναντιωθέντας τοῖς ψηφισαμένοις τὴν
ἀπόστασιν, ἀπέδοτο τοὺς ἄλλους περὶ τρισμυρίους
γενομένους· οἱ δὲ ἀποθανόντες ὑπὲρ ἑξακισχιλίους ἦσαν.


XII. Ἐν δὲ τοῖς πολλοῖς πάθεσι καὶ χαλεποῖς
ἐκείνοις ἃ τὴν πόλιν κατεῖχε, Θρᾷκές τινες ἐκκόψαντες
οἰκίαν Τιμοκλείας, γυναικὸς ἐνδόξου καὶ
σώφρονος, αὐτοὶ μὲν τὰ χρήματα διήρπαζον, ὁ δὲ
ἡγεμὼν τῇ γυναικὶ πρὸς βίαν συγγενόμενος καὶ
καταισχύνας, ἀνέκρινεν εἴ που χρυσίον ἔχοι κεκρυμμένον
2ἢ ἀργύριον. ἡ δὲ ἔχειν ὡμολόγησε,

1παρὰ τῶν Θηβαίων Coraës and Bekker, following Reiske: τὰ παρὰ τῶν Θηβαίων.254Alexander, xii.

a counter-demand that he should surrender to them Philotas and Antipater, and made a counter-proclamation that all who wished to help in setting Greece free should range themselves with them; and so Alexander set his Macedonians to the work of war. On the part of the Thebans, then, the struggle was carried on with a spirit and valour beyond their powers, since they were arrayed against an enemy who was many times more numerous than they; but when the Macedonian garrison also, leaving the citadel of the Cadmeia, fell upon them in the rear, most of them were surrounded, and fell in the battle itself, and their city was taken, plundered, and razed to the ground. This was done, in the main, because Alexander expected that the Greeks would be terrified by so great a disaster and cower down in quiet, but apart from this, he also plumed himself on gratifying the complaints of his allies; for the Phocians and Plataeans had denounced the Thebans. So after separating out the priests, all who were guest-friends of the Macedonians, the descendants of Pindar,1 and those who had voted against the revolt, he sold the rest into slavery, and they proved to be more than thirty thousand; those who had been slain were more than six thousand.


XII. Among the many and grievous calamities which thus possessed the city, some Thracians broke into the house of Timocleia, a woman of high repute and chastity, and while the rest were plundering her property, their leader shamefully violated her, and then asked her if she had gold or silver concealed anywhere. She admitted that she had, and after


1“And we are told that Alexander preserved the house of Pindar the poet, and the descendants of Pindar, out of regard for Pindar” (Arrian, Anab, i. 9, 10).255