Plutarch’s Lives

βρυχήματος εὐθὺς ἀφῆκεν ὁ θυμὸς αὐτόν. καὶ
γενόμενος παρ᾿ ἑαυτῷ καὶ τοὺς φίλους ἰδὼν ἀφώνους
ἑστῶτας ἑλκύσασθαι μὲν ἐκ τοῦ νεκροῦ τὴν
αἰχμὴν ἔφθασε, παῖσαι δ᾿ ἑαυτὸν ὁρμήσας παρὰ
τὸν τράχηλον ἐπεσχέθη, τῶν σωματοφυλάκων
τὰς χεῖρας αὐτοῦ λαβόντων καὶ τὸ σῶμα βίᾳ
παρενεγκόντων εἰς τὸν θάλαμον.


LII. Ἐπεὶ δὲ τήν τε νύκτα κακῶς κλαίων διήνεγκε
καὶ τὴν ἐπιοῦσαν ἡμέραν ἤδη τῷ βοᾶν καὶ
θρηνεῖν ἀπειρηκὼς ἄναυδος ἔκειτο, βαρεῖς ἀναφέρων
στεναγμούς, δείσαντες οἱ φίλοι τὴν ἀποσιώπησιν
εἰσῆλθον βίᾳ. καὶ τῶν μὲν ἄλλων οὐ
προσίετο τοὺς λόγους, Ἀριστάνδρου δὲ τοῦ μάντεως
ὑπομιμνήσκοντος αὐτὸν τήν τε ὄψιν ἣν
εἶδε περὶ τοῦ Κλείτου, καὶ τὸ σημεῖον, ὡς δὴ
πάλαι καθειμαρμένων τούτων, ἔδοξεν ἐνδιδόναι.
2διὸ Καλλισθένην τε τὸν φιλόσοφον παρεισήγαγον,
Ἀριστοτέλους οἰκεῖον ὄντα, καὶ τὸν Ἀβδηρίτην
Ἀνάξαρχον. ὧν Καλλισθένης μὲν ἠθικῶς
ἐπειρᾶτο καὶ πρᾴως, ὑποδυόμενος τῷ λόγῳ καὶ
περιϊὼν ἀλύπως, λαβέσθαι τοῦ πάθους, ὁ δὲ
Ἀνάξαρχος ἰδίαν τινὰ πορευόμενος ἐξ ἀρχῆς ὁδὸν
ἐν φιλοσοφίᾳ, καὶ δόξαν εἰληφὼς ὑπεροψίας καὶ
ὀλιγωρίας τῶν συνήθων, εὐθὺς εἰσελθὼν ἀνεβόησεν·
3“Οὗτός ἐστιν Ἀλέξανδρος, εἰς ὃν ἡ οἰκουμένη
νῦν ἀποβλέπει· ὁ δὲ ἔρριπται κλαίων ὥσπερ
ἀνδράποδον, ἀνθρώπων νόμον καὶ ψόγον δεδοικώς,
οἷς αὐτὸν προσήκει νόμον εἶναι καὶ ὅρον τῶν
δικαίων, ἐπείπερ ἄρχειν καὶ κρατεῖν νενίκηκεν,695
ἀλλὰ μὴ δουλεύειν ὑπὸ κενῆς δόξης κεκρατημένον.
374Alexander, lii.

than the king’s anger departed from him. And when he was come to himself and beheld his friends standing speechless, he drew the spear from the dead body and would have dashed it into his own throat, had not his body-guards prevented this by seizing his hands and carrying him by force to his chamber.


LII. Here he spent the night and the following day in bitter lamentations, and at last lay speechless, worn out with his cries and wailing, heaving deep groans. Then his friends, alarmed at his silence, forced their way in. To what the others said he would pay no attention, but when Aristander the seer reminded him of the vision he had seen concerning Cleitus, and of the omen,1 assuring him that all this had long ago been decreed by fate, he seemed to be less obdurate. Therefore they brought in to him Callisthenes the philosopher, who was a relative of Aristotle, and Anaxarchus of Abdera. Of these, Callisthenes tried by considerate and gentle methods to alleviate the king’s suffering, employing insinuation and circumlocution so as to avoid giving pain; but Anaxarchus, who had always taken a path of his own in philosophy, and had acquired a reputation for despising and slighting his associates, shouted out as soon as he came in: “Here is Alexander, to whom the whole world is now looking; but he lies on the floor weeping like a slave, in fear of the law and the censure of men, unto whom he himself should be a law and a measure of justice, since he has conquered the right to rule and mastery, instead of submitting like a slave to the mastery of a vain opinion. Knowest


1Cf. chapter 1. 2 f.375