Plutarch’s Lives

λεγομένην Κλίμακα καὶ διελθεῖν ὁρμησας ἐκ
5Φασηλίδος. διὸ καὶ πλείονας ἡμέρας ἐν τῇ πόλει
διέτριψεν· ἐν αἷς καὶ Θεοδέκτου τεθνηκότος
(ἦν δὲ Φασηλίτης) ἰδὼν εἰκόνα ἀνακειμένην ἐν
ἀγορᾷ, μετὰ δεῖπνον ἐπεκώμασε μεθύων καὶ τῶν
στεφάνων ἐπέρριψε πολλούς, οὐκ ἄχαριν ἐν
παιδιᾷ ἀποδιδοὺς τιμὴν τῇ γενομένῃ δι᾿ Ἀριστοτέλην
καὶ φιλοσοφίαν ὁμιλίᾳ πρὸς τὸν ἄνδρα.


XVIII. Μετὰ ταῦτα Πισιδῶν τε τοὺς ἀντιστάντας
ᾕρει καὶ Φρυγίαν ἐχειροῦτο· καὶ Γόρδιον
πόλιν, ἑστίαν Μίδου τοῦ παλαιοῦ γενέσθαι λεγομένην,
παραλαβών, τὴν θρυλουμένην ἅμαξαν εἶδε
φλοιῷ κρανίας ἐνδεδεμένην, καὶ λόγον ἐπ᾿ αὐτῇ
πιστευόμενον ὑπὸ τῶν βαρβάρων ἤκουσεν, ὡς τῷ
λύσαντι τὸν δεσμὸν εἵμαρται βασιλεῖ γενέσθαι
2τῆς οἰκουμένης. οἱ μὲν οὖν πολλοί φασι, τῶν
δεσμῶν τυφλὰς ἐχόντων τὰς ἀρχὰς καὶ δι᾿ ἀλλήλων
πολλάκις σκολιοῖς ἑλιγμοῖς ὑποφερομένων,
τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον ἀμηχανοῦντα λῦσαι διατεμεῖν
τῇ μαχαίρᾳ τὸ σύναμμα, καὶ πολλὰς ἐξ αὐτοῦ
κοπέντος ἀρχὰς φανῆναι. Ἀριστόβουλος δὲ καὶ
πάνυ λέγει ῥᾳδίαν αὐτῷ τὴν λύσιν γενέσθαι,
ἐξελόντι τοῦ ῥυμοῦ τὸν ἕστορα καλούμενον, ᾧ
συνείχετο τὸ ζυγόδεσμον, εἶθ᾿ οὕτως ὑφελκύσαντι
τὸν ζυγόν.
3Ἐντεῦθεν Παφλαγόνας τε καὶ Καππαδόκας
προσαγαγόμενος, καὶ τὴν Μέμνονος ἀκούσας
τελευτήν, ὃς τῶν ἐπὶ θαλάττῃ Δαρείου στρατηγῶν
272Alexander, xviii.

way of the so-called Ladder, and passed through it, setting out from Phaselis. This was the reason for his spending several days in that city, during which he noticed that a statue of Theodectas, a deceased citizen of Phaselis, had been erected in the marketplace. Once, therefore, after supper and in his cups, he led a band of revellers to the statue and crowned it with many of their garlands, thus in pleasantry returning no ungraceful honour for the past association with the man which he owed to Aristotle and philosophy.


XVIII. After this, he overpowered such of the Pisidians as had offered him resistance, and subdued Phrygia; and after he had taken the city of Gordium,1 reputed to have been the home of the ancient Midas, he saw the much-talked-of waggon bound fast to its yoke with bark of the cornel-tree, and heard a story confidently told about it by the Barbarians, to the effect that whosoever loosed the fastening was destined to become king of the whole world. Well, then, most writers say that since the fastenings had their ends concealed, and were intertwined many times in crooked coils, Alexander was at a loss how to proceed, and finally loosened the knot by cutting it through with his sword, and that when it was thus smitten many ends were to be seen. But Aristobulus says that he undid it very easily, by simply taking out the so-called “hestor,” or pin, of the waggon-pole, by which the yoke-fastening was held together, and then drawing away the yoke.2
Setting out from there, he subdued Paphlagonia and Cappadocia, and on hearing of the death of Memnon, one of the commanders of Dareius on the



1Early in 333 b.c.2Cf. Arrian, Anab. ii. 3.273