Plutarch’s Lives

ὑπὲρ κεφαλῆς Ἀλεξάνδρου συνεπαιωρούμενον καὶ
κατευθύνοντα τῇ πτήσει ὄρθιον ἐπὶ τοὺς πολεμίους,
ὥστε πολὺ μὲν θάρσος ἐγγενέσθαι τοῖς
ὁρῶσιν, ἐκ δὲ τοῦ θαρρεῖν καὶ παρακαλεῖν ἀλλήλους
δρόμῳ τοῖς ἱππεῦσιν ἱεμένοις ἐπὶ τοὺς
3πολεμίους ἐπικυμαίνειν τὴν φάλαγγα. πρὶν δὲ
συμμῖξαι τοὺς πρώτους ἐξέκλιναν οἱ βάρβαροι,
καὶ διωγμὸς ἦν πολύς, εἰς τὰ μέσα συνελαύνοντος
Ἀλεξάνδρου τὸ νικώμενον, ὅπου Δαρεῖος ἦν.
πόρρωθεν γὰρ αὐτὸν κατεῖδε διὰ τῶν προτεταγμένων
ἐν βάθει τῆς βασιλικῆς ἴλης ἐκφανέντα,
καλὸν ἄνδρα καὶ μέγαν ἐφ᾿ ἅρματος ὑψηλοῦ
βεβῶτα, πολλοῖς ἱππεῦσι καὶ λαμπροῖς καταπεφραγμένον
εὖ μάλα συνεσπειραμένοις περὶ τὸ
ἅρμα καὶ παρατεταγμένοις δέχεσθαι τοὺς πολεμίους.
4ἀλλὰ δεινὸς ὀφθεὶς ἐγγύθεν Ἀλέξανδρος
καὶ τοὺς φεύγοντας ἐμβαλὼν εἰς τοὺς μένοντας
ἐξέπληξε καὶ διεσκέδασε τὸ πλεῖστον. οἱ δὲ
ἄριστοι καὶ γενναιότατοι πρὸ τοῦ βασιλέως
φονευόμενοι καὶ κατ᾿ ἀλλήλων πίπτοντες ἐμποδὼν
τῆς διώξεως ἦσαν, ἐμπλεκόμενοι καὶ περισπαίροντες
αὐτοῖς καὶ ἵπποις.
5Δαρεῖος δέ, τῶν δεινῶν ἁπάντων ἐν ὀφθαλμοῖς
ὄντων καὶ τῶν προτεταγμένων δυνάμεων ἐρειπομένων
εἰς αὐτόν, ὡς οὐκ ἦν ἀποστρέψαι τὸ ἅρμα καὶ
διεξελάσαι ῥᾴδιον, ἀλλ᾿ οἵ τε τροχοὶ συνείχοντο
πτώμασι πεφυρμένοι τοσούτοις οἵ τε ἵπποι καταλαμβανόμενοι
324Alexander, xxxiii.

them an eagle which soared above the head of Alexander and directed his flight straight against the enemy, at which sight great courage filled the beholders, and after mutual encouragement and exhortation the cavalry charged at full speed upon the enemy and the phalanx rolled on after them like a flood. But before the foremost ranks were engaged the Barbarians gave way, and were hotly pursued, Alexander driving the conquered foe towards the centre of their array, where Dareius was.1 For from afar he was seen by Alexander through the deep ranks of the royal squadron of horse drawn up in front of him, towering conspicuous, a fine-looking man and tall, standing on a lofty chariot, fenced about by a numerous and brilliant array of horsemen, who were densely massed around the chariot and drawn up to receive the enemy. But when they saw Alexander close at hand and terrible, and driving those who fled before him upon those who held their ground, they were smitten with fear and scattered, for the most part. The bravest and noblest of them, however, slain in front of their king and falling in heaps upon one another, obstructed the Macedonians in their pursuit, weaving and twining themselves in their last agonies about riders and horses.
But Dareius, now that all the terrors of the struggle were before his eyes, and now that the forces drawn up to protect him were crowded back upon him, since it was, not an easy matter to turn his chariot about and drive it away, seeing that the wheels were obstructed and entangled in the great numbers of the fallen, while the horses, surrounded and hidden


1Alexander’s tactics are minutely described by Arrian (Anab. iii. 14, 1–3).325