Plutarch’s Lives

ὅ τι δὴ πεπονθὼς ὕπνον καθεύδοι νενικηκότος,
οὐχὶ μέλλοντος ἀγωνιεῖσθαι τὸν μέγιστον τῶν
2ἀγώνων. τὸν γοῦν Ἀλέξανδρον εἰπεῖν διαμειδιάσαντα·
“Τί γάρ; οὐκ ἤδη σοι νενικηκέναι δοκοῦμεν
ἀπηλλαγμένοι τοῦ πλανᾶσθαι καὶ διώκειν
ἐν πολλῇ καὶ κατεφθαρμένῃ φυγομαχοῦντα χώρᾳ
Δαρεῖον;” οὐ μόνον δὲ πρὸ τῆς μάχης, ἀλλὰ καὶ
παρ᾿ αὐτὸν τὸν κίνδυνον ἐπεδείξατο μέγαν καὶ
συνεστηκότα τῷ λογίζεσθαι καὶ θαρρεῖν ἑαυτόν.
3ἔσχε γὰρ ὁ ἀγὼν ὑποτροπὴν καὶ σάλον ἐν τῷ
εὐωνύμῳ κέρατι κατὰ Παρμενίωνα, τῆς Βακτριανῆς
ἵππου ῥόθῳ πολλῷ καὶ μετὰ βίας παρεμπεσούσης
εἰς τοὺς Μακεδόνας, Μαζαίου δὲ
περιπέμψαντος ἔξω τῆς φάλαγγος ἱππεῖς τοῖς
σκευοφυλακοῦσι προσβαλοῦντας. διὸ καὶ θορυβούμενος684
ὑπ᾿ ἀμφοτέρων ὁ Παρμενίων ἀπέστειλε
πρὸς Ἀλέξανδρον ἀγγέλους φράζοντας οἴχεσθαι
τὸν χάρακα καὶ τὰς ἀποσκευάς, εἰ μὴ κατὰ τάχος
βοήθειαν ὀχυρὰν ἀπὸ τοῦ στόματος πέμψειε τοῖς
4ὄπισθεν. ἔτυχε μὲν οὖν κατ᾿ ἐκεῖνο καιροῦ τοῖς
περὶ αὐτὸν ἐφόδου διδοὺς σημεῖον· ὡς δὲ ἤκουσε
τὰ παρὰ τοῦ Παρμενίωνος, οὐκ ἔφη σωφρονεῖν
αὐτὸν οὐδὲ ἐντὸς εἶναι τῶν λογισμῶν, ἀλλ᾿ ἐπιλελῆσθαι
ταραττόμενον ὅτι νικῶντες μὲν προσκτήσονται
καὶ τὰ τῶν πολεμίων, ἡττωμένοις δὲ
φροντιστέον οὐ χρημάτων οὐδὲ ἀνδραπόδων, ἀλλ᾿
ὅπως ἀποθανοῦνται καλῶς καὶ λαμπρῶς ἀγωνιζόμενοι.
5Ταῦτα ἐπιστείλας Παρμενίωνι τὸ κράνος περιέθετο,
τὸν δὲ ἄλλον ὁπλισμὸν εὐθὺς ἀπὸ σκηνῆς
320Alexander, xxxii.

had thus roused him, he asked him how he could possibly sleep as if he were victorious, instead of being about to fight the greatest of all his battles. Then Alexander said with a smile: “What, pray? Dost thou not think that we are already victorious, now that we are relieved from wandering about in a vast and desolated country in pursuit of a Dareius who avoids a battle?” And not only before the battle, but also in the very thick of the struggle did he show himself great, and firm in his confident calculations. For in the battle the left wing under Parmenio was thrown back and in distress, when the Bactrian cavalry fell upon the Macedonians with great impetuosity and violence, and when Mazaeus sent horsemen round outside the line of battle to attack those who were guarding the Macedonian baggage. Therefore, too, Parmenio, much disturbed by both occurrences, sent messengers to Alexander telling him that camp and baggage were gone, unless he speedily sent strong reinforcements from front to rear.1 Now, it chanced that at that instant Alexander was about to give the signal for the onset to those under his command; but when he heard Parmemo’s
message, he declared that Parmenio was beside himself and had lost the use of his reason, and had forgotten in his distress that victors add the baggage of the enemy to their own, and that those who are vanquished must not think about their wealth or their slaves, but only how they may fight gloriously and die with honour.
After sending this message to Parmenio, he put on his helmet, but the rest of his armour he had on as


1Cf. Arrian, Anab. iii. 15, 1, where Parmenio’s message recalls Alexander from the pursuit of Dareius.321