Plutarch’s Lives

τοὺς τὰ περίβλεπτα μεγάλοις πόνοις καὶ κινδύνοις
διώκοντας, ὡς οὐδὲν ἢ μικρὸν ἐν ἡδοναῖς καὶ
ἀπολαύσεσι πλέον ἔχοντας τῶν ἄλλων. ὁ δ᾿ οὖν
Ἀλέξανδρος καὶ ἀπὸ τῶν εἰρημένων δῆλός ἐστιν
αὐτὸς οὐδὲν πεπονθὼς οὐδὲ τετυφωμένος, ἀλλὰ
τοὺς ἄλλους καταδουλούμενος τῇ δόξῃ τῆς θειότητος.


XXIX. Εἰς δὲ Φοινίκην ἐπανελθὼν ἐξ Αἰγύπτου
θυσίας τοῖς θεοῖς καὶ πομπὰς ἐπετέλει καὶ
χορῶν κυκλίων καὶ τραγικῶν ἀγῶνας, οὐ μόνον
ταῖς παρασκευαῖς, ἀλλὰ καὶ ταῖς ἁμίλλαις λαμπροὺς
γενομένους. ἐχορήγουν γὰρ οἱ βασιλεῖς
τῶν Κυπρίων, ὥσπερ Ἀθήνησιν οἱ κληρούμενοι
τὰς φυλάς, καὶ ἠγωνίζοντο θαυμαστῇ φιλοτιμίᾳ
πρὸς ἀλλήλους. μάλιστα δὲ Νικοκρέων ὁ Σαλαμίνιος
καὶ Πασικράτης ὁ Σόλιος διεφιλονείκησαν.
2οὗτοι γὰρ ἔλαχον τοῖς ἐνδοξοτάτοις ὑποκριταῖς
χορηγεῖν, Πασικράτης μὲν Ἀθηνοδόρῳ, Νικοκρέων
δὲ Θεσσαλῷ, περὶ ὃν ἐσπουδάκει καὶ αὐτὸς
Ἀλέξανδρος. οὐ μὴν διέφηνε τὴν σπουδὴν πρότερον
ἢ ταῖς ψήφοις ἀναγορευθῆναι νικῶντα τὸν
Ἀθηνόδωρον. τότε δέ, ὡς ἔοικεν, ἀπιὼν ἔφη τοὺς
μὲν κριτὰς ἐπαινεῖν, αὐτὸς μέντοι μέρος ἂν ἡδέως
προέσθαι τῆς βασιλείας ἐπὶ τῷ μὴ Θεσσαλὸν
3ἰδεῖν νενικημένον. ἐπεὶ δὲ Ἀθηνόδωρος ὑπὸ τῶν
Ἀθηναίων ζημιωθείς, ὅτι πρὸς τὸν ἀγῶνα τῶν
Διονυσίων οὐκ ἀπήντησεν, ἠξίου γράψαι περὶ
308Alexander, xxix.

and ridiculing those who undergo great toils and dangers in the pursuit of eminence and power, since in the way of enjoyments and pleasures they have little or nothing more than other men. From what has been said, then, it is clear that Alexander himself was not foolishly affected or puffed up by the belief in his divinity, but used it for the subjugation of others.


XXIX. When he had returned from Egypt into Phoenicia,1 he honoured the gods with sacrifices and solemn processions, and held contests of dithyrambic choruses and tragedies which were made brilliant, not only by their furnishings, but also by the competitors who exhibited them. For the kings of Cyprus were the choregi, or exhibitors, just like, at Athens, those chosen by lot from the tribes, and they competed against each other with amazing ambition. Most eager of all was the contention between Nicocreon of Salamis and Pasicrates of Soli. For the lot assigned to these exhibitors the most celebrated actors, to Pasicrates Athenodorus, and to Nicocreon Thessalus, in whose success Alexander himself was interested. He did not reveal this interest, however, until, by the votes of the judges, Athenodorus had been proclaimed victor. But then, as it would appear, on leaving the theatre, he said that he approved the decision of the judges, but would gladly have given up a part of his kingdom rather than to have seen Thessalus vanquished. And yet, when Athenodorus, who had been fined by the Athenians for not keeping his engagement in the dramatic contest of their Dionysiac festival, asked the king to write a letter to them in his behalf,


1Early in 331 b.c.309