Plutarch’s Lives


XLIX. Ὁ μὲν οὖν Φιλώτας ἐπιβουλευόμενος
οὕτως ἠγνόει, καὶ συνῆν τῇ Ἀντιγόνῃ πολλὰ καὶ
πρὸς ὀργὴν καὶ μεγαλαυχίαν ῥήματα καὶ λόγους
2κατὰ τοῦ βασιλέως ἀνεπιτηδείους προϊέμενος. ὁ
δὲ Ἀλέξανδρος, καίπερ καρτερᾶς ἐνδείξεως κατὰ
τοῦ Φιλώτου προσπεσούσης, ἐκαρτέρησε σιωπῇ
καὶ κατέσχεν, εἴτε θαρρῶν τῇ Παρμενίωνος εὐνοίᾳ
πρὸς αὑτόν, εἴτε δεδιὼς τὴν δόξαν αὐτῶν καὶ
τὴν δύναμιν. ἐν δὲ τῷ τότε χρόνῳ Μακεδὼν
ὄνομα Λίμνος, ἐκ Χαλαίστρας, ἐπιβουλεύων Ἀλεξάνδρῳ
Νικόμαχόν τινα τῶν νέων, πρὸς ὃν αὐτὸς
ἐρωτικῶς εἶχεν, ἐπὶ τὴν κοινωνίαν τῆς πράξεως
3παρεκάλει. τοῦ δὲ μὴ δεξαμένου, φράσαντος δὲ
τἀδελφῷ Κεβαλίνῳ τὴν πεῖραν, ἐλθὼν ἐκεῖνος
πρὸς Φιλώταν ἐκέλευσεν εἰσάγειν αὐτοὺς πρὸς
Ἀλέξανδρον ὡς περὶ ἀναγκαίων ἔχοντας ἐντυχεῖν
καὶ μεγάλων. ὁ δὲ Φιλώτας, ὅ τι δὴ παθὼν
(ἄδηλον γάρ ἐστιν), οὐ παρῆγεν αὐτούς, ὡς πρὸς
ἄλλοις μείζοσι γιγνομένου τοῦ βασιλέως. καὶ
4τοῦτο δὶς ἐποίησεν. οἱ δὲ καθ᾿ ὑποψίαν ἤδη τοῦ
Φιλώτου τραπόμενοι πρὸς ἕτερον καὶ δι᾿ ἐκείνου
τῷ Ἀλεξάνδρῳ προσαχθέντες πρῶτον μὲν τὰ τοῦ
Λίμνου κατεῖπον, ἔπειτα παρεδήλωσαν ἡσυχῆ
τὸν Φιλώταν, ὡς ἀμελήσειεν αὐτῶν δὶς ἐντυχόντων.
καὶ τοῦτο δὴ σφόδρα παρώξυνε τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον·
καὶ τοῦ πεμφθέντος ἐπὶ τὸν Λίμνον, ὡς
ἠμύνετο συλλαμβανόμενος, ἀποκτείναντος αὐτόν,
ἔτι μᾶλλον διεταράχθη, τὸν ἔλεγχον ἐκπεφευγέναι
5τῆς ἐπιβουλῆς νομίζων. καὶ πικρῶς ἔχων693
364Alexander, xlix.


XLIX. Now, Philotas was ignorant of the plot thus laid against him, and in his frequent interviews with Antigone would utter many angry and boastful speeches and many improper words against the king. But Alexander, although strong testimony against Philotas came to his ears, endured in silence and restrained himself, either because he had confidence in Parmenio’s good will towards him, or because he feared the reputation and power of father and son. Meanwhile, however, a Macedonian named Limnus, from Chalaestra, conspired against Alexander’s life,1 and invited Nicomachus, one of the young men, whose lover he was, to take part with him in the undertaking. Nicomachus would not accept the invitation, but told his brother Cebalinus of the attempt, and he, going to Philotas, ordered him to conduct them into the presence of Alexander, on the ground that there were matters of great importance about which they must see him. But Philotas, for whatever reason (and the reason is not known), would not conduct them in, alleging that the king was engaged on other matters of more importance. And he refused their request twice. They now became suspicious of Philotas and applied to someone else, by whom they were brought before Alexander. In the first place they told him about the plot of Limnus, and then threw out veiled insinuations against Philotas, on the ground that he had neglected their petitions on two occasions. This greatly incensed Alexander; and when he found that Limnus had defended himself against arrest and had therefore been killed by the man sent to fetch him, he was still more disturbed in mind, thinking that the proof of the plot had escaped him. And since
1In the late autumn of 330 b.c.365