Plutarch’s Lives

πρόσθες ἔτι τὴν λοιπὴν ὁδὸν ἐπὶ τὴν σκηνὴν ἑαυτῷ1
3τοῦτο κομίσας.” ὅλως δὲ ἤχθετο τοῖς μὴ
λαμβάνουσι μᾶλλον ἢ τοῖς αἰτοῦσι. καὶ Φωκίωνι
μὲν ἔγραψεν ἐπιστολὴν ὡς οὐ χρησόμενος
αὐτῷ φίλῳ τὸ λοιπόν, εἰ διωθοῖτο τὰς χάριτας.
Σεραπίωνι δὲ τῶν ἀπὸ σφαίρας τινὶ νεανίσκων
οὐδὲν ἐδίδου διὰ τὸ μηδὲν αἰτεῖν. ὡς οὖν εἰς τὸ
σφαιρίζειν παραγενόμενος ὁ Σεραπίων ἄλλοις
ἔβαλλε τὴν σφαῖραν, εἰπόντος δὲ τοῦ βασιλέως,
“Ἐμοὶ δὲ οὐ δίδως;” “Οὐ γὰρ αἰτεῖς,” εἶπε,
4τούτῳ μὲν δὴ γελάσας πολλὰ ἔδωκε. Πρωτέᾳ δέ
τινι τῶν περὶ σκώμματα καὶ πότον οὐκ ἀμούσων
ἔδοξε δι᾿ ὀργῆς γεγονέναι· τῶν δὲ φίλων δεομένων
κἀκείνου δακρύοντος ἔφη διαλλάττεσθαι· κἀκεῖνος,
“Οὐκοῦν,” εἶπεν, “ὦ βασιλεῦ, δός τί μοι
πιστὸν πρῶτον.” ἐκέλευσεν οὖν αὐτῷ πέντε τάλαντα
δοθῆναι. περὶ δὲ τῶν τοῖς φίλοις καὶ τοῖς688
σωματοφύλαξι νεμομένων πλούτων, ἡλίκον εἶχον
ὄγκον, ἐμφαίνει δι᾿ ἐπιστολῆς Ὀλυμπιάς, ἣν
5ἔγραψε πρὸς αὐτόν. “Ἄλλως,” φησίν, “εὖ
ποίει τοὺς φίλους καὶ ἐνδόξους ἄγε· νῦν δ᾿ ἰσοβασιλέας
πάντας ποιεῖς καὶ πολυφιλίας παρασκευάζεις
αὐτοῖς, ἑαυτὸν δὲ ἐρημοῖς.” πολλάκις
δὲ τοιαῦτα τῆς Ὀλυμπιάδος γραφούσης ἐφύλαττεν
ἀπόρρητα τὰ γράμματα, πλὴν ἅπαξ Ἡφαιστίωνος,
ὥσπερ εἰώθει, λυθεῖσαν ἐπιστολὴν αὐτῷ
συναναγινώσκοντος οὐκ ἐκώλυσεν, ἀλλὰ τὸν δακτύλιον

1ἑαυτῷ Sint., with the best MSS.; Coraës and Bekker have σεαυτῷ. Cf. § 5.340Alexander, xxxix.

but finish your journey by taking this load to your own tent.” Furthermore, he was generally more displeased with those who would not take his gifts than with those who asked for them. And so he wrote to Phocion in a letter that he would not treat him as a friend in future if he rejected his favours. Again, to Serapion, one of the youths who played at ball with him, he used to give nothing because he asked for nothing. Accordingly, whenever Serapion had the ball, he would throw it to others, until the king said: “Won’t you give it to me?” “No,” said Serapion, “because you don’t ask for it,” whereat the king burst out laughing and made him many presents. With Proteas, however, a clever wag and boon companion, he appeared to be angry; but when the man’s friends begged his forgiveness, as did Proteas himself with tears, the king said that he was his friend again, whereat Proteas said: “In that case, O King, give me something to prove it first.” Accordingly, the king ordered that five talents should be given him. What lofty airs his friends and bodyguards were wont to display over the wealth bestowed by him, is plain from a letter which Olympias wrote to him. She says: “I beg thee to find other ways of conferring favours on those thou lovest and holdest in honour; as it is, thou makest them all the equals of kings and providest them with an abundance of friends, whilst thyself thou strippest bare.” Olympias often wrote him in like vein, but Alexander kept her writings secret, except once when Hephaestion, as was his wont, read with him a letter which had been opened; the king did not prevent him, but took the ring
341