Plutarch’s Lives


LXVII. Ἀναλαβὼν οὖν ἐνταῦθα τὴν δύναμιν
ἐξώρμησε κώμῳ χρώμενος ἐφ᾿ ἡμέρας ἑπτὰ διὰ
τῆς Καρμανίας. αὐτὸν μὲν οὖν ἵπποι σχέδην
ἐκόμιζον ὀκτώ, μετὰ τῶν ἑταίρων ὑπὲρ θυμέλης
ἐν ὑψηλῷ καὶ περιφανεῖ πλαισίῳ πεπηγυίας εὐωχούμενον
συνεχῶς ἡμέρας καὶ νυκτός· ἅμαξαι
δὲ παμπληθεῖς, αἱ μὲν ἁλουργοῖς καὶ ποικίλοις
περιβολαίοις, αἱ δ᾿ ὕλης ἀεὶ προσφάτου καὶ
χλωρᾶς σκιαζόμεναι κλάδοις, εἵποντο τοὺς ἄλλους
ἄγουσαι φίλους καὶ ἡγεμόνας ἐστεφανωμένους
2καὶ πίνοντας. εἶδες δ᾿ ἂν οὐ πέλτην, οὐ
κράνος, οὐ σάρισαν, ἀλλὰ φιάλαις καὶ ῥυτοῖς καὶ
θηρικλείοις παρὰ τὴν ὁδὸν ἅπασαν οἱ στρατιῶται
βαπτίζοντες ἐκ πίθων μεγάλων καὶ κρατήρων
ἀλλήλοις προέπινον, οἱ μὲν ἐν τῷ προάγειν ἅμα
καὶ βαδίζειν, οἱ δὲ κατακείμενοι. πολλὴ δὲ μοῦσα
συρίγγων καὶ αὐλῶν ᾠδῆς τε καὶ ψαλμοῦ καὶ
3βακχείας γυναικῶν κατεῖχε πάντα τόπον. τῷ δὲ
ἀτάκτῳ καὶ πεπλανημένῳ τῆς πορείας παρείπετο
καὶ παιδιὰ βακχικῆς ὕβρεως, ὡς τοῦ θεοῦ παρόντος
αὐτοῦ καὶ συμπαραπέμποντος τὸν κῶμον.
ἐπεὶ δὲ ἧκε τῆς Γεδρωσίας εἰς τὸ βασίλειον, αὖθις
4ἀνελάμβανε τὴν στρατιὰν πανηγυρίζων. λέγεται
δὲ μεθύοντα αὐτὸν θεωρεῖν ἀγῶνας χορῶν,
τὸν δὲ ἐρώμενον Βαγώαν χορεύοντα νικῆσαι καὶ
κεκοσμημένον διὰ τοῦ θεάτρου παρελθόντα καθίσαι
παρ᾿ αὐτόν· ἰδόντας δὲ τοὺς Μακεδόνας
κροτεῖν καὶ βοᾶν φιλῆσαι κελεύοντας, ἄχρι οὗ
περιβαλὼν κατεφίλησεν.
412Alexander, lxvii.


LXVII. Accordingly, after refreshing his forces here, he set out and marched for seven days through Carmania in a revelling rout. He himself was conveyed slowly along by eight horses, while he feasted day and night continuously with his companions on a dais built upon a lofty and conspicuous scaffolding of oblong shape; and waggons without number followed, some with purple and embroidered canopies, others protected from the sun by boughs of trees which were kept fresh and green, conveying the rest of his friends and commanders, who were all garlanded and drinking. Not a shield was to be seen, not a helmet, not a spear, but along the whole march with cups and drinking-horns and flagons the soldiers kept dipping wine from huge casks and mixing-bowls and pledging one another, some as they marched along, others lying down; while pipes and flutes, stringed instruments and song, and revelling cries of women, filled every place with abundant music. Then, upon this disordered and straggling procession there followed also the sports of bacchanalian license, as though Bacchus himself were present and conducting the revel.1 Moreover, when he came to the royal palace of Gedrosia, he once more gave his army time for rest and held high festival. We are told, too, that he was once viewing some contests in singing and dancing, being well heated with wine, and that his favourite, Bagoas, won the prize for song and dance, and then, all in his festal array, passed through the theatre and took his seat by Alexander’s side; at sight of which the Macedonians clapped their hands and loudly bade the king kiss the victor, until at last he threw his arms about him and kissed him tenderly.
1According to Arrian (Anab. vi. 28, 1 f.), this bacchanalian procession through Carmania rests on no credible authority.413