Plutarch’s Lives

ἐστρατήγησε δὲ τῶν ἀπὸ τῆς τύχης ὑπαρχόντων
πρὸς τὸ νικῆσαι βέλτιον, ὅς γε τοσούτῳ πλήθει
τῶν βαρβάρων λειπόμενος ἐκείνοις μὲν οὐ παρέσχε
κύκλωσιν, αὐτὸς δὲ τῷ δεξιῷ τὸ εὐώνυμον
ὑπερβαλὼν καὶ γενόμενος κατὰ κέρας φυγὴν
ἐποίησε τῶν καθ᾿ αὑτὸν βαρβάρων, ἐν πρώτοις
ἀγωνιζόμενος, ὥστε τρωθῆναι ξίφει τὸν μηρόν, ὡς
μὲν Χάρης φησίν, ὑπὸ Δαρείου (συμπεσεῖν γὰρ
5αὐτοὺς εἰς χεῖρας), Ἀλέξανδρος δὲ περὶ τῆς
μάχης ἐπιστέλλων τοῖς περὶ τὸν Ἀντίπατρον
οὐκ εἴρηκεν ὅστις ἦν ὁ τρώσας, ὅτι δὲ τρωθείη
τὸν μηρὸν ἐγχειριδίῳ, δυσχερὲς δ᾿ οὐδὲν ἀπὸ τοῦ
τραύματος συμβαίη γέγραφε.
Νικήσας δὲ λαμπρῶς καὶ καταβαλὼν ὑπὲρ
ἕνδεκα μυριάδας τῶν πολεμίων, Δαρεῖον μὲν οὐχ
εἷλε τέτταρας σταδίους ἢ πέντε προλαβόντα τῇ
φυγῇ, τὸ δὲ ἅρμα καὶ τὸ τόξον αὐτοῦ λαβὼν
6ἐπανῆλθε· καὶ κατέλαβε τοὺς Μακεδόνας τὸν μὲν
ἄλλον πλοῦτον ἐκ τοῦ βαρβαρικοῦ στρατοπέδου
φέροντας καὶ ἄγοντας ὑπερβάλλοντα πλήθει,
καίπερ εὐζώνων πρὸς τὴν μάχην παραγενομένων
καὶ τὰ πλεῖστα τῆς ἀποσκευῆς ἐν Δαμασκῷ
καταλιπόντων, τὴν δὲ Δαρείου σκηνὴν ἐξῃρηκότας676
ἐκείνῳ, θεραπείας τε λαμπρᾶς καὶ παρασκευῆς
7καὶ χρημάτων πολλῶν γέμουσαν. εὐθὺς οὖν
ἀποδυσάμενος τὰ ὅπλα πρὸς τὸ λουτρὸν ἐβάδιζεν,
εἰπών· “Ἴωμεν ἀπολουσόμενοι τὸν ἀπὸ τῆς μάχης
ἱδρῶτα τῷ Δαρείου λουτρῷ.” καί τις τῶν
ἑταίρων “Μὰ τὸν Δία” εἶπεν, “ἀλλὰ τῷ
Ἀλεξάνδρου· τὰ γὰρ τῶν ἡττωμένων εἶναί τε δεῖ
8καὶ προσαγορεύεσθαι τοῦ κρατοῦντος.” ὡς δὲ
280Alexander, xx.

his generalship was better than the provisions of Fortune for his victory. For since he was so vastly inferior in numbers to the Barbarians, he gave them no opportunity to encircle him, but, leading his right wing in person, extended it past the enemy’s left, got on their flank, and routed the Barbarians who were opposed to him, fighting among the foremost, so that he got a sword-wound in the thigh. Chares says this wound was given him by Dareius, with whom he had a hand-to-hand combat, but Alexander, in a letter to Antipater about the battle, did not say who it was that gave him the wound; he wrote that he had been wounded in the thigh with a dagger, but that no serious harm resulted from the wound.
Although he won a brilliant victory and destroyed more than a hundred and ten thousand of his enemies, he did not capture Dareius, who got a start of four or five furlongs in his flight; but he did take the king’s chariot, and his bow, before he came back from the pursuit. He found his Macedonians carrying off the wealth from the camp of the Barbarians, and the wealth was of surpassing abundance, although its owners had come to the battle in light marching order and had left most of their baggage in Damascus; he found, too, that his men had picked out for him the tent of Dareius, which was full to overflowing with gorgeous servitors and furniture, and many treasures. Straightway, then, Alexander put off his armour and went to the bath, saying: “Let us go and wash off the sweat of the battle in the bath of Dareius.” “No, indeed,” said one of his companions, “but rather in that of Alexander; for the property of the conquered must belong to the conqueror, and be called his.” And when he
281