Plutarch’s Lives
4πρὸς δὲ τὴν πληγὴν ἐνδόντος αὐτοῦ καὶ τὸ σῶμα
κάμψαντος, ὁ μὲν βαλὼν ἐπέδραμε βαρβαρικὴν
μάχαιραν σπασάμενος, Πευκέστας δὲ καὶ Λιμναῖος
προέστησαν· ὧν πληγέντων ἑκατέρων ὁ μὲν
ἀπέθανε, Πευκέστας δὲ ἀντεῖχε, τὸν δὲ βάρβαρον
Ἀλέξανδρος ἀπέκτεινεν. αὐτὸς δὲ τραύματα
πολλὰ λαβών, τέλος δὲ πληγεὶς ὑπέρῳ κατὰ τοῦ
τραχήλου, προσήρεισε τῷ τείχει τὸ σῶμα, βλέπων
5πρὸς τοὺς πολεμίους. ἐν τούτῳ δὲ τῶν Μακεδόνων
περιχυθέντων ἁρπασθεὶς ἀναίσθητος ἤδη
τῶν περὶ αὐτὸν ἐπὶ σκηνῆς ἐκομίζετο. καὶ
παραυτίκα μὲν ὡς τεθνεῶτος ἦν λόγος ἐν τῷ
στρατοπέδῳ· χαλεπῶς δὲ καὶ πολυπόνως τὸν
ὀϊστὸν ἐκπρισάντων ξύλινον ὄντα, καὶ τοῦ
θώρακος οὕτω μόλις ἀπολυθέντος, περὶ τὴν
ἐκκοπὴν ἐγίνοντο τῆς ἀκίδος ἐνδεδυκυίας ἑνὶ τῶν
ὀστέων. λέγεται δὲ τὸ μὲν πλάτος τριῶν δακτύλων
6εἶναι, τὸ δὲ μῆκος τεσσάρων. διὸ ταῖς
λιποθυμίαις ἔγγιστα θανάτου συνελαυνόμενος
ἐξαιρουμένης αὐτῆς, ὅμως ἀνέλαβε. καὶ διαφυγὼν
τὸν κίνδυνον, ἔτι δὲ ἀσθενὴς ὢν καὶ πολὺν χρόνον
ἐν διαίτῃ καὶ θεραπείαις ἔχων αὑτόν, ἔξω θορυβοῦντας
ὡς ᾔσθετο ποθοῦντας αὐτὸν ἰδεῖν τοὺς
Μακεδόνας, λαβὼν ἱμάτιον προῆλθε. καὶ θύσας
τοῖς θεοῖς αὖθις ἀνήχθη καὶ παρεκομίζετο χώραν
τε πολλὴν καὶ πόλεις μεγάλας καταστρεφόμενος.


LXIV. Τῶν δὲ Γυμνοσοφιστῶν τοὺς μάλιστα
τὸν Σάββαν ἀναπείσαντας ἀποστῆναι καὶ κακὰ
πλεῖστα τοῖς Μακεδόσι παρασχόντας λαβὼν
δέκα, δεινοὺς δοκοῦντας εἶναι περὶ τὰς ἀποκρίσεις


404Alexander, lxiv.

the force of the blow that Alexander recoiled and sank to his knees, whereupon his assailant ran at him with drawn scimitar, while Peucestas and Limnaeus1 defended him. Both of them were wounded, and Limnaeus was killed; but Peucestas held out, and at last Alexander killed the Barbarian. But he himself received many wounds, and at last was smitten on the neck with a cudgel, and leaned against the wall, his eyes still fixed upon his foes. At this instant his Macedonians flocked about him, caught him up, already unconscious of what was going on about him, and carried him to his tent. And straightway a report that he was dead prevailed in the camp; but when with much difficulty and pains they had sawn off the shaft of the arrow, which was of wood, and had thus succeeded at last in removing the king’s breastplate, they came to the excision of the arrowhead, which was buried in one of the ribs. We are told, moreover, that it was three fingers broad and four long. Its removal, therefore, threw the king into swoons and brought him to death’s door, but nevertheless he recovered. And after he was out of danger, though he was still weak and kept himself for a long time under regimen and treatment, perceiving from their tumult at his door that his Macedonians were yearning to see him, he took his cloak and went out to them. And after sacrificing to the gods he went on board ship again and dropped down the river, subduing much territory and great cities as he went.


LXIV. He captured ten of the Gymnosophists who had done most to get Sabbas to revolt, and had made the most trouble for the Macedonians. These philosophers were reputed to be clever and concise
1Leonnatus, according to Arrian, vi. 10, 2.405