Plutarch’s Lives
3ταλάντοις γενομένου. ἐπεὶ δὲ Ἀντιγένης
ὁ ἑτερόφθαλμος ὡς ὀφείλων ἀπεγράψατο ψευδῶς,
καὶ παραγαγών τινα φάσκοντα δεδανεικέναι πρὸς
τὴν τράπεζαν, ἀπέτισε τὸ ἀργύριον, εἶτα ἐφωράθη
ψευδόμενος, ὀργισθεὶς ὁ βασιλεὺς ἀπήλασε
τῆς αὐλῆς αὐτὸν καὶ παρείλετο τὴν ἡγεμονίαν.
ἦν δὲ λαμπρὸς ἐν τοῖς πολεμικοῖς ὁ Ἀντιγένης·704
καὶ ἔτι δὲ νέος ὤν, Φιλίππου πολιορκοῦντος Πέρινθον,
ἐμπεσόντος αὐτῷ καταπελτικοῦ βέλους
εἰς τὸν ὀφθαλμόν, οὐ παρέσχε βουλομένοις ἐξελεῖν
τὸ βέλος οὐδὲ ὑφήκατο πρὶν ὤσασθαι προσμαχόμενος
καὶ κατακλεῖσαι τοὺς πολεμίους εἰς
4τὸ τεῖχος. οὐ μετρίως οὖν τότε τὴν ἀτιμίαν
ἔφερεν, ἀλλὰ δῆλος ἦν ἑαυτὸν ὑπὸ λύπης καὶ
βαρυθυμίας διαχρησόμενος. καὶ τοῦτο δείσας ὁ
βασιλεὺς ἀνῆκε τὴν ὀργὴν καὶ τὰ χρήματα ἔχειν
ἐκέλευσεν αὐτόν.


LXXI. Τῶν δὲ παίδων τῶν τρισμυρίων, οὓς
ἀσκουμένους καὶ μανθάνοντας ἀπέλιπε, τοῖς τε
σώμασιν ἀνδρείων φανέντων καὶ τοῖς εἴδεσιν
εὐπρεπῶν, ἔτι δὲ καὶ ταῖς μελέταις εὐχέρειαν
καὶ κουφότητα θαυμαστὴν ἐπιδειξαμένων, αὐτὸς
μὲν ἥσθη, τοῖς δὲ Μακεδόσι δυσθυμία παρέστη
καὶ δέος, ὡς ἧττον αὐτοῖς τοῦ βασιλέως προσέξοντος.
2διὸ καὶ τοὺς ἀσθενεῖς καὶ πεπηρωμένους
αὐτοῦ καταπέμποντος ἐπὶ θάλατταν ὕβριν ἔφασαν
εἶναι καὶ προπηλακισμόν, ἀνθρώποις ἀποχρησάμενον
εἰς ἅπαντα νῦν ἀποτίθεσθαι σὺν
αἰσχύνῃ καὶ προσρίπτειν ταῖς πατρίσι καὶ τοῖς


420Alexander, lxxi.

eight hundred and seventy talents.1 Now Antigenes, the One-eyed, had got himself enrolled as a debtor fraudulently and, on producing somebody who affirmed that he had made a loan to him at the bank, the money was paid over; then his fraud was discovered, and the king, in anger, drove him from his court and deprived him of his command. Antigenes, however, was a splendid soldier, and while he was still a young man and Philip was besieging Perinthus, though a bolt from a catapult smote him in the eye, he would not consent to have the bolt taken out nor give up fighting until he had repelled the enemy and shut them up within their walls. Accordingly, he could not endure with any complacency the disgrace that now fell upon him, but was evidently going to make away with himself from grief and despondency. So the king, fearing this, put away his wrath and ordered him to keep the money.


LXXI. The thirty thousand boys whom he had left behind him under instruction and training2 were now so vigorous in their bodies and so comely in their looks, and showed besides such admirable dexterity and agility in their exercises, that Alexander himself was delighted; his Macedonians, however, were filled with dejection and fear, thinking that their king would now pay less regard to them. Therefore when he also sent the weak and maimed among them down to the sea-board, they said it was insult and abuse, after using men up in every kind of service, now to put them away in disgrace and cast them back upon their native cities and their parents, no longer



1Alexander also paid the debts of all his soldiers, amounting to 20,000 talents (Arrian, Anab. vii. 5, 1–3), unless this is the donation which Plutarch has here erroneously connected with the great wedding feast. Cf. Athenaeus, xii. pp. 538 ff.2Cf. chapter xlvii. 3.421