Plutarch’s Lives

δὴ διοίσομεν ἡμεῖς τῶν ἄλλων, εἰ καθ᾿ οὓς ἐπαιδεύθημεν
λόγους, οὗτοι πάντων ἔσονται κοινοί;
ἐγὼ δὲ βουλοίμην ἂν ταῖς περὶ τὰ ἄριστα ἐμπειρίαις
5ἢ ταῖς δυνάμεσι διαφέρειν. ἔρρωσο.” ταύτην
μὲν οὖν τὴν φιλοτιμίαν αὐτοῦ παραμυθούμενος
Ἀριστοτέλης ἀπολογεῖται περὶ τῶν λόγων
ἐκείνων, ὡς καὶ ἐκδεδομένων καὶ μὴ ἐκδεδομένων·
ἀληθῶς γὰρ ἡ μετὰ τὰ φυσικὰ πραγματεία πρὸς
διδασκαλίαν καὶ μάθησιν οὐδὲν ἔχουσα χρήσιμον
ὑπόδειγμα τοῖς πεπαιδευμένοις ἀπ᾿ ἀρχῆς γέγραπται.


VIII. Δοκεῖ δέ μοι καὶ τὸ φιλιατρεῖν Ἀλεξάνδρῳ
προστρίψασθαι μᾶλλον ἑτέρων Ἀριστοτέλης·
οὐ γὰρ μόνον τὴν θεωρίαν ἠγάπησεν, ἀλλὰ καὶ
νοσοῦσιν ἐβοήθει τοῖς φίλοις καὶ συνέταττε θεραπείας
τινὰς καὶ διαίτας, ὡς ἐκ τῶν ἐπιστολῶν
λαβεῖν ἔστιν. ἦν δὲ καὶ φύσει φιλολόγος καὶ
2φιλαναγνώστης. καὶ τὴν μὲν Ἰλιάδα τῆς πολεμικῆς
ἀρετῆς ἐφόδιον καὶ νομίζων καὶ ὀνομάζων,
ἔλαβε μὲν Ἀριστοτέλους διορθώσαντος ἣν ἐκ τοῦ
νάρθηκος καλοῦσιν, εἶχε δὲ ἀεὶ μετὰ τοῦ ἐγχειριδίου
κειμένην ὑπὸ τὸ προσκεφάλαιον, ὡς Ὀνησίκριτος
ἱστόρηκε, τῶν δὲ ἄλλων βιβλίων οὐκ εὐπορῶν
ἐν τοῖς ἄνω τόποις Ἅρπαλον ἐκέλευσε
3πέμψαι. κἀκεῖνος ἔπεμψεν αὐτῷ τάς τε Φιλίστου
βίβλους καὶ τῶν Εὐριπίδου καὶ Σοφοκλέους
καὶ Αἰσχύλου τραγῳδιῶν συχνάς, καὶ Τελέστου
καὶ Φιλοξένου διθυράμβους. Ἀριστοτέλην δὲ
θαυμάζων ἐν ἀρχῇ καὶ ἀγαπῶν οὐχ ἧττον, ὡς
αὐτὸς ἔλεγε, τοῦ πατρός, ὡς δι᾿ ἐκεῖνον μὲν ζῶν,
διὰ τοῦτον δὲ καλῶς ζῶν, ὕστερον ὑποπτότερον
242Alexander, viii.

doctrines; for in what shall I surpass other men if those doctrines wherein I have been trained are to be all men’s common property? But I had rather excel in my acquaintance with the best things than in my power. Farewell.” Accordingly, in defending himself, Aristotle encourages this ambition of Alexander by saying that the doctrines of which he spoke were both published and not published; for in truth his treatise on metaphysics is of no use for those who would either teach or learn the science, but is written as a memorandum for those already trained therein.


VIII. Moreover, in my opinion Alexander’s love of the art of healing was inculcated in him by Aristotle preeminently. For he was not only fond of the theory of medicine, but actually came to the aid of his friends when they were sick, and prescribed for them certain treatments and regimens, as one can gather from his letters. He was also by nature a lover of learning and a lover of reading. And since he thought and called the Iliad a viaticum of the military art, he took with him Aristotle’s recension of the poem, called the Iliad of the Casket,1 and always kept it lying with his dagger under his pillow, as Onesicritus informs us; and when he could find no other books in the interior of Asia, he ordered Harpalus to send him some. So Harpalus sent him the books of Philistus, a great many of the tragedies of Euripides, Sophocles, and Aeschylus, and the dithyrambic poems of Telestes and Philoxenus. Aristotle he admired at the first, and loved him, as he himself used to say, more than he did his father, for that the one had given him life, but the other had taught him a noble life; later, however,


1Cf. chapter xxvi. 1.243