Plutarch’s Lives

ἡδέως γενέσθαι καὶ μεθυσθῆναι μετὰ τοῦ
βασιλέως, αὐτὸν δὲ ἐκεῖνον ἔφη μετ᾿ ὀλίγον χρόνον
4ἐν Βαβυλῶνι ὄψεσθαι. ταῦτα δ᾿ εἰπὼν κατακλιθεὶς
καὶ συγκαλυψάμενος οὐκ ἐκινήθη τοῦ
πυρὸς πλησιάζοντος, ἀλλ᾿ ἐν ᾧ κατεκλίθη σχήματι,
τοῦτο διατηρῶν ἐκαλλιέρησεν ἑαυτὸν τῷ
πατρίῳ νόμῳ τῶν ἐκεῖ σοφιστῶν. τοῦτο πολλοῖς
ἔτεσιν ὕστερον ἄλλος Ἰνδὸς ἐν Ἀθήναις Καίσαρι
συνὼν ἐποίησε· καὶ δείκνυται μέχρι νῦν τὸ μνημεῖον
Ἰνδοῦ προσαγορευόμενον.


LXX. Ὁ δὲ Ἀλέξανδρος ἀπὸ τῆς πυρᾶς γενόμενος,
καὶ συναγαγὼν πολλοὺς τῶν φίλων καὶ
τῶν ἡγεμόνων ἐπὶ δεῖπνον, ἀγῶνα προὔθηκε καὶ
στέφανον ἀκρατοποσίας. ὁ μὲν οὖν πλεῖστον
πιὼν Πρόμαχος ἄχρι χοῶν τεσσάρων προῆλθε·
καὶ λαβὼν τὸ νικητήριον, στέφανον ταλαντιαῖον,
ἡμέρας τρεῖς ἐπέζησε. τῶν δὲ ἄλλων, ὡς Χάρης
φησί, τετταράκοντα καὶ εἷς ἀπέθανον πιόντες,
ἰσχυροῦ τῇ μέθῃ κρύους ἐπιγενομένου.
2Τῶν δὲ ἑταίρων γάμον ἐν Σούσοις ἐπιτελῶν, καὶ
λαμβάνων μὲν αὐτὸς γυναῖκα τὴν Δαρείου θυγατέρα
Στάτειραν, διανέμων δὲ τὰς ἀρίστας τοῖς
ἀρίστοις, κοινὸν δὲ τῶν ἤδη προγεγαμηκότων
Μακεδόνων γάμον ἄλλον1 ἑστιάσας, ἐν ᾧ φασιν
ἐννακισχιλίων τῶν παρακεκλημένων ἐπὶ τὸ δεῖπνον
ὄντων ἑκάστῳ χρυσῆν φιάλην πρὸς τὰς
σπονδὰς δοθῆναι, τά τε ἄλλα θαυμαστῶς ἐλαμπρύνατο
καὶ τὰ χρέα τοῖς δανείσασιν ὑπὲρ τῶν
ὀφειλόντων αὐτὸς διαλύσας, τοῦ παντὸς ἀναλώματος
ἐλάσσονος μυρίων ταλάντων ἑκατὸν τριάκοντα

1ἄλλον Bekker, after Coraës: καλὸν with the MSS.418Alexander, lxx.

day one of pleasure and revelry with the king, whom, he declared, he should soon see in Babylon. After thus speaking, he lay down and covered his head, nor did he move as the fire approached him, but continued to lie in the same posture as at first, and so sacrificed himself acceptably, as the wise men of his country had done from of old. The same thing was done many years afterwards by another Indian who was in the following of Caesar,1 at Athens; and the “Indian’s Tomb” is shown there to this day.


LXX. But Alexander, after returning from the funeral pyre and assembling many of his friends and officers for supper, proposed a contest in drinking neat wine, the victor to be crowned. Well, then, the one who drank the most, Promachus, got as far as four pitchers;2 he took the prize, a crown of a talent’s worth, but lived only three days afterwards. And of the rest, according to Chares, forty-one died of what they drank, a violent chill having set in after their debauch.
At Susa he brought to pass the marriage of his companions, took to wife himself the daughter of Dareius, Stateira, assigned the noblest women to his noblest men, and gave a general wedding feast for those of his Macedonians who had already contracted other marriages. At this feast, we are told, nine thousand guests reclined at supper, to each of whom a golden cup for the libations was given. All the other appointments too, were amazingly splendid, and the host paid himself the debts which his guests owed, the whole outlay amounting to nine thousand



1Augustus Caesar.2The “chous,” or pitcher, held about three quarts.419