Plutarch’s Lives

καὶ τὸν Κολοφωνιον Ἀρτέμιον, “Οὐ δοκοῦσιν,”
εἶπεν, “ὑμῖν οἱ Ἕλληνες ἐν τοῖς Μακεδόσιν ὥσπερ
3ἐν θηρίοις ἡμίθεοι περιπατεῖν;” τοῦ δὲ Κλείτου
μὴ εἴκοντος, ἀλλὰ εἰς μέσον ἃ βούλεται λέγειν
τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον κελεύοντος, ἢ μὴ καλεῖν ἐπὶ
δεῖπνον ἄνδρας ἐλευθέρους καὶ παρρησίαν ἔχοντας,
ἀλλὰ μετὰ βαρβάρων ζῆν καὶ ἀνδραπόδων,
οἳ τὴν Περσικὴν ζώνην καὶ τὸν διάλευκον αὐτοῦ
χιτῶνα προσκυνήσουσιν, οὐκέτι φέρων τὴν ὀργὴν
Ἀλέξανδρος μήλων παρακειμένων ἑνὶ βαλὼν
4ἔπαισεν αὐτὸν καὶ τὸ ἐγχειρίδιον ἐζήτει. τῶν δὲ
σωματοφυλάκων ἑνὸς Ἀριστοφάνους φθάσαντος
ὑφελέσθαι, καὶ τῶν ἄλλων περιεχόντων καὶ δεομένων,
ἀναπηδήσας ἀνεβόα Μακεδονιστὶ καλῶν
τοὺς ὑπασπιστάς (τοῦτο δὲ ἦν σύμβολον θορύβου
μεγάλου), καὶ τὸν σαλπιγκτὴν ἐκέλευσε σημαίνειν,
καὶ πὺξ ἔπαισεν ὡς διατρίβοντα καὶ μὴ
βουλόμενον. οὗτος μὲν οὖν ὕστερον εὐδοκίμησεν
ὡς τοῦ μὴ συνταραχθῆναι τὸ στρατόπεδον αἰτιώτατος
γενόμενος. τὸν δὲ Κλεῖτον οὐχ ὑφιέμενον
οἱ φίλοι μόλις ἐξέωσαν τοῦ ἀνδρῶνος.
5Ὁ δὲ κατ᾿ ἄλλας θύρας αὖθις εἰσῄει, μάλα
ὀλιγώρως καὶ θρασέως Εὐριπίδου τὰ ἐξ Ἀνδρομάχης
ἰαμβεῖα ταῦτα περαίνων·

οἴμοι, καθ᾿ Ἑλλάδ᾿ ὡς κακῶς νομίζεται.

οὕτω δὴ λαβὼν παρά τινος τῶν δορυφόρων Ἀλέξανδρος
αἰχμὴν ἀπαντῶντα τὸν Κλεῖτον αὐτῷ
καὶ παράγοντα τὸ πρὸ τῆς θύρας παρακάλυμμα
6διελαύνει. πεσόντος δὲ μετὰ στεναγμοῦ καὶ


372Alexander, li.

and Artemius of Colophon, said: “Do not the Greeks appear to you to walk about among Macedonians like demi-gods among wild beasts?” Cleitus, however, would not yield, but called on Alexander to speak out freely what he wished to say, or else not to invite to supper men who were free and spoke their minds, but to live with Barbarians and slaves, who would do obeisance to his white tunic and Persian girdle. Then Alexander, no longer able to restrain his anger, threw one of the apples that lay on the table at Cleitus and hit him, and began looking about for his sword. But one of his body-guards, Aristophanes, conveyed it away before he could lay hands on it, and the rest surrounded him and begged him to desist, whereupon he sprang to his feet and called out in Macedonian speech a summons to his corps of guards (and this was a sign of great disturbance), and ordered the trumpeter to sound, and smote him with his fist because he hesitated and was unwilling to do so. This man, then, was afterwards held in high esteem on the ground that it was due to him more than to any one else that the camp was not thrown into commotion. But Cleitus would not give in, and with much ado his friends pushed him out of the banquet-hall.
He tried to come in again, however, by another door, very boldly and contemptuously reciting these iambics from the “Andromache” of Euripides1:
“Alas! in Hellas what an evil government!”
And so, at last, Alexander seized a spear from one of his guards, met Cleitus as he was drawing aside the curtain before the door, and ran him through. No sooner had Cleitus fallen with a roar and a groan
1Verse 683 (Kirchhoff).373