Plutarch’s Lives

πλανωμένους νύκτωρ καὶ κλάζοντες εἰς ἴχνος
καθίστασαν τῆς πορείας.
Ἐπεὶ δὲ διεξελθὼν τὴν ἔρημον ἧκεν εἰς τὸν
τόπον, ὁ μὲν προφήτης αὐτὸν ὁ Ἄμμωνος ἀπὸ
τοῦ θεοῦ χαίρειν, ὡς ἀπὸ πατρός, προσεῖπεν· ὁ
δὲ ἐπήρετο μή τις αὐτὸν εἴη διαπεφευγὼς τῶν τοῦ
4πατρὸς φονέων. εὐφημεῖν δὲ τοῦ προφήτου
κελεύσαντος, οὐ γὰρ εἶναι πατέρα θνητὸν αὐτῷ,
μεταβαλὼν ἐπυνθάνετο, τοὺς Φιλίππου φονεῖς εἰ
πάντας εἴη τετιμωρημένος· εἶτα περὶ τῆς ἀρχῆς,
εἰ πάντων αὐτῷ δίδωσιν ἀνθρώπων κυρίῳ γενέσθαι.
χρήσαντος δὲ τοῦ θεοῦ καὶ τοῦτο διδόναι
καὶ Φίλιππον ἀπέχειν ἔκπλεω τὴν δίκην, ἐδωρεῖτο
τὸν θεὸν ἀναθήμασι λαμπροῖς καὶ χρήμασι τοὺς ἀνθρώπους.
5Ταῦτα περὶ τῶν χρησμῶν οἱ πλεῖστοι γράφουσιν·
αὐτὸς δὲ Ἀλέξανδρος ἐν ἐπιστολῇ πρὸς
τὴν μητέρα φησὶ γεγονέναι τινὰς αὐτῷ μαντείας
ἀπορρήτους, ἃς αὐτὸς ἐπανελθὼν φράσει πρὸς
μόνην ἐκείνην. ἔνιοι δέ φασι τὸν μὲν προφήτην
Ἑλληνιστὶ βουλόμενον προσειπεῖν μετά τινος
φιλοφροσύνης “Ὦ παιδίον,” ἐν τῷ τελευταίῳ τῶν
φθόγγων ὑπὸ βαρβαρισμοῦ πρὸς τὸ σίγμα ἐξενεχθῆναι
καὶ εἰπεῖν, “Ὦ παιδίος,” ἀντὶ τοῦ νῦ τῷ
σίγμα χρησάμενον, ἀσμένῳ δὲ τῷ Ἀλεξάνδρῳ τὸ
σφάλμα τῆς φωνῆς γενέσθαι καὶ διαδοθῆναι λόγον
ὡς παῖδα Διὸς αὐτὸν τοῦ θεοῦ προσειπόντος.
6λέγεται δὲ καὶ Ψάμμωνος ἐν Αἰγύπτῳ τοῦ φιλοσόφου
διακούσας ἀποδέξασθαι μάλιστα τῶν
λεχθέντων, ὅτι πάντες οἱ ἄνθρωποι βασιλεύονται
ὑπὸ θεοῦ· τὸ γὰρ ἄρχον ἐν ἑκάστῳ καὶ κρατοῦν
304Alexander, xxvii.

and cawed until they had set them in the track of the march.
When Alexander had passed through the desert and was come to the place of the oracle, the prophet of Ammon gave him salutation from the god as from a father; whereupon Alexander asked him whether any of the murderers of his father had escaped him. To this the prophet answered by bidding him be guarded in his speech, since his was not a mortal father. Alexander therefore changed the form of his question, and asked whether the murderers of Philip had all been punished; and then, regarding his own empire, he asked whether it was given to him to become lord and master of all mankind. The god gave answer that this was given to him, and that Philip was fully avenged. Then Alexander made splendid offerings to the god and gave his priests large gifts of money.
This is what most writers state regarding the oracular responses; but Alexander himself, in a letter to his mother, says that he received certain secret responses, which he would tell to her, and to her alone, on his return. And some say that the prophet, wishing to show his friendliness by addressing him with “O paidion,” or O my son, in his foreign pronunciation ended the words with “s” instead of “n,” and said, “O paidios,” and that Alexander was pleased at the slip in pronunciation, and a story became current that the god had addressed him with “O pai Dios,” or O son of Zeus. We are told, also, that he listened to the teachings of Psammon the philosopher in Egypt, and accepted most readily this utterance of his, namely, that all mankind are under the kingship of God, since in every case that
305