Plutarch’s Lives


XLII. Θαυμάσαι δὲ αὐτὸν ἔστιν ὅτι καὶ μέχρι
τοιούτων ἐπιστολῶν τοῖς φίλοις ἐσχόλαζεν, οἷα
γράφει παῖδα Σελεύκου εἰς Κιλικίαν ἀποδεδρακότα
κελεύων ἀναζητῆσαι, καὶ Πευκέσταν ἐπαινῶν
ὅτι Νίκωνα, Κρατεροῦ δοῦλον, συνέλαβε, καὶ
Μεγαβύζῳ περὶ τοῦ θεράποντος τοῦ ἐν τῷ ἱερῷ
καθεζομένου, κελεύων αὐτόν, ἂν δύνηται, συλλαβεῖν
ἔξω τοῦ ἱεροῦ προκαλεσάμενος, ἐν δὲ τῷ
2ἱερῷ μὴ προσάπτεσθαι. λέγεται δὲ καὶ τὰς δίκας
διακρίνων ἐν ἀρχῇ τὰς θανατικὰς τὴν χεῖρα τῶν
ὤτων τῷ ἑτέρῳ προστιθέναι τοῦ κατηγόρου λέγοντος,
ὅπως τῷ κινδυνεύοντι καθαρὸν φυλάττηται
καὶ ἀδιάβλητον. ἀλλ᾿ ὕστερόν γε αὐτὸν ἐξετράχυναν
αἱ πολλαὶ διαβολαί, διὰ τῶν ἀληθῶν πάροδον
ἐπὶ τὰ ψευδῆ λαβοῦσαι. καὶ μάλιστα
κακῶς ἀκούων ἐξίστατο τοῦ φρονεῖν καὶ χαλεπὸς
ἦν καὶ ἀπαραίτητος, ἅτε δὴ τὴν δόξαν ἀντὶ τοῦ
ζῆν καὶ τῆς βασιλείας ἠγαπηκώς.
3Τότε δὲ ἐξήλαυνεν ἐπὶ Δαρεῖον ὡς πάλιν
μαχούμενος· ἀκούσας δὲ τὴν ὑπὸ Βήσσου γενομένην
αὐτοῦ σύλληψιν ἀπέλυσε τοὺς Θεσσαλοὺς
οἴκαδε, δισχίλια τάλαντα δωρεὰν ἐπιμετρήσας
ταῖς μισθοφοραῖς. πρὸς δὲ τὴν δίωξιν ἀργαλέαν
καὶ μακρὰν γινομένην (ἕνδεκα γὰρ ἡμέραις ἱππάσατο
τρισχιλίους καὶ τριακοσίους σταδίους)
ἀπηγόρευσαν μὲν οἱ πλεῖστοι, καὶ μάλιστα κατὰ
4τὴν ἀνυδρίαν. ἔνθα δὴ Μακεδόνες ἀπήντησαν
αὐτῷ τινες ὕδωρ ἐν ἀσκοῖς ἐφ᾿ ἡμιόνων κομίζοντες
ἀπὸ τοῦ ποταμοῦ· καὶ θεασάμενοι τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον
348Alexander, xlii.


XLII. And it is astonishing that he had time to write so many letters for his friends. For instance, he wrote one giving orders to seek out a slave of Seleucus who had run away into Cilicia; and one in commendation of Peucestas for arresting Nicon, a servant of Craterus; and one to Megabyzus about an attendant who had taken refuge in a sanctuary, bidding him, if possible, entice the slave outside the sanctuary and then arrest him, but not to lay hands upon him in the sanctuary. It is said, too, that at first, when he was trying capital cases, he would put his hand over one of his ears while the accuser was speaking, that he might keep it free and unprejudiced for the accused. But afterwards the multitude of accusations which he heard rendered him harsh, and led him to believe the false because so many were true. And particularly when he was maligned he lost discretion and was cruel and inexorable, since he loved his reputation more than his life or his kingdom.
Now, however, he marched out against Dareius,1 expecting to fight another battle; but when he heard that Dareius had been seized by Bessus, he sent his Thessalians home, after distributing among them a largess of two thousand talents over and above their pay. In consequence of the pursuit of Dareius, which was long and arduous (for in eleven days he rode thirty-three hundred furlongs), most of his horsemen gave out, and chiefly for lack of water. At this point some Macedonians met him who were carrying water from the river in skins upon their mules. And when they beheld Alexander, it being now midday, in a


1In the spring of 330 b.c.349