Plutarch’s Lives
4οὐκ οἶσθα,” εἶπεν, “ὅτι τὴν Δίκην ἔχει πάρεδρον
ὁ Ζεὺς καὶ τὴν Θέμιν, ἵνα πᾶν τὸ πραχθὲν ὑπὸ
τοῦ κρατοῦντος θεμιτὸν ᾖ καὶ δίκαιον;” τοιούτοις
τισὶ λόγοις χρησάμενος ὁ Ἀνάξαρχος τὸ μὲν
πάθος ἐκούφισε τοῦ βασιλέως, τὸ δὲ ἦθος εἰς
πολλὰ χαυνότερον καὶ παρανομώτερον ἐποίησεν,
αὑτὸν δὲ δαιμονίως ἐνήρμοσε, καὶ τοῦ Καλλισθένους
τὴν ὁμιλίαν, οὐδὲ ἄλλως ἐπίχαριν διὰ τὸ
αὐστηρὸν οὖσαν, προσδιέβαλε.
5Λέγεται δέ ποτε παρὰ δεῖπνον ὑπὲρ ὡρῶν καὶ
κράσεως τοῦ περιέχοντος λόγων ὄντων, τὸν Καλλισθένην,
μετέχοντα δόξης τοῖς λέγουσι τἀκεῖ
μᾶλλον εἶναι ψυχρὰ καὶ δυσχείμερα τῶν Ἑλληνικῶν,
ἐναντιουμένου τοῦ Ἀναξάρχου καὶ φιλονεικοῦντος,
εἰπεῖν· “Ἀλλὰ μὴν ἀνάγκη σοὶ
ταῦτα ἐκείνων ὁμολογεῖν ψυχρότερα· σὺ γὰρ ἐκεῖ
μὲν ἐν τρίβωνι διεχείμαζες, ἐνταῦθα δὲ τρεῖς ἐπιβεβλημένος
δάπιδας κατάκεισαι.” τὸν μὲν οὖν
Ἀνάξαρχον καὶ τοῦτο προσπαρώξυνε.


LIII. Τοὺς δὲ ἄλλους σοφιστὰς καὶ κόλακας ὁ
Καλλισθένης ἐλύπει σπουδαζόμενος μὲν ὑπὸ τῶν
νέων διὰ τὸν λόγον, οὐχ ἧττον δὲ τοῖς πρεσβυτέροις
ἀρέσκων διὰ τὸν βίον, εὔτακτον ὄντα καὶ
σεμνὸν καὶ αὐτάρκη, καὶ βεβαιοῦντα τὴν λεγομένην
τῆς ἀποδημίας πρόφασιν, ὅτι τοὺς πολίτας
καταγαγεῖν καὶ κατοικίσαι πάλιν τὴν πατρίδα
2φιλοτιμούμενος ἀνέβη πρὸς Ἀλέξανδρον. φθονούμενος
δὲ διὰ τὴν δόξαν ἔστιν ἃ καὶ καθ᾿ αὑτοῦ
τοῖς διαβάλλουσι παρεῖχε, τάς τε κλήσεις τὰ


376Alexander, liii.

thou not,” said he, “that Zeus has Justice and Law seated beside him, in order that everything that is done by the master of the world may be lawful and just?” By using some such arguments as these Anaxarchus succeeded in lightening the suffering of the king, it is true, but rendered his disposition in many ways more vainglorious and lawless; he also made himself wonderfully liked by the king, and brought the intercourse of Callisthenes with him, which had always been unpleasant because of the man’s austerity, into additional disfavour.
It is said that once at supper the conversation turned upon seasons and weather, and that Callisthenes, who held with those who maintain that it is more cold and wintry there than in Greece, was stoutly opposed by Anaxarchus, whereupon he said: “You surely must admit that it is colder here than there; for there you used to go about in winter in a cloak merely, but here you recline at table with three rugs thrown over you.” Of course this also added to the irritation of Anaxarchus.


LIII. Moreover, the other sophists and flatterers in the train of Alexander were annoyed to see Callisthenes eagerly courted by the young men on account of his eloquence, and no less pleasing to the older men on account of his mode of life, which was well-ordered, dignified, and independent, and confirmed the reason given for his sojourn abroad, namely, that he had gone to Alexander from an ardent desire to restore his fellow-citizens to their homes and re-people his native city.1 And besides being envied on account of his reputation, he also at times by his own conduct furnished material for his detractors, rejecting invitations for the most
1Olynthus, which had been destroyed by Philip in 347 b.c.377