Plutarch’s Lives

χώραν ὀρύττων παρὰ τὸν Ὦξον ποταμὸν ἀνεκάλυψε
πηγὴν ὑγροῦ λιπαροῦ καὶ πιμελώδους·
ἀπαντλουμένου δὲ τοῦ πρώτου καθαρὸν ἀνέβλυζεν
ἤδη καὶ διαυγὲς ἔλαιον, οὔτε ὀσμῇ δοκοῦν οὔτε
γεύσει ἐλαίου διαφέρειν, στιλπνότητά τε καὶ
λιπαρότητα παντάπασιν ἀπαράλλακτον, καὶ
5ταῦτα τῆς χώρας μηδὲ ἐλαίας φερούσης. λέγεται
μὲν οὖν καὶ τὸν Ὦξον αὐτὸν εἶναι μαλακώτατον
ὕδωρ, ὥστε τὸ δέρμα τοῖς λουομένοις ἐπιλιπαίνειν.
οὐ μὴν ἀλλὰ θαυμαστῶς Ἀλέξανδρος
ἡσθεὶς δῆλός ἐστιν ἐξ ὧν γράφει πρὸς Ἀντίπατρον,
ἐν τοῖς μεγίστοις τοῦτο τῶν ἀπὸ τοῦ
θεοῦ γεγονότων αὐτῷ τιθέμενος. οἱ δὲ μάντεις
ἐνδόξου μὲν στρατείας, ἐπιπόνου δὲ καὶ χαλεπῆς
τὸ σημεῖον ἐποιοῦντο· πόνων γὰρ ἀρωγὴν ἔλαιον
ἀνθρώποις ὑπὸ θεοῦ δεδόσθαι.


LVIII. Πολλοὶ μὲν οὖν κατὰ τὰς μάχας αὐτῷ
κίνδυνοι συνέπεσον καὶ τραύμασι νεανικοῖς ἀπήντησε,
τὴν δὲ πλείστην φθορὰν ἀπορίαι τῶν ἀναγκαίων
καὶ δυσκρασίαι τοῦ περιέχοντος ἀπειργάσαντο
τῆς στρατιᾶς. αὐτὸς δὲ τόλμῃ τὴν τύχην
ὑπερβαλέσθαι καὶ τὴν δύναμιν ἀρετῇ φιλοτιμούμενος,
οὐδὲν ᾤετο τοῖς θαρροῦσιν ἀνάλωτον οὐδὲ
2ὀχυρὸν εἶναι τοῖς ἀτόλμοις. λέγεται δὲ τὴν Σισιμίθρου
πολιορκῶν πέτραν ἄβατον οὖσαν καὶ ἀπότομον1
ἀθυμούντων τῶν στρατιωτῶν ἐρωτῆσαι
τὸν Ὀξυάρτην ποῖός τις αὐτὸς εἴη τὴν ψυχὴν
ὁ Σισιμίθρης. φήσαντος δὲ τοῦ Ὀξυάρτου δειλότατον
ἀνθρώπων, “Λέγεις σύ γε,” φάναι, “τὴν

1ἀπότομον Coraës’ correction of the MSS. ἀπρόσβατον, for which Bekker reads ἀπρόσμαχον, after Schaefer. Sintenis2 suggests ἀπότομον καὶ ἀπρόσβατον.388Alexander, lviii.

king’s tent along the river Oxus, uncovered a spring of liquid which was oily and fatty; but when the top of it was drawn off, there flowed at once a pure and clear oil, which appeared to differ from olive oil neither in odour nor in flavour, and in smoothness and lustre was altogether the same, and that too though the country produced no olive trees. It is said, indeed, that the Oxus itself also has a very soft water, which gives sleekness to the skin of those who bathe in it. However, that Alexander was marvellously pleased is clear from what he writes to Antipater, where he speaks of this as one of the greatest omens vouchsafed to him from Heaven. The seers, however, held that the omen foreshadowed an expedition which would be glorious, but difficult and toilsome; for oil, they said, was given to men by Heaven as an aid to toil.


LVIII. And so it proved; for he encountered many perils in the battles which he fought, and received very severe wounds; but the greatest losses which his army suffered were caused by lack of necessary provisions and severity of weather. Still, he was eager to overcome fortune by boldness and force by valour, and thought nothing invincible for the courageous, and nothing secure for the cowardly. It is said that when he was besieging the citadel of Sisimithres, which was steep and inaccessible, so that his soldiers were disheartened, he asked Oxyartes what sort of a man Sisimithres himself was in point of spirit. And when Oxyartes replied that he was most cowardly of men, “Thy words mean,” said Alexander, “that we
389