Plutarch’s Lives

τῶν αἰσχρῶν, ἀλλ᾿ ὥσπερ οὐκ ἐν στρατοπέδῳ
πολεμίων, ἀλλ᾿ ἐν ἱεροῖς καὶ ἁγίοις φυλαττομένας
παρθενῶσιν ἀπόρρητον ἔχειν καὶ ἀόρατον ἑτέροις
δίαιταν. καίτοι λέγεταί γε τὴν Δαρείου γυναῖκα
πολὺ πασῶν τῶν βασιλίδων εὐπρεπεστάτην γενέσθαι,
καθάπερ καὶ αὐτὸς Δαρεῖος ἀνδρῶν κάλλιστος
καὶ μέγιστος, τὰς δὲ παῖδας ἐοικέναι τοῖς
γονεῦσιν.
4Ἀλλ᾿ Ἀλέξανδρος, ὡς ἔοικε, τοῦ νικᾶν τοὺς
πολεμίους τὸ κρατεῖν ἑαυτοῦ βασιλικώτερον
ἡγούμενος, οὔτε τούτων ἔθιγεν οὔτε ἄλλην ἔγνω
γυναῖκα πρὸ γάμου, πλὴν Βαρσίνης. αὕτη δέ,
μετὰ τὴν Μέμνονος τελευτὴν χήρα γενομένη, περὶ
Δαμασκὸν ἐλήφθη. πεπαιδευμένη δὲ παιδείαν
Ἑλληνικὴν καὶ τὸν τρόπον ἐπιεικὴς οὖσα καὶ
πατρὸς Ἀρταβάζου γεγονότος ἐκ βασιλέως θυγατρός,
ἐγνώσθη, Παρμενίωνος προτρεψαμένου
τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον, ὥς φησιν Ἀριστόβουλος, καλῆς
5καὶ γενναίας ἅψασθαι γυναικός. τὰς δὲ
ἄλλας αἰχμαλώτους ὁρῶν ὁ Ἀλέξανδρος κάλλει
καὶ μεγέθει διαφερούσας ἔλεγε παίζων ὡς εἰσὶν
ἀλγηδόνες ὀμμάτων αἱ Περσίδες. ἀντεπιδεικνύμενος
δὲ πρὸς τὴν ἰδέαν τὴν ἐκείνων τὸ τῆς ἰδίας
ἐγκρατείας καὶ σωφροσύνης κάλλος, ὥσπερ ἀψύχους
εἰκόνας ἀγαλμάτων παρέπεμψεν.


XXII. Ἐπεὶ δὲ Φιλόξενος ὁ τῶν ἐπὶ θαλάττῃ
στρατηγὸς ἔγραψεν εἶναι παρ᾿ αὐτῷ Θεόδωρόν
τινα Ταραντῖνον ἔχοντα παῖδας ὠνίους δύο τὴν
ὄψιν ὑπερφυεῖς, καὶ πυνθανόμενος εἰ πρίηται,
χαλεπῶς ἐνεγκὼν ἐβόα πολλάκις πρὸς τοὺς φίλους,
ἐρωτῶν τί πώποτε Φιλόξενος αἰσχρὸν αὐτῷ
284Alexander, xxii.

awaited anything that could disgrace them, but lived, as though guarded in sacred and inviolable virgins’ chambers instead of in an enemy’s camp, apart from the speech and sight of men. And yet it is said that the wife of Dareius was far the most comely of all royal women, just as Dareius himself also was handsomest and tallest of men, and the daughters resembled their parents.
But Alexander, as it would seem, considering the mastery of himself a more kingly thing than the conquest of his enemies, neither laid hands upon these women, nor did he know any other before marriage, except Barsiné. This woman, Memnon’s widow, was taken prisoner at Damascus. And since she had received a Greek education, and was of an agreeable disposition, and since her father, Artabanus, was son of a king’s daughter, Alexander determined (at Parmenio’s instigation, as Aristobulus says) to attach himself to a woman of such high birth and beauty. But as for the other captive women, seeing that they were surpassingly stately and beautiful, he merely said jestingly that Persian women were torments to the eyes.1 And displaying in rivalry with their fair looks the beauty of his own sobriety and self-control, he passed them by as though they were lifeless images for display.


XXII. Moreover, when Philoxenus, the commander of his forces on the sea-board, wrote that there was with him a certain Theodorus, of Tarentum, who had two boys of surpassing beauty to sell, and enquired whether Alexander would buy them, Alexander was incensed, and cried out many times to his friends, asking them what shameful thing Philoxenus had ever


1Cf. Herod. v. 18.285