Plutarch’s Lives

ὠφεληθῆναι βουλόμενος· ἐνεπλήσθη δὲ καὶ
2τὸ λοιπὸν εὐπορίας στρατόπεδον. καὶ γευσάμενοι
τότε πρῶτον οἱ Μακεδόνες χρυσοῦ καὶ
ἀργύρου καὶ γυναικῶν καὶ διαίτης βαρβαρικῆς,
ὥσπερ κύνες ἔσπευδον ἁψάμενοι στίβου διώκειν
καὶ ἀνιχνεύειν τὸν τῶν Περσῶν πλοῦτον.
Οὐ μὴν ἀλλ᾿ Ἀλεξάνδρῳ πρῶτον ἐδόκει κρατύνεσθαι
τὰ πρὸς θαλάσσῃ. Κύπρον μὲν οὖν
εὐθὺς οἱ βασιλεῖς ἧκον ἐγχειρίζοντες αὐτῷ, καὶ
3Φοινίκην πλὴν Τύρου. Τύρον δὲ πολιορκῶν ἑπτὰ
μῆνας χώμασι καὶ μηχαναῖς καὶ τριήρεσι διακοσίαις
ἐκ θαλάττης, ὄναρ εἶδε τὸν Ἡρακλέα
δεξιούμενον αὐτὸν ἀπὸ τοῦ τείχους καὶ καλοῦντα.
τῶν δὲ Τυρίων πολλοῖς κατὰ τοὺς ὕπνους ἔδοξεν
ὁ Ἀπόλλων λέγειν ὡς ἄπεισι πρὸς Ἀλέξανδρον·
οὐ γὰρ ἀρέσκειν αὐτῷ τὰ πρασσόμενα κατὰ τὴν
4πόλιν. ἀλλ᾿ αὐτοὶ μὲν ὥσπερ ἄνθρωπον αὐτομολοῦντα
πρὸς τοὺς πολεμίους ἐπ᾿ αὐτοφώρῳ
τὸν θεὸν εἰληφότες σειράς τε τῷ κολοσσῷ περιέβαλλον
αὐτοῦ καὶ καθήλουν πρὸς τὴν βάσιν,
Ἀλεξανδριστὴν καλοῦντες. ἑτέραν δὲ ὄψιν
5Ἀλέξανδρος εἶδε κατὰ τοὺς ὕπνους. Σάτυρος
αὐτῷ φανεὶς ἐδόκει προσπαίζειν πόρρωθεν, εἶτα
βουλομένου λαβεῖν ὑπεξέφευγε· τέλος δὲ πολλὰ
λιπαρήσαντος καὶ περιδραμόντος ἦλθεν εἰς χεῖρας.
οἱ δὲ μάντεις τοὔνομα διαιροῦντες οὐκ ἀπιθάνως
ἔφασαν αὐτῷ· “Σὴ γενήσεται Τύρος.”
καὶ κρήνην δέ τινα δεικνύουσι, πρὸς ἣν κατὰ τοὺς
ὕπνους ἰδεῖν ἔδοξε τὸν Σάτυρον.
6Διὰ μέσου δὲ τῆς πολιορκίας ἐπὶ τοὺς Ἄραβας
τοὺς προσοικοῦντας τῷ Ἀντιλιβάνῳ στρατεύσας
292Alexander, xxiv.

themselves. But the rest of the army also was filled with wealth. Then for the first time the Macedonians got a taste of gold and silver and women and barbaric luxury of life, and now that they had struck the trail, they were like dogs in their eagerness to pursue and track down the wealth of the Persians.
However, Alexander determined first to make himself master of the sea-coasts. As for Cyprus, then, its kings came at once and put the island in his hands, together with Phoenicia, with the exception of Tyre. But Tyre he besieged for seven months,1 with moles, and engines-of-war, and two hundred triremes by sea. During this siege he had a dream in which he saw Heracles stretching out his hand to him from the wall and calling him. And many of the Tyrians dreamed that Apollo told them he was going away to Alexander, since he was displeased at what was going on in the city. Whereupon, as if the god had been a common deserter caught in the act of going over to the enemy, they encircled his colossal figure with cords and nailed it down to its pedestal, calling him an Alexandrist. In another dream, too, Alexander thought he saw a satyr who mocked him at a distance, and eluded his grasp when he tried to catch him, but finally, after much coaxing and chasing, surrendered. The seers, dividing the word “satyros” into two parts, said to him, plausibly enough, “Tyre is to be thine.” And a spring is pointed out, near which Alexander dreamed he saw the satyr.
While the siege of the city was in progress, he made an expedition against the Arabians who dwelt in the neighbourhood of Mount Antilibanus. On


1January–August, 332 b.c.293