Plutarch’s Lives

στάσεως τοσαύτης καὶ κακῶν ἐμπέπληκας.” οὕτω
δὴ συμφρονήσας ὁ Φίλιππος ἔπεμψε καὶ
κατήγαγε πείσας διὰ τοῦ Δημαράτου τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον.


X. Ἐπεὶ δὲ Πιξόδαρος, ὁ Καρίας σατράπης,
ὑποδυόμενος δι᾿ οἰκειότητος εἰς τὴν Φιλίππου
συμμαχίαν, ἐβούλετο τὴν πρεσβυτάτην τῶν θυγατέρων
Ἀρριδαίῳ τῷ Φιλίππου γυναῖκα δοῦναι
καὶ περὶ τούτων Ἀριστόκριτον εἰς Μακεδονίαν
ἀπέστειλεν, αὖθις ἐγίνοντο λόγοι καὶ διαβολαὶ
παρὰ τῶν φίλων καὶ τῆς μητρὸς πρὸς Ἀλέξανδρον,
ὡς Ἀρριδαῖον ἐπὶ τῇ βασιλείᾳ Φιλίππου
γάμοις λαμπροῖς καὶ πράγμασι μεγάλοις εἰσοικειοῦντος.
2ὑφ᾿ ὧν διαταραχθεὶς πέμπει Θεσσαλὸν
εἰς Καρίαν, τὸν τῶν τραγῳδιῶν ὑποκριτήν,
Πιξοδάρῳ διαλεξόμενον ὡς χρὴ τὸν νόθον ἐάσαντα,
καὶ οὐ φρενήρη, μεθαρμόσασθαι τὸ κῆδος εἰς
Ἀλέξανδρον. καὶ Πιξοδάρῳ μὲν οὐ παρὰ μικρὸν
ἤρεσκε ταῦτα τῶν προτέρων μᾶλλον. ὁ δὲ Φίλιππος
αἰσθόμενος, ἰὼν εἰς τὸ Ἀλεξάνδρου δωμάτιον,1
παραλαβὼν τῶν φίλων αὐτοῦ καὶ συνήθων
3ἕνα, Φιλώταν τὸν Παρμενίωνος, ἐπετίμησεν ἰσχυρῶς,
καὶ πικρῶς ἐλοιδόρησεν ὡς ἀγεννῆ καὶ τῶν
ὑπαρχόντων περὶ αὐτὸν ἀγαθῶν ἀνάξιον, εἰ Καρὸς
ἀνθρώπου καὶ βαρβάρῳ βασιλεῖ δουλεύοντος
ἀγαπᾷ γαμβρὸς γενέσθαι. τὸν δὲ Θεσσαλὸν
ἔγραψε Κορινθίοις ὅπως ἀναπέμψωσιν ἐν πέδαις
δεδεμένον. τῶν δὲ ἄλλων ἑταίρων Ἅρπαλον καὶ

1ἰὼν . . . δωμάτιον an anonymous correction of the MSS. ὄντα τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον εἰς τὸ δωμάτιον, after Amyot; Sintenis and Bekker adopt ἰόντα, the correction of Stephanus (learning that Alexander was coming).248Alexander, x.

dissension and calamities.” Thus brought to his senses, Philip sent and fetched Alexander home, having persuaded him to come through the agency of Demaratus.


X. But when Pixodarus, the satrap of Caria, trying by means of a tie of relationship to steal into a military alliance with Philip, wished to give his eldest daughter in marriage to Arrhidaeus the son of Philip, and sent Aristocritus to Macedonia on this errand, once more slanderous stories kept coming to Alexander from his friends and his mother, who said that Philip, by means of a brilliant marriage and a great connexion, was trying to settle the kingdom upon Arrhidaeus. Greatly disturbed by these stories, Alexander sent Thessalus, the tragic actor, to Caria, to argue with Pixodarus that he ought to ignore the bastard brother, who was also a fool, and make Alexander his connexion by marriage. And this plan was vastly more pleasing to Pixodarus than the former. But Philip, becoming aware of this, went to Alexander’s chamber, taking with him one of Alexander’s friends and companions, Philotas the son of Parmenio, and upbraided his son severely, and bitterly reviled him as ignoble and unworthy of his high estate, in that he desired to become the son-in-law of a man who was a Carian and a slave to a barbarian king. And as for Thessalus, Philip wrote to the Corinthians that they should send him back to Macedonia in chains. Moreover, of the other companions of Alexander, he banished from Macedonia
249