Plutarch’s Lives

καὶ βραχυλόγους, ἐρωτήματα προὔβαλεν αὐτοῖς
ἄπορα, φήσας ἀποκτενεῖν τὸν μὴ ὀρθῶς ἀποκρινάμενον
πρῶτον, εἶτα ἐφεξῆς οὕτω τοὺς ἄλλους·701
2ἕνα δὲ τὸν πρεσβύτατον ἐκέλευσε κρίνειν. ὁ μὲν
οὖν πρῶτος ἐρωτηθεὶς πότερον οἴεται τοὺς ζῶντας
εἶναι πλείονας ἢ τοὺς τεθνηκότας, ἔφη τοὺς ζῶντας·
οὐκέτι γὰρ εἶναι τοὺς τεθνηκότας. ὁ δὲ
δεύτερος, πότερον τὴν γῆν ἢ τὴν θάλατταν μείζονα
τρέφειν θηρία, τὴν γῆν· ταύτης γὰρ μέρος
εἶναι τὴν θάλατταν. ὁ δὲ τρίτος, ποῖόν ἐστι
ζῷον πανουργότατον, “Ὃ μέχρι νῦν,” εἶπεν,
3“ἄνθρωπος οὐκ ἔγνωκεν.” ὁ δὲ τέταρτος ἀνακρινόμενος
τίνι λογισμῷ τὸν Σάββαν ἀπέστησεν,
ἀπεκρίνατο, “Καλῶς ζῆν βουλόμενος αὐτὸν ἢ
καλῶς ἀποθανεῖν.” ὁ δὲ πέμπτος ἐρωτηθεὶς πότερον
οἴεται τὴν ἡμέραν ἢ τὴν νύκτα προτέραν
γεγονέναι, “Τὴν ἡμέραν,” εἶπεν, “ἡμέρᾳ μιᾷ·”
καὶ προσεπεῖπεν οὗτος, θαυμάσαντος τοῦ βασιλέως,
ὅτι τῶν ἀπόρων ἐρωτήσεων ἀνάγκη καὶ τὰς
4ἀποκρίσεις ἀπόρους εἶναι. μεταβαλὼν οὖν τὸν
ἕκτον ἠρώτα πῶς ἄν τις φιληθείη μάλιστα· “Ἂν
κράτιστος ὤν,” ἔφη, “μὴ φοβερὸς ᾖ.” τῶν δὲ
λοιπῶν τριῶν ὁ μὲν ἐρωτηθεὶς πῶς ἄν τις ἐξ
ἀνθρώπων γένοιτο θεός, “Εἴ τι πράξειεν,” εἶπεν,
“ὃ πρᾶξαι δυνατὸν ἀνθρώπῳ μὴ ἔστιν·” ὁ δὲ περὶ
ζῳῆς καὶ θανάτου, πότερον ἰσχυρότερον, ἀπεκρίνατο
5τὴν ζῳὴν τοσαῦτα κακὰ φέρουσαν. ὁ δὲ
τελευταῖος, μέχρι τίνος ἀνθρώπῳ καλῶς ἔχον ζῆν,
“Μέχρι οὗ μὴ νομίζει τὸ τεθνάναι τοῦ ζῆν ἄμεινον.”
οὕτω δὴ τραπόμενος πρὸς τὸν δικαστὴν
ἐκέλευσεν ἀποφαίνεσθαι. τοῦ δὲ ἕτερον ἑτέρου
χεῖρον εἰρηκέναι φήσαντος “Οὐκοῦν,” ἔφη, “σὺ
406Alexander, lxiv.

in answering questions, and Alexander therefore put difficult questions to them, declaring that he would put to death him who first made an incorrect answer, and then the rest, in an order determined in like manner; and he commanded one of them, the oldest, to be judge in the contest. The first one, accordingly, being asked which, in his opinion, were more numerous, the living or the dead, said that the living were, since the dead no longer existed. The second, being asked whether the earth or the sea produced larger animals, said the earth did, since the sea was but a part of the earth. The third, being asked what animal was most cunning, said: “That which up to this time man has not discovered.” The fourth, when asked why he had induced Sabbas to revolt, replied: “Because I wished him either to live nobly or to die nobly.” The fifth, being asked which, in his opinion, was older, day or night, replied: “Day, by one day”; and he added, upon the king expressing amazement, that hard questions must have hard answers. Passing on, then, to the sixth, Alexander asked how a man could be most loved; “If,” said the philosopher, “he is most powerful, and yet does not inspire fear.” Of the three remaining, he who was asked how one might become a god instead of man, replied: “By doing something which a man cannot do”; the one who was asked which was the stronger, life or death, answered: “Life, since it supports so many ills.” And the last, asked how long it were well for a man to live, answered: “Until he does not regard death as better than life.” So, then, turning to the judge, Alexander bade him give his opinion. The judge declared that they had answered one worse than another. “Well, then,” said Alexander, “thou shalt
407