Plutarch’s Lives

ὠσάμενοι δισμυρίοις πεζοῖς καὶ δισχιλίοις ἱππεῦσι
παραταξάμενον, ἀντέστησαν ἰσχυρῶς Ἀλεξάνδρῳ
βιαζομένῳ καὶ τὸν Γάγγην περᾶσαι ποταμόν,
εὖρος μὲν αὐτοῦ δύο καὶ τριάκοντα σταδίων εἶναι
πυνθανόμενοι καὶ βάθος ὀργυιὰς ἑκατόν, ἀντιπέρας
δὲ τὰς ὄχθας ἀποκεκρύφθαι πλήθεσιν
2ὅπλων καὶ ἵππων καὶ ἐλεφάντων. ἐλέγοντο γὰρ
ὀκτὼ μὲν μυριάδας ἱπποτῶν, εἴκοσι δὲ πεζῶν,
ἅρματα δὲ ὀκτακισχίλια καὶ μαχίμους ἐλέφαντας
ἑξακισχιλίους ἔχοντες οἱ Γανδαριτῶν καὶ Πραισίων
βασιλεῖς ὑπομένειν. καὶ κόμπος οὐκ ἦν
περὶ ταῦτα. Ἀνδρόκοττος γὰρ ὕστερον οὐ πολλῷ
βασιλεύσας Σελεύκῳ πεντακοσίους ἐλέφαντας
ἐδωρήσατο, καὶ στρατοῦ μυριάσιν ἑξήκοντα τὴν
Ἰνδικὴν ἐπῆλθεν ἅπασαν καταστρεφόμενος.
3Τὸ μὲν οὖν πρῶτον ὑπὸ δυσθυμίας καὶ ὀργῆς
αὑτὸν εἰς τὴν σκηνὴν καθείρξας ἔκειτο, χάριν700
οὐδεμίαν εἰδὼς τοῖς διαπεπραγμένοις εἰ μὴ περάσειε
τὸν Γάγγην, ἀλλ᾿ ἐξομολόγησιν ἥττης τιθέμενος
τὴν ἀναχώρησιν. ὡς δὲ οἵ τε φίλοι τὰ εἰκότα
παρηγοροῦντες αὐτὸν οἵ τε στρατιῶται κλαυθμῷ
καὶ βοῇ προσιστάμενοι ταῖς θύραις ἱκέτευον,
ἐπικλασθεὶς ἀνεζεύγνυε, πολλὰ πρὸς δόξαν ἀπατηλὰ
4καὶ σοφιστικὰ μηχανώμενος. καὶ γὰρ ὅπλα
μείζονα καὶ φάτνας ἵππων καὶ χαλινοὺς βαρυτέρους
κατασκευάσας ἀπέλιπέ τε καὶ διέρριψεν
ἱδρύσατο δὲ βωμοὺς θεῶν, οὓς μέχρι νῦν οἱ
Πραισίων βασιλεῖς διαβαίνοντες σέβονται καὶ
400Alexander, lxii.

all they could do to repulse an enemy who mustered only twenty thousand infantry and two thousand horse, they violently opposed Alexander when he insisted on crossing the river Ganges also, the width of which, as they learned, was thirty-two furlongs, its depth a hundred fathoms, while its banks on the further side were covered with multitudes of men-at-arms
and horsemen and elephants. For they were told that the kings of the Ganderites and Praesii were awaiting them with eighty thousand horsemen, two hundred thousand footmen, eight thousand chariots, and six thousand fighting elephants. And there was no boasting in these reports. For Androcottus, who reigned there not long afterwards, made a present to Seleucus of five hundred elephants, and with an army of six hundred thousand men overran and subdued all India.
At first, then, Alexander shut himself up in his tent from displeasure and wrath and lay there, feeling no gratitude for what he had already achieved unless he should cross the Ganges, nay, counting a retreat a confession of defeat. But his friends gave him fitting consolation, and his soldiers crowded about his door and besought him with loud cries and wailing, until at last he relented and began to break camp, resorting to many deceitful and fallacious devices for the enhancement of his fame. For instance, he had armour prepared that was larger than usual, and mangers for horses that were higher, and bits that were heavier than those in common use, and left them scattered up and down. Moreover, he erected altars for the gods, which down to the present time are revered by the kings of the Praesii when they cross the river, and on them they offer
401