Plutarch’s Lives

ἀνεπλήρου1 ἀβελτερίας κατάφοβον2 τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον
γενόμενον. οὐ μὴν ἀλλὰ καὶ χρησμῶν
γε τῶν περὶ Ἡφαιστίωνος ἐκ θεοῦ κομισθέντων
ἀποθέμενος τὸ πένθος αὖθις ἦν ἐν θυσίαις καὶ
3πότοις. ἑστιάσας δὲ λαμπρῶς τοὺς περὶ Νέαρχον,
εἶτα λουσάμενος, ὥσπερ εἰώθει μέλλων
καθεύδειν, Μηδίου δεηθέντος ᾤχετο κωμασόμενος
πρὸς αὐτόν· κἀκεῖ πιὼν ὅλην τὴν ἐπιοῦσαν ἡμέραν
ἤρξατο πυρέττειν, οὔτε σκύφον Ἡρακλέους
ἐκπιὼν οὔτε ἄφνω διαλγὴς γενόμενος τὸ μετάφρενον
ὥσπερ λόγχῃ πεπληγώς, ἀλλὰ ταῦτά
τινες ᾤοντο δεῖν γράφειν ὥσπερ δράματος μεγάλου
τραγικὸν ἐξόδιον καὶ περιπαθὲς πλάσαντες.
4Ἀριστόβουλος δέ φησιν αὐτὸν πυρέττοντα μανικῶς,
διψήσαντα δὲ σφόδρα πιεῖν οἶνον· ἐκ τούτου
δὲ φρενιτιᾶσαι, καὶ τελευτῆσαι τριακάδι Δαισίου
μηνός.


LXXVI. Ἐν δὲ ταῖς ἐφημερίσιν οὕτως γέγραπται
τὰ περὶ τὴν νόσον. ὀγδόῃ ἐπὶ δεκάτῃ
Δαισίου μηνὸς ἐκάθευδεν ἐν τῷ λουτρῶνι διὰ τὸ
πυρέξαι. τῇ δὲ ἑξῆς λουσάμενος εἰς τὸν θάλαμον
μετῆλθε, καὶ διημέρευε πρὸς Μήδιον κυβεύων.
εἶτ᾿ ὀψὲ λουσάμενος καὶ τὰ ἱερὰ τοῖς θεοῖς ἐπιθεὶς
2ἐμφαγὼν διὰ νυκτὸς ἐπύρεξε. τῇ εἰκάδι
λουσάμενος πάλιν ἔθυσε τὴν εἰθισμένην θυσίαν·
καὶ κατακείμενος ἐν τῷ λουτρῶνι τοῖς περὶ Νέαρχον


1ἀνεπλήρου Coraës’ correction of the MSS. καὶ ἀναπληροῦν, adopted by Bekker.2κατάφοβον Coraës’ correction of the MSS. καὶ φόβου, adopted by Bekker.432Alexander, lxxvi.

lower levels, filled with folly the Alexander who was now become a prey to his fears. Notwithstanding, in consequence of oracular responses regarding Hephaestion which were brought him, he laid aside his grief and betook himself once more to sacrifices and drinking-bouts. He gave a splendid entertainment to Nearchus, and then, although he had taken his customary bath before going to bed, at the request of Medius he went to hold high revel with him;1 and here, after drinking all the next day, he began to have a fever. This did not come upon him after he had quaffed a “bowl of Heracles,” nor after he had been seized with a sudden pain in the back as though smitten with a spear; these particulars certain writers felt obliged to give, and so, as it were, invented in tragic fashion a moving finale for a great action. But Aristobulus says that he had a raging fever, and that when he got very thirsty he drank wine, whereupon he became delirious, and died on the thirtieth day of the month Daesius.


LXXVI. Moreover, in the court “Journals” there are recorded the following particulars regarding his sickness.2 On the eighteenth of the month Daesius3 he slept in the bathing-room because he had a fever. On the following day, after his bath, he removed into his bed-chamber, and spent the day at dice with Medius. Then, when it was late, he took a bath, performed his sacrifices to the gods, ate a little, and had a fever through the night. On the twentieth, after bathing again, he performed his customary sacrifice; and lying in the bathing-room




1Cf. Arrian, Anab. vii. 25.2They are given also by Arrian (Anab. vii. 25).3June 2, 323 b.c.433