Plutarch’s Lives

δεινότητος ὁ Καλλισθένης, ἀλλὰ τῆς δυσμενείας
Μακεδόσιν ἀπόδειξιν δέδωκε.


LIV. Ταῦτα μὲν οὖν ὁ Ἕρμιππός φησι τὸν
ἀναγνώστην τοῦ Καλλισθένους Στροῖβον Ἀριστοτέλει
διηγεῖσθαι, τὸν δὲ Καλλισθένην συνέντα
τὴν ἀλλοτριότητα τοῦ βασιλέως δὶς ἢ τρὶς
ἀπιόντα πρὸς αὐτὸν εἰπεῖν·

κάτθανε καὶ Πάτροκλος, ὅπερ σέο πολλὸν
ἀμείνων.

οὐ φαύλως οὖν εἰπεῖν ἔοικεν ὁ Ἀριστοτέλης ὅτι
Καλλισθένης λόγῳ μὲν ἦν δυνατὸς καὶ μέγας,
2νοῦν δὲ οὐκ εἶχεν. ἀλλὰ τήν γε προσκύνησιν
ἰσχυρῶς ἀπωσάμενος καὶ φιλοσόφως, καὶ μόνος
ἐν φανερῷ διελθὼν ἃ κρύφα πάντες οἱ βέλτιστοι
καὶ πρεσβύτατοι τῶν Μακεδόνων ἠγανάκτουν,
τοὺς μὲν Ἕλληνας αἰσχύνης ἀπήλλαξε μεγά̱λης,
καὶ μείζονος Ἀλέξανδρον, ἀποτρέψας τὴν προσκύνησιν,696
αὑτὸν δὲ ἀπώλεσεν, ἐκβιάσασθαι δοκῶν
μᾶλλον ἢ πεῖσαι τὸν βασιλέα.
3Χάρης δὲ ὁ Μιτυληναῖός φησι τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον
ἐν τῷ συμποσίῳ πιόντα φιάλην προτεῖναί τινι
τῶν φίλων· τὸν δὲ δεξάμενον πρὸς ἑστίαν ἀναστῆναι
καὶ πιόντα προσκυνῆσαι πρῶτον, εἶτα
φιλῆσαι τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον, καὶ κατακλιθῆναι.
4πάντων δὲ τοῦτο ποιούντων ἐφεξῆς τὸν Καλλισθένην
λαβόντα τὴν φιάλην, οὐ προσέχοντος τοῦ
βασιλέως, ἀλλὰ Ἡφαιστίωνι προσδιαλεγομένου,
πιόντα προσιέναι φιλήσοντα, Δημητρίου δὲ τοῦ


380Alexander, liv.

had given a proof, not of his eloquence, but of his ill-will towards the Macedonians.


LIV. This, then, according to Hermippus, is the story which Stroebus, the slave who read aloud for Callisthenes, told to Aristotle, and he says that when Callisthenes was aware of the alienation of the king, twice or thrice, as he was going away from him, he recited the verse:

“Dead is also Patroclus, a man far braver than thou
art.”1

What Aristotle said, then, would seem to have been no idle verdict, namely, that Callisthenes showed great ability as a speaker, but lacked common sense. But in the matter of the obeisance, at least, by refusing sturdily and like a philosopher to perform the act, and by standing forth alone and rehearsing in public the reasons for the indignation which all the oldest and best of the Macedonians cherished in secret, he delivered the Greeks from a great disgrace, and Alexander from a greater, by leading him not to insist upon the obeisance; but he destroyed himself, because he was thought to use force rather than persuasion with the king.
Chares of Mitylene says that once at a banquet Alexander, after drinking, handed the cup to one of his friends, and he, on receiving it, rose up so as to face the household shrine, and when he had drunk, first made obeisance to Alexander, then kissed him, and then resumed his place upon the couch. As all the guests were doing this in turn, Callisthenes took the cup, the king not paying attention, but conversing with Hephaestion, and after he had drunk went towards the king to kiss him; but
1Achilles to Hector, Iliad, xxi. 107.381