Plutarch’s Lives
4Βουλόμενος δὲ τῷ θεῷ χρήσασθαι περὶ τῆς
στρατείας ἦλθεν εἰς Δελφούς· καὶ κατὰ τύχην
ἡμερῶν ἀποφράδων οὐσῶν, ἐν αἷς οὐ νενόμισται
θεμιστεύειν, πρῶτον μὲν ἔπεμπε παρακαλῶν τὴν
πρόμαντιν. ὡς δὲ ἀρνουμένης καὶ προϊσχομένης
τὸν νόμον αὐτὸς ἀναβὰς βίᾳ πρὸς τὸν ναὸν εἷλκεν
αὐτήν, ἡ δὲ ὥσπερ ἐξηττημένη τῆς σπουδῆς εἶπεν·
“Ἀνίκητος εἶ, ὦ παῖ,” τοῦτο ἀκούσας Ἀλέξανδρος
οὐκέτι ἔφη χρῄζειν ἑτέρου μαντεύματος,
ἀλλ᾿ ἔχειν ὃν ἐβούλετο παρ᾿ αὐτῆς χρησμόν.
5Ἐπεὶ δὲ ὥρμησε πρὸς τὴν στρατείαν, ἄλλα τε
δοκεῖ σημεῖα παρὰ τοῦ δαιμονίου γενέσθαι, καὶ
τὸ περὶ Λείβηθρα τοῦ Ὀρφέως ξόανον (ἦν δὲ
κυπαρίττινον) ἱδρῶτα πολὺν ὑπὸ τὰς ἡμέρας ἐκείνας
ἀφῆκε. φοβουμένων δὲ πάντων τὸ σημεῖον,
Ἀρίστανδρος ἐκέλευε θαρρεῖν, ὡς ἀοιδίμους καὶ
περιβοήτους κατεργασόμενον πράξεις, αἳ πολὺν672
ἱδρῶτα καὶ πόνον ὑμνοῦσι ποιηταῖς καὶ μουσικοῖς
παρέξουσι.


XV. Τῆς δὲ στρατιᾶς τὸ πλῆθος οἱ μὲν ἐλάχιστον
λέγοντες τρισμυρίους πεζοὺς καὶ τετρακισχιλίους
ἱππεῖς, οἱ δὲ πλεῖστον πεζοὺς μὲν
τετρακισμυρίους καὶ τρισχιλίους, ἱππέας δὲ πεντακισχιλίους
ἀναγράφουσιν. ἐφόδιον δὲ τούτοις
οὐ πλέον ἑβδομήκοντα ταλάντων ἔχειν αὐτὸν
Ἀριστόβουλος ἱστορεῖ, Δοῦρις δὲ τριάκοντα μόνον
ἡμερῶν διατροφήν, Ὀνησίκριτος δὲ καὶ διακόσια
2τάλαντα προσοφείλειν. ἀλλὰ καίπερ ἀπὸ
μικρῶν καὶ στενῶν οὕτως ὁρμώμενος, οὐ πρότερον



260Alexander, xv.
And now, wishing to consult the god concerning the expedition against Asia, he went to Delphi; and since he chanced to come on one of the inauspicious days, when it is not lawful to deliver oracles, in the first place he sent a summons to the prophetess. And when she refused to perform her office and cited the law in her excuse, he went up himself and tried to drag her to the temple, whereupon, as if overcome by his ardour, she said: “Thou art invincible, my son!” On hearing this, Alexander said he desired no further prophecy, but had from her the oracle which he wanted.
Moreover, when he set out upon his expedition,1 it appears that there were many signs from heaven, and, among them, the image of Orpheus at Leibethra (it was made of cypress-wood) sweated profusely at about that time. Most people feared the sign, but Aristander bade Alexander be of good cheer, assured that he was to perform deeds worthy of song and story, which would cost poets and musicians much toil and sweat to celebrate.2


XV. As to the number of his forces, those who put it at the smallest figure mention thirty thousand foot and four thousand horse; those who put it at the highest, forty-three thousand foot and five thousand horse.3 To provision these forces, Aristobulus says he had not more than seventy talents; Duris speaks of maintenance for only thirty days; and Onesicritus says he owed two hundred talents besides. But although he set out with such meagre and narrow resources, he would not set foot upon his ship until


1In the early spring of 334 b.c.2Cf. Arrian, Anab. i. 11,2.3“Not much more than thirty thousand foot, including light-armed troops and archers, and over five thousand horse” (Arrian, Anab. i. 11, 3).261