Plutarch’s Lives

πολλὰς αἰτίας καὶ μεγάλας διαφορὰς παρεῖχον,
ἃς ἡ τῆς Ὀλυμπιάδος χαλεπότης, δυσζήλου καὶ
βαρυθύμου γυναικός, ἔτι μείζονας ἐποίει, παροξυνούσης
4τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον. ἐκφανεστάτην δὲ
Ἄτταλος παρέσχεν ἐν τοῖς Κλεοπάτρας γάμοις,
ἣν ὁ Φίλιππος ἠγάγετο παρθένον, ἐρασθεὶς παρ᾿
ἡλικίαν τῆς κόρης. θεῖος γὰρ ὢν αὐτῆς ὁ Ἄτταλος
ἐν τῷ πότῳ μεθύων παρεκάλει τοὺς Μακεδόνας
αἰτεῖσθαι παρὰ θεῶν γνήσιον ἐκ Φιλίππου
καὶ Κλεοπάτρας γενέσθαι διάδοχον τῆς βασιλείας.
ἐπὶ τούτῳ παροξυνθεὶς ὁ Ἀλέξανδρος καὶ εἰπών,
“Ἡμεῖς δέ σοι, κακὴ κεφαλή, νόθοι δοκοῦμεν;”
5ἔβαλε σκύφον ἐπ᾿ αὐτόν. ὁ δὲ Φίλιππος ἐπ᾿
ἐκεῖνον ἐξανέστη σπασάμενος τὸ ξίφος, εὐτυχίᾳ
δὲ ἑκατέρου διὰ τὸν θυμὸν καὶ τὸν οἶνον ἔπεσε
σφαλείς. ὁ δὲ Ἀλέξανδρος ἐφυβρίζων, “Οὗτος
μέντοι,” εἶπεν, “ἄνδρες, εἰς Ἀσίαν ἐξ Εὐρώπης
παρεσκευάζετο διαβαίνειν, ὃς ἐπὶ κλίνην ἀπὸ
κλίνης διαβαίνων ἀνατέτραπται.” μετὰ ταύτην
τὴν παροινίαν ἀναλαβὼν τὴν Ὀλυμπιάδα καὶ
καταστήσας εἰς Ἤπειρον αὐτὸς ἐν Ἰλλυριοῖς
διέτριβεν.
6Ἐν τούτῳ δὲ Δημάρατος ὁ Κορίνθιος, ξένος ὢν
τῆς οἰκίας καὶ παρρησίας μετέχων, ἀφίκετο πρὸς
Φίλιππον. μετὰ δὲ τὰς πρώτας δεξιώσεις καὶ
φιλοφροσύνας ἐπερωτῶντος τοῦ Φιλίππου πῶς
ἔχουσιν ὁμονοίας πρὸς ἀλλήλους οἱ Ἕλληνες,
“Πάνυ γοῦν,” ἔφη, “σοι προσήκει, φίλιππε,
κήδεσθαι τῆς Ἑλλάδος, ὃς τὸν οἶκον τὸν σεαυτοῦ
246Alexander, ix.

women’s apartments, produced many grounds of offence and great quarrels between father and son, and these the bad temper of Olympias, who was a jealous and sullen woman, made still greater, since she spurred Alexander on. The most open quarrel was brought on by Attalus at the marriage of Cleopatra, a maiden whom Philip was taking to wife, having fallen in love with the girl when he was past the age for it.1 Attalus, now, was the girl’s uncle, and being in his cups, he called upon the Macedonians to ask of the gods that from Philip and Cleopatra there might be born a legitimate successor to the kingdom. At this Alexander was exasperated, and with the words, “But what of me, base wretch? Dost thou take me for a bastard?” threw a cup at him. Then Philip rose up against him with drawn sword, but, fortunately for both, his anger and his wine made him trip and fall. Then Alexander, mocking over him, said: “Look now, men! here is one who was preparing to cross from Europe into Asia; and he is upset in trying to cross from couch to couch.” After this drunken broil Alexander took Olympias and established her in Epirus, while he himself tarried in Illyria.
Meanwhile Demaratus the Corinthian, who was a guest-friend of the house and a man of frank speech, came to see Philip. After the first greetings and welcomes were over, Philip asked him how the Greeks were agreeing with one another, and Demaratus replied: “It is surely very fitting, Philip, that thou shouldst be concerned about Greece, when thou hast filled thine own house with such great


1Amyot, “hors d’age et de saison.” In consequence of this passion Philip had divorced Olympias.247