Plutarch’s Lives

συνεγνωκὼς τοιαῦτα ὀνείδη προξενῶν κάθηται.
τὸν δὲ Φιλόξενον αὐτὸν ἐν ἐπιστολῇ πολλὰ λοιδορήσας
ἐκέλευσεν αὐτοῖς φορτίοις τὸν Θεόδωρον677
2εἰς τὸν ὄλεθρον ἀποστέλλειν. ἐπέπληξε δὲ καὶ
Ἅγνωνι γράψαντι πρὸς αὐτὸν ὅτι Κρωβύλον
εὐδοκιμοῦντα ἐν Κορίνθῳ βούλεται πριάμενος
ἀγαγεῖν πρὸς αὐτόν. πυνθανόμενος δὲ μισθοφόρων
τινῶν γύναια διεφθαρκέναι Δάμωνα καὶ Τιμόθεον
Μακεδόνας τῶν ὑπὸ Παρμενίωνι στρατευομένων,
ἔγραψε Παρμενίωνι κελεύων, ἐὰν ἐλεγχθῶσιν,
ὡς θηρία ἐπὶ καταφθορᾷ τῶν ἀνθρώπων
3γεγονότα τιμωρησάμενον ἀποκτεῖναι. καὶ περὶ
ἑαυτοῦ κατὰ λέξιν ἐν ταύτῃ τῇ ἐπιστολῇ γέγραφεν·
“Ἐγὼ γὰρ οὐχ ὅτι ἑωρακὼς ἂν εὑρεθείην
τὴν Δαρείου γυναῖκα ἢ βεβουλημένος ἰδεῖν, ἀλλ᾿
οὐδὲ τῶν λεγόντων περὶ τῆς εὐμορφίας αὐτῆς
προσδεδεγμένος τὸν λόγον.” ἔλεγε δὲ μάλιστα
συνιέναι θνητὸς ὢν ἐκ τοῦ καθεύδειν καὶ συνουσιάζειν,
ὡς ἀπὸ μιᾶς ἐγγινόμενον ἀσθενείας τῇ
φύσει καὶ τὸ πονοῦν καὶ τὸ ἡδόμενον.
4Ἦν δὲ καὶ γαστρὸς ἐγκρατέστατος, καὶ τοῦτο
ἄλλοις τε πολλοῖς ἐδήλωσε καὶ τοῖς πρὸς Ἄδαν
λεχθεῖσιν, ἣν ἐποιήσατο μητέρα καὶ Καρίας
βασίλισσαν ἀπέδειξεν. ὡς γὰρ ἐκείνη φιλοφρονουμένη
πολλὰ μὲν ὄψα καθ᾿ ἡμέραν ἀπέστελλεν
αὐτῷ καὶ πέμματα, τέλος δὲ τοὺς δοκοῦντας εἶναι
δεινοτάτους ὀψοποιοὺς καὶ ἀρτοποιούς, ἔφη τούτων
5μηδενὸς δεῖσθαι· βελτίονας γὰρ ὀψοποιοὺς
ἔχειν ὑπὸ τοῦ παιδαγωγοῦ Λεωνίδου δεδομένους
286Alexander, xxii.

seen in him that he should spend his time in making such disgraceful proposals. And on Philoxenus himself he heaped much reproach in a letter, bidding him send Theodorus to perdition, merchandize and all. He severely rebuked Hagnon also for writing to him that he wanted to buy Crobylus, whose beauty was famous in Corinth, as a present for him. Furthermore, on learning that Damon and Timotheus, two Macedonian soldiers under Parmenio’s command, had ruined the wives of certain mercenaries, he wrote to Parmenio ordering him, in case the men were convicted, to punish them and put them to death as wild beasts born for the destruction of mankind. In this letter he also wrote expressly concerning himself; “As for me, indeed, it will be found not only that I have not seen the wife of Dareius or desired to see her, but that I have not even allowed people to speak to me of her beauty.” And he used to say that sleep and sexual intercourse, more than any thing else, made him conscious that he was mortal, implying that both weariness and pleasure arise from one and the same natural weakness.
He had also the most complete mastery over his appetite, and showed this both in many other ways, and especially by what he said to Ada, whom he honoured with the title of Mother and made queen of Caria.1 When, namely, in the kindness of her heart, she used to send him day by day many viands and sweetmeats, and finally offered him bakers and cooks reputed to be very skilful, he said he wanted none of them, for he had better cooks which had been given him by his tutor, Leonidas; for his breakfast,


1Cf. Arrian, Anab. i. 23, 8.287