Plutarch’s Lives

μετὰ τῶν ἄλλων μεταπεμπομένους εἰς τὴν γάζαν
ἀποτίθεσθαι τοὺς βασιλεῖς, οἷον ἐκβεβαιουμένους
τὸ μέγεθος τῆς ἀρχῆς καὶ τὸ κυριεύειν ἁπάντων.


XXXVII. Τῆς δὲ Περσίδος οὔσης διὰ τραχύτητα
δυσεμβόλου καὶ φυλαττομένης ὑπὸ γενναιοτάτων
Περσῶν (Δαρεῖος μὲν γὰρ ἐπεφεύγει)
γίγνεταί τινος περιόδου κύκλον ἐχούσης οὐ πολὺν
ἡγεμὼν αὐτῷ δίγλωσσος ἄνθρωπος, ἐκ πατρὸς
Λυκίου, μητρὸς δὲ Περσίδος γεγονώς· ὅν φασιν,
ἔτι παιδὸς ὄντος Ἀλεξάνδρου, τὴν Πυθίαν προειπεῖν,
ὡς λύκος ἔσται καθηγεμὼν Ἀλεξάνδρῳ τῆς
2ἐπὶ Πέρσας πορείας. φόνον μὲν οὖν ἐνταῦθα
πολὺν τῶν ἁλισκομένων γενέσθαι συνέπεσε· γράφει
γὰρ αὐτὸς ὡς νομίζων αὐτῷ τοῦτο λυσιτελεῖν
ἐκέλευεν ἀποσφάττεσθαι τοὺς ἀνθρώπους· νομίσματος
δὲ εὑρεῖν πλῆθος. ὅσον ἐν Σούσοις, τὴν δὲ
ἄλλην κατασκευὴν καὶ τὸν πλοῦτον ἐκκομισθῆναί
φασι μυρίοις ὀρικοῖς ζεύγεσι καὶ πεντακισχιλίαις
καμήλοις.
3Ξέρξου δὲ ἀνδριάντα μέγαν θεασάμενος ὑπὸ
πλήθους τῶν ὠθουμένων εἰς τὰ βασίλεια πλημμελῶς
ἀνατετραμμένον ἐπέστη, καὶ καθάπερ ἔμψυχον
προσαγορεύσας, “Πότερόν σε,” εἶπε, “διὰ
τὴν ἐπὶ τοὺς Ἕλληνας στρατείαν κείμενον παρέλθωμεν
ἢ διὰ τὴν ἄλλην μεγαλοφροσύνην καὶ
ἀρετὴν ἐγείρωμεν;” τέλος δὲ πολὺν χρόνον πρὸς
ἑαυτῷ γενόμενος καὶ σιωπήσας παρῆλθε. βουλόμενος
δὲ τοὺς στρατιώτας ἀναλαβεῖν (καὶ γὰρ ἦν
334Alexander, xxxvii.

up among their treasures, as a sort of confirmation of the greatness of their empire and the universality of their sway.


XXXVII. Persis was difficult of access, owing to the roughness of the country, and was guarded by the noblest of the Persians (for Dareius had taken to flight); but Alexander found a guide to conduct him thither by a circuit of no great extent. The man spoke two languages, since his father was a Lycian and his mother a Persian; and it was he, they say, whom the Pythian priestess had in mind when she prophesied, Alexander being yet a boy, that a “lycus,” or wolf, would be Alexander’s guide on his march against the Persians.1 In this country, then, as it turned out, there was a great slaughter of the prisoners taken; for Alexander himself writes that he gave orders to have the inhabitants butchered, thinking that this would be to his advantage; and they say that as much coined money was found there2 as at Susa, and that it took ten thousand pairs of mules and five thousand camels to carry away the other furniture and wealth there.
On beholding a great statue of Xerxes which had been carelessly overthrown by a throng that forced its way into the palace, Alexander stopped before it, and accosting it as if it had been alive, said: “Shall I pass on and leave thee lying there, because of thine expedition against the Hellenes, or, because of thy magnanimity and virtue in other ways, shall I set thee up again?” But finally, after communing with himself a long time in silence, he passed on. Wishing to refresh his soldiers (for it was winter



1Arrian (Anab. iii. 18, 1f.) speaks only of a forced march through the mountains.2In Persepolis.335