Plutarch’s Lives

Νέαρχον, ἔτι δ᾿ Ἐριγύιον καὶ Πτολεμαῖον ἐκ
Μακεδονίας μετέστησεν, οὓς ὕστερον Ἀλέξανδρος
καταγαγὼν ἐν ταῖς μεγίσταις ἔσχε τιμαῖς.
4Ἐπεὶ δὲ Παυσανίας Ἀττάλου γνώμῃ καὶ Κλεοπάτρας
ὑβρισθεὶς καὶ μὴ τυχὼν δίκης ἀνεῖλε
Φίλιππον, τὸ μὲν πλεῖστον εἰς Ὀλυμπιάδα τῆς
αἰτίας περιῆλθεν, ὡς θυμουμένῳ τῷ νεανίσκῳ
προσεγκελευσαμένην καὶ παροξύνασαν, ἔθιγε δέ
τις καὶ Ἀλεξάνδρου διαβολή. λέγεται γὰρ ἐντυχόντος670
αὐτῷ τοῦ Παυσανίου μετὰ τὴν ὕβριν
ἐκείνην καὶ ἀποδυρομένου προενέγκασθαι τὸ τῆς
Μηδείας ἰαμβεῖον·

τὸν δόντα καὶ γήμαντα καὶ γαμουμένην.

οὐ μὴν ἀλλὰ καὶ τοὺς συναιτίους τῆς ἐπιβουλῆς
ἀναζητήσας ἐκόλασε, καὶ τὴν Κλεοπάτραν ἀποδημοῦντος
αὐτοῦ τῆς Ὀλυμπιάδος ὠμῶς μεταχειρισαμένης ἠγανάκτησε.


XI. Παρέλαβε μὲν οὖν ἔτη γεγονὼς εἴκοσι τὴν
βασιλείαν, φθόνους μεγάλους καὶ δεινὰ μίση καὶ
κινδύνους πανταχόθεν ἔχουσαν. οὔτε γὰρ τὰ
βάρβαρα καὶ πρόσοικα γένη τὴν δούλωσιν ἔφερε,
ποθοῦντα τὰς πατρίους βασιλείας, οὔτε τὴν Ἑλλάδα
κρατήσας τοῖς ὅπλοις ὁ Φίλιππος οἷον καταζεῦξαι
καὶ τιθασεῦσαι χρόνον ἔσχεν, ἀλλὰ μόνον


250Alexander, xi.

Harpalus and Nearchus, as well as Erigyius and Ptolemy, men whom Alexander afterwards recalled and had in the highest honours.
And so when Pausanias, who had been outrageously dealt with at the instance of Attalus and Cleopatra and could get no justice at Philip’s hands, slew Philip, most of the blame devolved upon Olympias, on the ground that she had added her exhortations to the young man’s anger and incited him to the deed; but a certain amount of accusation attached itself to Alexander also. For it is said that when Pausanias, after the outrage that he had suffered, met Alexander, and bewailed his fate, Alexander recited to him the iambic verse of the “Medeia”1:—

“The giver of the bride, the bridegroom, and the
bride.”

However, he did seek out the participants in the plot and punished them, and was angry with Olympias for her savage treatment of Cleopatra during his absence.2


XI. Thus it was that at the age of twenty years Alexander received the kingdom, which was exposed to great jealousies, dire hatreds, and dangers on every hand. For the neighbouring tribes of Barbarians would not tolerate their servitude, and longed for their hereditary kingdoms; and as for Greece, although Philip had conquered her in the field, he had not had time enough to make her tame under his yoke, but had merely disturbed and changed the


1The Medeia of Euripides, v. 289 (Kirchhoff). The context makes the verse suggest the murder of Attalus, Philip, and Cleopatra.2“After his death Olympias killed Philip’s infant son, together with his mother Cleopatra, niece of Attalus, by dragging them over a bronze vessel filled with fire” (Pausanias, viii, 7, 5).251