Plutarch’s Lives

τῇ Ὀλυμπιάδι συμμυηθεὶς αὐτός τε μειράκιον
ὢν ἔτι κἀκείνης παιδὸς ὀρφανῆς γονέων
ἐρασθῆναι καὶ τὸν γάμον οὕτως ἁρμόσαι, πείσας
2τὸν ἀδελφὸν αὐτῆς Ἀρύμβαν. ἡ μὲν οὖν νύμφη,
πρὸ τῆς νυκτὸς ᾗ συνείρχθησαν εἰς τὸν θάλαμον,
ἔδοξε βροντῆς γενομένης ἐμπεσεῖν αὐτῆς τῇ γαστρὶ
κεραυνόν, ἐκ δὲ τῆς πληγῆς πολὺ πῦρ ἀναφθέν,
εἶτα ῥηγνύμενον εἰς φλόγας πάντη φερομένας
διαλυθῆναι. ὁ δὲ Φίλιππος ὑστέρῳ χρόνῳ μετὰ
τὸν γάμον εἶδεν ὄναρ αὑτὸν ἐπιβάλλοντα σφραγῖδα
τῇ γαστρὶ τῆς γυναικός· ἡ δὲ γλυφὴ τῆς σφραγῖδος,
3ὡς ᾤετο, λέοντος εἶχεν εἰκόνα. τῶν δὲ
ἄλλων μάντεων ὑφορωμένων τὴν ὄψιν, ὡς ἀκριβεστέρας
φυλακῆς δεομένων τῷ Φιλίππῳ τῶν
περὶ τὸν γάμον, Ἀρίστανδρος ὁ Τελμησσεὺς
κύειν ἔφη τὴν ἄνθρωπον, οὐθὲν γὰρ ἀποσφραγίζεσθαι
τῶν κενῶν, καὶ κύειν παῖδα θυμοειδῆ καὶ
4λεοντώδη τὴν φύσιν. ὤφθη δέ ποτε καὶ δράκων
κοιμωμένης τῆς Ὀλυμπιάδος παρεκτεταμένος τῷ
σώματι· καὶ τοῦτο μάλιστα τοῦ Φιλίππου τὸν
ἔρωτα καὶ τὰς φιλοφροσύνας ἀμαυρῶσαι λέγουσιν,
ὡς μηδὲ φοιτᾶν ἔτι πολλάκις παρ᾿ αὐτὴν ἀναπαυσόμενον,
εἴτε δείσαντά τινας μαγείας ἐπ᾿
αὐτῷ καὶ φάρμακα τῆς γυναικός, εἴτε τὴν ὁμιλίαν
ὡς κρείττονι συνούσης ἀφοσιούμενον.
5Ἕτερος δὲ περὶ τούτων ἐστὶ λόγος, ὡς πᾶσαι
μὲν αἱ τῇδε γυναῖκες ἔνοχοι τοῖς Ὀρφικοῖς οὖσαι
καὶ τοῖς περὶ τὸν Διόνυσον ὀργιασμοῖς ἐκ τοῦ
πάνυ παλαιοῦ, Κλώδωνές τε καὶ Μιμαλλόνες
226Alexander, ii.

being initiated into the mysteries of Samothrace at the same time with Olympias, he himself being still a youth and she an orphan child, fell in love with her and betrothed himself to her at once with the consent of her brother, Arymbas. Well, then, the night before that on which the marriage was consummated, the bride dreamed that there was a peal of thunder and that a thunder-bolt fell upon her womb, and that thereby much fire was kindled, which broke into flames that travelled all about, and then was extinguished. At a later time, too, after the marriage, Philip dreamed that he was putting a seal upon his wife’s womb; and the device of the seal, as he thought, was the figure of a lion. The other seers, now, were led by the vision to suspect that Philip needed to put a closer watch upon his marriage relations; but Aristander of Telmessus said that the woman was pregnant, since no seal was put upon what was empty, and pregnant of a son whose nature would be bold and lion-like. Moreover, a serpent was once seen lying stretched out by the side of Olympias as she slept, and we are told that this, more than anything else, dulled the ardour of Philip’s attentions to his wife, so that he no longer came often to sleep by her side, either because he feared that some spells and enchantments might be practised upon him by her, or because he shrank from her embraces in the conviction that she was the partner of a superior being.
But concerning these matters there is another story to this effect: all the women of these parts were addicted to the Orphic rites and the orgies of Dionysus from very ancient times (being called Klodones and Mimallones1), and imitated in many 

1Macedonian names for Bacchantes.227