Plutarch’s Lives

ἀτρέμα τῶν δορατίων ἕκαστον ἐξῄρει τοῦ
8σώματος. ἐπεὶ δὲ ληφθέντα τὸν Πῶρον ὁ Ἀλέξανδρος
ἠρώταπῶς αὐτῷ χρήσηται, “Βασιλικῶς,”
εἶπε· προσπυθομένου δὲ μή τι ἄλλο λέγει,
“Πάντα,” εἶπεν, “ἐστὶν ἐν τῷ βασιλικῶς.” οὐ
μόνον οὖν ἀφῆκεν αὐτὸν ἄρχειν ὧν ἐβασίλευε,
σατράπην καλούμενον, ἀλλὰ καὶ προσέθηκε χώραν
τοὺς1 αὐτονόμους καταστρεψάμενος, ἐν ᾗ
πεντεκαίδεκα μὲν ἔθνη, πόλεις δὲ πεντακισχιλίας
ἀξιολόγους, κώμας δὲ παμπόλλας εἶναί φασιν·
ἄλλην δὲ τρὶς τοσαύτην ἧς Φίλιππόν τινα τῶν
ἑταίρων σατράπην ἀπέδειξεν.


LXI. Ἐκ δὲ τῆς πρὸς Πῶρον μάχης καὶ ὁ
Βουκεφάλας ἐτελεύτησεν, οὐκ εὐθύς, ἀλλ᾿ ὕστερον,
ὡς οἱ πλεῖστοι λέγουσιν ἀπὸ τραυμάτων θεραπευόμενος,
ὡς δὲ Ὀνησίκριτος, διὰ γῆρας ὑπέρπονος
γενόμενος· τριάκοντα γὰρ ἐτῶν ἀποθανεῖν
αὐτόν. ἐδήχθη δ᾿ ἰσχυρῶς Ἀλέξανδρος, οὐδὲν
ἄλλο ἢ συνήθη καὶ φίλον ἀποβεβληκέναι νομίζων·
καὶ πόλιν οἰκίσας ἐπ᾿ αὐτῷ παρὰ τὸν Ὑδάσπην
Βουκεφαλίαν προσηγόρευσε. λέγεται δὲ καὶ
κύνα Περίταν ὄνομα τεθραμμένον ὑπ᾿ αὐτοῦ καὶ
στεργόμενον ἀποβαλὼν κτίσαι πόλιν ἐπώνυμον.
τοῦτο δὲ Σωτίων φησὶ Ποτάμωνος ἀκοῦσαι τοῦ
Λεσβίου.


LXII. Τοὺς μέντοι Μακεδόνας ὁ πρὸς Πῶρον
ἀγὼν ἀμβλυτέρους ἐποίησε καὶ τοῦ πρόσω τῆς
Ἰνδικῆς ἔτι προελθεῖν ἐπέσχε. μόλις γὰρ ἐκεῖνον




1τοὺς with Bekker, after Coraës: καὶ τούς.398Alexander, lxii.

gently took each spear and drew it out of his body. Porus was taken prisoner, and when Alexander asked him how he would be treated, said: “Like a king”; and to another question from Alexander whether he had anything else to say, replied: “All things are included in my ‘like a king.’” Accordingly, Alexander not only permitted him to govern his former kingdom, giving him the title of satrap, but also added to it the territory of the independent peoples whom he subdued, in which there are said to have been fifteen nations, five thousand cities of considerable size, and a great multitude of villages. He subdued other territory also thrice as large as this and appointed Philip, one of his companions, satrap over it.


LXI. After the battle with Porus, too, Bucephalas died,—not at once, but some time afterwards,—as most writers say, from wounds for which he was under treatment, but according to Onesicritus, from old age, having become quite worn out;1 for he was thirty years old when he died. His death grieved Alexander mightily, who felt that he had lost nothing less than a comrade and friend; he also built a city in his memory on the banks of the Hydaspes and called it Bucephalia. It is said, too, that when he lost a dog also, named Peritas, which had been reared by him and was loved by him, he founded a city and gave it the dog’s name. Sotion says he heard this from Potamon the Lesbian.


LXII. As for the Macedonians, however, their struggle with Porus blunted their courage and stayed their further advance into India.2 For having had


1Cf. Arrian, Anab. v. 19, 4 f.2Alexander carried his conquests from the Indus to the Hyphasis (Arrian, Anab. v. 25), subduing the Punjab. It was now September, 326 b.c.399