Plutarch’s Lives

οὕτω καὶ φιλέταιρος μετ᾿ αὐτὸν Ἀλέξανδρον
οὐδείς. λέγεται γοῦν ὅτι τῶν συνήθων τινὸς
αἰτοῦντος ἀργύριον ἐκέλευσε δοῦναι· φήσαντος
δὲ τοῦ διοικητοῦ μὴ ἔχειν, “Τί λέγεις;” εἶπεν,
2“οὐδὲ ποτήριον ἔχεις οὐδὲ ἱμάτιον;” ὄγκῳ δὲ
φρονήματος καὶ βάρει πλούτου καὶ τῇ περὶ τὸ
σῶμα θεραπείᾳ καὶ διαίτῃ χρώμενος ἐπαχθέστερον
ἢ κατ᾿ ἰδιώτην, καὶ τότε δὴ τὸ σεμνὸν καὶ
ὕψηλον οὐκ ἐμμελῶς, ἀλλ᾿ ἄνευ χαρίτων τῷ
σολοίκῳ καὶ παρασήμῳ μιμούμενος, ὑποψίαν καὶ
φθόνον ἔσχεν, ὥστε καὶ Παρμενίωνά ποτε εἰπεῖν
3πρὸς αὐτόν· “Ὦ παῖ, χείρων μοι γίνου.” πρὸς
δὲ αὐτὸν Ἀλέξανδρον ἐκ πάνυ πολλῶν χρόνων
ἐτύγχανε διαβεβλημένος. ὅτε γὰρ τὰ περὶ
Δαμασκὸν ἑάλω χρήματα Δαρείου νικηθέντος ἐν
Κιλικίᾳ, πολλῶν σωμάτων κομισθέντων εἰς τὸ
στρατόπεδον εὑρέθη γύναιον ἐν τοῖς αἰχμαλώτοις,
τῷ μὲν γένει Πυδναῖον, εὐπρεπὲς δὲ τὴν ὄψιν·
4ἐκαλεῖτο δὲ Ἀντιγόνη. τοῦτο ἔσχεν ὁ Φιλώτας·
οἷα δὲ νέος πρὸς ἐρωμένην καὶ σὺν οἴνῳ πολλὰ
φιλότιμα καὶ στρατιωτικὰ παρρησιαζόμενος ἑαυτοῦ
τὰ μέγιστα τῶν ἔργων ἀπέφαινε καὶ τοῦ
πατρός, Ἀλέξανδρον δὲ μειράκιον ἀπεκάλει δι᾿
5αὐτοὺς τὸ τῆς ἀρχῆς ὄνομα καρπούμενον. ταῦτα
τῆς γυναικὸς ἐκφερούσης πρός τινα τῶν συνήθων,
ἐκείνου δέ, ὡς εἰκός, πρὸς ἕτερον, περιῆλθεν εἰς
Κρατερὸν ὁ λόγος· καὶ λαβὼν τὸ γύναιον εἰσήγαγε
κρύφα πρὸς Ἀλέξανδρον. ἀκούσας δὲ
ἐκεῖνος ἐκέλευσε φοιτᾶν εἰς ταὐτὸ τῷ Φιλώτᾳ,
καὶ πᾶν, ὅ τι ἂν ἐκπύθηται τούτου, πρὸς αὐτὸν
ἀπαγγέλλειν βαδίζουσαν.
362Alexander, xlviii.

after Alexander himself, no one was so fond of giving and so fond of his comrades. At any rate, we are told that when one of his intimates asked him for some money, he ordered his steward to give it him, and when the steward said he had none to give, “What meanest thou?” cried Philotas, “hast thou not even plate or clothing?” However, he displayed a pride of spirit, an abundance of wealth, and a care of the person and mode of life which were too offensive for a private man, and at this time particularly his imitation of majesty and loftiness was not successful at all, but clumsy, spurious, and devoid of grace, so that he incurred suspicion and envy, and even Parmenio once said to him: “My son, pray be less of a personage.” Moreover, for a very long time accusations against him had been brought to Alexander himself. For when Dareius had been defeated in Cilicia and the wealth of Damascus was taken, among the many prisoners brought into the camp there was found a young woman, born in Pydna, and comely to look upon; her name was Antigone. This woman Philotas got; and as a young man will often talk freely in vaunting and martial strain to his mistress and in his cups, he used to tell her that the greatest achievements were performed by himself and his father, and would call Alexander a stripling who through their efforts enjoyed the title of ruler. These words the woman would report to one of her acquaintances, and he, as was natural, to somebody else, until the story came round to Craterus, who took the girl and brought her secretly to Alexander. He, on hearing her story, ordered her to continue her meetings with Philotas and to come and report to him whatever she learned from her lover.
363