Plutarch’s Lives

ἤδη μεσημβρίας οὔσης κακῶς ὑπὸ δίψους
ἔχοντα ταχὺ πλησάμενοι κράνος προσήνεγκαν.
πυθομένου δὲ αὐτοῦ τίσι κομίζοιεν, “Υἱοῖς,”
ἔφασαν, “ἰδίοις· ἀλλὰ σοῦ ζῶντος ἑτέρους ποιησόμεθα,
5κἂν ἐκείνους ἀπολέσωμεν.” ταῦτα ἀκούσας
ἔλαβεν εἰς τὰς χεῖρας τὸ κράνος· περιβλέψας
δὲ καὶ θεασάμενος τοὺς περὶ αὑτὸν ἱππεῖς ἅπαντας
ἐγκεκλικότας ταῖς κεφαλαῖς καὶ πρὸς τὸ ποτὸν
βλέποντας ἀπέδωκεν οὐ πιών, ἀλλ᾿ ἐπαινέσας
τοὺς ἀνθρώπους, “Ἂν γὰρ αὐτός,” ἔφη, “πίω
6μόνος, ἀθυμήσουσιν οὗτοι.”θεασάμενοι δὲ τὴν
ἐγκράτειαν αὐτοῦ καὶ μεγαλοψυχίαν οἱ ἱππεῖς
ἄγειν ἀνέκραγον θαρροῦντα καὶ τοὺς ἵππους
ἐμάστιζον· οὔτε γὰρ κάμνειν οὔτε διψᾶν οὔθ᾿
ὅλως θνητοὺς εἶναι νομίζειν αὑτούς, ἕως ἂν ἔχωσι
βασιλέα τοιοῦτον.


XLIII. Ἡ μὲν οὖν προθυμία πάντων ἦν ὁμοία·690
μόνους δέ φασιν ἑξήκοντα συνεισπεσεῖν εἰς τὰ
στρατόπεδα τῶν πολεμίων. ἔνθα δὴ πολὺν μὲν
ἄργυρον καὶ χρυσὸν ἐρριμμένον ὑπερβαίνοντες,
πολλὰς δὲ παίδων καὶ γυναικῶν ἁρμαμάξας
ἡνιόχων ἐρήμους διαφερομένας παρερχόμενοι,
τοὺς πρώτους ἐδίωκον, ὡς ἐν ἐκείνοις Δαρεῖον
ὄντα. μόλις δὲ εὑρίσκεται πολλῶν ἀκοντισμάτων
κατάπλεως τὸ σῶμα κείμενος ἐν ἁρμαμάξῃ,
2μικρὸν ἀπολείπων τοῦ τελευτᾶν. ὅμως δὲ καὶ
πιεῖν ᾔτησε, καὶ πιὼν ὕδωρ ψυχρὸν εἶπε πρὸς
τὸν δόντα Πολύστρατον· “Ὦ ἄνθρωπε, τοῦτό
μοι πέρας γέγονε δυστυχίας ἁπάσης, εὖ παθεῖν
ἀμείψασθαι μὴ δυνάμενον· ἀλλ᾿ Ἀλέξανδρος
ἀποδώσει σοι τὴν χάριν, Ἀλεξάνδρῳ δὲ οἱ θεοὶ
350Alexander, xliii.

wretched plight from thirst, they quickly filled a helmet and brought it to him. To his enquiry for whom they were carrying the water, they replied: “For our own sons; but if thou livest, we can get other sons, even if we lose these.” On hearing this he took the helmet into his hands, but when he looked around and saw the horsemen about him all stretching out their heads and gazing at the water, he handed it back without drinking any, but with praises for the men who had brought it; “For,” said he, “if I should drink of it alone, these horsemen of mine will be out of heart.” But when they beheld his self-control and loftiness of spirit, they shouted out to him to lead them forward boldly, and began to goad their horses on, declaring that they would not regard themselves as weary, or thirsty, or as mortals at all, so long as they had such a king.


XLIII. So, then, all were alike ready and willing; but only sixty, they say, were with Alexander when he burst into the camp of the enemy. There, indeed, they rode over much gold and silver that was thrown away, passed by many waggons full of women and children which were coursing hither and thither without their drivers, and pursued those who were foremost in flight, thinking that Dareius was among them. But at last they found him lying in a waggon, his body all full of javelins, at the point of death. Nevertheless, he asked for something to drink, and when he had drunk some cold water which Polystratus
gave him, he said to him: “My man, this is the extremity of all my ill-fortune, that I receive good at thy hands and am not able to return it; but Alexander will requite thee for thy good offices, and the gods will reward Alexander for his kindness to
351