Plutarch’s Lives

ζῶσαν, ἀλλὰ καὶ τελευτήσασαν ἄμοιρον κεῖσθαι
ταφῆς βασιλικῆς,” ὑπολαβὼν ὁ θαλαμηπόλος,
“Ἀλλὰ ταφῆς γε χάριν,” εἶπεν, “ὦ βασιλεῦ,
καὶ τιμῆς ἁπάσης καὶ τοῦ πρέποντος οὐδὲν ἔχεις
3αἰτιάσασθαι τὸν πονηρὸν δαίμονα Περσῶν. οὔτε
γὰρ ζώσῃ τῇ δεσποίνῃ Στατείρᾳ καὶ μητρὶ σῇ καὶ
τέκνοις ἐνέδει τῶν πρόσθεν ἀγαθῶν καὶ καλῶν ἢ
τὸ σὸν ὁρᾶν φῶς, ὃ πάλιν ἀναλάμψει λαμπρὸν
ὁ κύριος Ὠρομάσδης, οὔτε ἀποθανοῦσα κόσμου
τινὸς ἄμοιρος γέγονεν, ἀλλὰ καὶ πολεμίων τετίμηται
δάκρυσιν. οὕτω γὰρ ἔστι χρηστὸς κρατήσας
Ἀλέξανδρος, ὡς δεινὸς μαχόμενος.”
4Ταῦτα ἀκούσαντα Δαρεῖον ἡ ταραχὴ καὶ τὸ
πάθος ἐξέφερε πρὸς ὑποψίας ἀτόπους· καὶ τὸν
εὐνοῦχον ἐνδοτέρω τῆς σκηνῆς ἀπαγαγών, “Εἰ
μὴ καὶ σὺ μετὰ τῆς Περσῶν,” ἔφη, “τύχης μακεδονίζεις,
ἀλλ᾿ ἔτι σοι δεσπότης ἐγὼ Δαρεῖος, εἰπέ
μοι σεβόμενος Μίθρου τε φῶς μέγα καὶ δεξιὰν
βασίλειον, ἆρα μὴ τὰ μικρότατα τῶν Στατείρας
κλαίω κακῶν, οἰκτρότερα δὲ ζώσης ἐπάσχομεν,
καὶ μᾶλλον ἂν κατ᾿ ἀξίαν ἐδυστυχοῦμεν ὠμῷ καὶ
σκυθρωπῷ περιπεσόντες ἐχθρῷ; τί γὰρ εὐπρεπὲς
ἀνδρὶ νέῳ πρὸς ἐχθροῦ γυναῖκα μέχρι1 τιμῆς
5τοσαύτης συμβόλαιον;” ἔτι λέγοντος αὐτοῦ
καταβαλὼν ἐπὶ τοὺς πόδας Τείρεως αὑτὸν ἱκέτευεν
εὐφημεῖν καὶ μήτε Ἀλέξανδρον ἀδικεῖν
μήτε τὴν τεθνεῶσαν ἀδελφὴν καὶ γυναῖκα καταισχῦναι,
μήτε αὑτοῦ τὴν μεγίστην ὧν ἔπταικεν

1μέχρι Coraës and Bekker: καὶ μέχρι.312Alexander, xxx.

must not only become a captive in her life, but also in her death be deprived of royal burial.” “Nay, O King” answered the chamberlain, “as regards her burial, and her receiving every fitting honour, thou hast no charge to make against the evil genius of the Persians. For neither did my mistress Stateira, while she lived, or thy mother or thy children, lack any of their former great blessings except the light of thy countenance, which Lord Oromazdes will cause to shine again with lustre; nor after her death was she deprived of any funeral adornment, nay, she was honoured with the tears of enemies. For Alexander is as gentle after victory as he is terrible in battle.”
When Dareius heard this, his agitation and grief swept him into absurd suspicions, and leading the eunuch away into a more secluded part of his tent, he said: “If thou also, together with the fortune of the Persians, dost not side with the Macedonians, and if I, Dareius, am still thy lord and master, tell me, as thou reverest the great light of Mithras and the right hand of thy king, is it not the least of Stateira’s misfortunes that I am now lamenting? While she was alive did I not suffer more pitiful evils? And would not my wretched fortune have been more compatible with my honour if I had met with an angry and savage enemy? For what intercourse that is proper can a young man have with an enemy’s wife when it leads to such marks of honour?” While the king was still speaking, Teireos
threw himself down at his feet and besought him to hold his peace, and neither to wrong Alexander, nor shame his dead sister and wife, nor rob himself of the greatest consolation for his disasters,
313