Plutarch’s Lives

αὐτοῦ τὸν βασιλέα, τοῦτο μὲν οὐκ ἐποίησε, τὴν
δὲ ζημίαν ἀπέστειλε παρ᾿ ἑαυτοῦ. Λύκωνος δὲ
τοῦ Σκαρφέως εὐημεροῦντος ἐν τῷ θεάτρῳ καὶ
στίχον εἰς τὴν κωμῳδίαν ἐμβαλόντος αἴτησιν
περιέχοντα δέκα ταλάντων, γελάσας ἔδωκε.
4Δαρείου δὲ πέμψαντος ἐπιστολὴν πρὸς αὐτὸν
καὶ φίλους δεομένους μύρια μὲν ὑπὲρ τῶν ἑαλωκότων
λαβεῖν τάλαντα, τὴν δὲ ἐντὸς Εὐφράτου
πᾶσαν ἔχοντα καὶ γήμαντα μίαν τῶν θυγατέρων
φίλον εἶναι καὶ σύμμαχον, ἐκοινοῦτο τοῖς ἑταίροις·
καὶ Παρμενίωνος εἰπόντος “Ἐγὼ μέν, εἰ
Ἀλέξανδρος ἤμην, ἔλαβον ἂν ταῦτα,” “Κἀγώ,
νὴ Δία,” εἶπεν ὁ Ἀλέξανδρος, “εἰ Παρμενίων.”
πρὸς δὲ τὸν Δαρεῖον ἔγραψεν, ὡς οὐδενὸς ἀτυχήσει
τῶν φιλανθρώπων ἐλθὼν πρὸς αὐτόν, εἰ δὲ μή,
αὐτὸς ἐπ᾿ ἐκεῖνον ἤδη πορεύεσθαι.


XXX. Ταχὺ μέντοι μετεμελήθη τῆς Δαρείου
γυναικὸς ἀποθανούσης ἐν ὠδῖσι· καὶ φανερὸς ἦν682
ἀνιώμενος ὡς ἐπίδειξιν οὐ μικρὰν ἀφῃρημένος
χρηστότητος. ἔθαψεν οὖν τὴν ἄνθρωπον οὐδεμιᾶς
πολυτελείας φειδόμενος. τῶν δὲ θαλαμηπόλων
τις εὐνούχων, οἳ συνεαλώκεισαν ταῖς γυναιξίν,
ἀποδρὰς ἐκ τοῦ στρατοπέδου καὶ πρὸς
Δαρεῖον ἀφιππασάμενος, Τείρεως ὄνομα, φράζει
2τὸν θάνατον αὐτῷ τῆς γυναικός. ὡς δὲ πληξάμενος
τὴν κεφαλὴν καὶ ἀνακλαύσας “Φεῦ τοῦ
Περσῶν” ἔφη “δαίμονος, εἰ τὴν βασιλέως γυναῖκα
καὶ ἀδελφὴν οὐ μόνον αἰχμάλωτον γενέσθαι
310Alexander, xxx.

though he would not do this, he sent them the amount of the fine from his own purse. Furthermore, when Lycon of Scarpheia, who was acting successfully before Alexander, inserted into the comedy a verse containing a request for ten talents, Alexander laughed and gave them to him.1
When Dareius sent to him a letter and friends,2 begging him to accept ten thousand talents as ransom for the captives, to hold all the territory this side of the Euphrates, to take one of his daughters in marriage, and on these terms to be his ally and friend, Alexander imparted the matter to his companions. “If I were Alexander,” said Parmenio, “I would accept these terms.” “And so indeed would I,” said Alexander, “were I Parmenio.” But to Dareius he wrote: “Come to me, and thou shalt receive every courtesy; but otherwise I shall march at once against thee.”3


XXX. Soon, however, he repented him of this answer, when the wife of Dareius died in childbirth, and it was evident that he was distressed at this loss of opportunity to show great kindness. Accordingly, he gave the woman a sumptuous burial. One of the eunuchs of the bed-chamber who had been captured with the women, Teireos by name, ran away from the camp, made his way on horseback to Dareius, and told him of the death of his wife. Then the king, beating upon his head and bursting into lamentation, said: “Alas for the evil genius of the Persians, if the sister and wife of their king




1Cf. Morals, pp. 334 f.2This was during the siege of Tyre, according to Arrian (Anab. ii. 25. 1).3This was but the conclusion of an arrogant letter. Cf. Arrian, Anab. ii. 25, 3.311