Plutarch’s Lives

τοὺς ἔναγχος ἡττημένους ὑπὸ τῶν βαρβάρων
5ἐπ᾿ αἰσχύνῃ καὶ γέλωτι. τῶν δὲ πρεσβυτέρων
δυσχεραινόντων καὶ λοιδορούντων τόν
τε ποιητὴν καὶ τὸν ᾄδοντα, τοῦ δὲ Ἀλεξάνδρου
καὶ τῶν περὶ αὐτὸν ἡδέως ἀκροωμένων καὶ λέγειν
κελευόντων, ὁ Κλεῖτος ἤδη μεθύων καὶ φύσει
τραχὺς ὢν ὀργὴν καὶ αὐθάδης ἠγανάκτει μάλιστα,
φάσκων οὐ καλῶς ἐν βαρβάροις καὶ πολεμίοις
ὑβρίζεσθαι Μακεδόνας πολὺ βελτίονας τῶν γελώντων,
6εἰ καὶ δυστυχίᾳ κέχρηνται. φήσαντος
δὲ τοῦ Ἀλεξάνδρου τὸν Κλεῖτον αὑτῷ συνηγορεῖν
δυστυχίαν ἀποφαίνοντα τὴν δειλίαν, ἐπαναστὰς ὁ
Κλεῖτος, “Αὕτη μέντοι σε,” εἶπεν, “ἡ δειλία τὸν
ἐκ θεῶν ἤδη τῷ Σπιθριδάτου ξίφει τὸν νῶτον
ἐκτρέποντα περιεποίησε, καὶ τῷ Μακεδόνων αἵματι694
καὶ τοῖς τραύμασι τούτοις ἐγένου τηλικοῦτος
ὥστε Ἄμμωνι σαυτὸν εἰσποιεῖν ἀπειπάμενος
Φίλιππον.”


LI. Παροξυνθεὶς οὖν ὁ Ἀλέξανδρος, “Ἦ ταῦτα,”
εἶπεν, “ὦ κακὴ κεφαλή, σὺ περὶ ἡμῶν
ἑκάστοτε λέγων καὶ διαστασιάζων Μακεδόνας
χαιρήσειν νομίζεις;” “Ἀλλ᾿ οὐδὲ νῦν,” ἔφη,
“χαίρομεν, Ἀλέξανδρε, τοιαῦτα τέλη τῶν πόνων
κομιζόμενοι, μακαρίζομεν δὲ τοὺς ἤδη τεθνηκότας
πρὶν ἐπιδεῖν Μηδικαῖς ῥάβδοις ξαινομένους Μακεδόνας,
καὶ Περσῶν δεομένους ἵνα τῷ βασιλεῖ
2προσέλθωμεν.” τοιαῦτα τοῦ Κλείτου παρρησιαζομένου
καὶ τῶν περὶ Ἀλέξανδρον ἀντανισταμένων
καὶ λοιδορούντων αὐτόν, οἱ πρεσβύτεροι
κατέχειν ἐπειρῶντο τὸν θόρυβον. ὁ δὲ Ἀλέξανδρος
ἀποστραφεὶς πρὸς Ξενόδοχον τὸν Καρδιανὸν
370Alexander, li.

generals who had lately been defeated by the Barbarians. The older guests were annoyed at this and railed at both the poet and the singer, but Alexander and those about him listened with delight and bade the singer go on. Then Cleitus, who was already drunk and naturally of a harsh temper and wilful, was more than ever vexed, and insisted that it was not well done, when among Barbarians and enemies, to insult Macedonians who were far better men than those who laughed at them, even though they had met with misfortune. And when Alexander declared that Cleitus was pleading his own cause when he gave cowardice the name of misfortune, Cleitus sprang to his feet and said: “It was this cowardice of mine, however, that saved thy life, god-born as thou art, when thou wast already turning thy back upon the spear of Spithridates;1 and it is by the blood of Macedonians, and by these wounds, that thou art become so great as to disown Philip and make thyself son to Ammon.”2


LI. Thoroughly incensed, then, Alexander said: “Base fellow, dost thou think to speak thus of me at all times, and to raise faction among Macedonians, with impunity?” “Nay,” said Cleitus, “not even now do we enjoy impunity, since such are the rewards we get for our toils; and we pronounce those happy who are already dead, and did not live to see us Macedonians thrashed with Median rods, or begging Persians in order to get audience with our king.” So spake Cleitus in all boldness, and those about Alexander sprang up to confront him and reviled him, while the elder men tried to quell the tumult. Then Alexander, turning to Xenodochus of Cardia



1Cf. chapter xvi. 5.2Cf. chapters xxvii. f.371