Plutarch’s Lives

καὶ ἀποκρυπτόμενοι τῷ πλήθει τῶν
νεκρῶν ἐξήλλοντο καὶ συνετάραττον τὸν ἡνίοχον,
ἀπολείπει μὲν τὸ ἅρμα καὶ τὰ ὅπλα, θήλειαν δέ,685
6ὥς φασι, νεοτόκον ἵππον περιβὰς ἔφυγεν. οὐ μὴν
τότε ἂν ἐδόκει διαφυγεῖν, εἰ μὴ πάλιν ἧκον ἕτεροι
παρὰ τοῦ Παρμενίωνος ἱππεῖς μετακαλοῦντες
Ἀλέξανδρον, ὡς συνεστώσης ἔτι πολλῆς δυνάμεως
ἐκεῖ καὶ τῶν πολεμίων οὐκ ἐνδιδόντων. ὅλως γὰρ
αἰτιῶνται Παρμενίωνα κατ᾿ ἐκείνην τὴν μάχην
νωθρὸν γενέσθαι καὶ δύσεργον, εἴτε τοῦ γήρως
ἤδη τι παραλύοντος τῆς τόλμης, εἴτε τὴν ἐξουσίαν
καὶ τὸν ὄγκον, ὡς Καλλισθένης φησί, τῆς Ἀλεξάνδρου
δυνάμεως βαρυνόμενον καὶ προσφθονοῦντα.
7τότε δ᾿ οὖν ὁ βασιλεὺς ἀνιαθεὶς τῇ
μεταπέμψει τοῖς μὲν στρατιώταις οὐκ ἔφρασε τὸ
ἀληθές, ἀλλ᾿ ὡς ἀνέχων τοῦ φονεύειν καὶ σκότους
ὄντος ἀνάκλησιν ἐσήμανεν· ἐλαύνων δὲ πρὸς τὸ
κινδυνεῦον μέρος ἤκουσε καθ᾿ ὁδὸν ἡττῆσθαι
παντάπασι καὶ φεύγειν τοὺς πολεμίους.


XXXIV. Τοῦτο τῆς μάχης ἐκείνης λαβούσης
τὸ πέρας, ἡ μὲν ἀρχὴ παντάπασιν ἡ Περσῶν
ἐδόκει καταλελύσθαι, βασιλεὺς δὲ τῆς Ἀσίας
Ἀλέξανδρος ἀνηγορευμένος ἔθυε τοῖς θεοῖς μεγαλοπρεπῶς
καὶ τοῖς φίλοις ἐδωρεῖτο πλούτους καὶ
οἴκους καὶ ἡγεμονίας. φιλοτιμούμενος δὲ πρὸς
τοὺς Ἕλληνας ἔγραψε τὰς τυραννίδας πάσας
καταλυθῆναι καὶ πολιτεύειν αὐτονόμους, ἰδίᾳ δὲ
Πλαταιεῦσι τὴν πόλιν ἀνοικοδομεῖν, ὅτι τὴν
χώραν οἱ πατέρες αὐτῶν ἐναγωνίσασθαι τοῖς
326Alexander, xxxiv.

away by the multitude of dead bodies, were rearing up and frightening the charioteer, forsook his chariot and his armour, mounted a mare which, as they say, had newly foaled, and took to flight. However, it is thought that he would not then have made his escape, had not fresh horsemen come from Parmenio1
summoning Alexander to his aid, on the ground that a large force of the enemy still held together there and would not give ground. For there is general complaint that in that battle Parmenio was sluggish and inefficient, either because old age was now impairing somewhat his courage, or because he was made envious and resentful by the arrogance and pomp, to use the words of Callisthenes, of Alexander’s power. At the time, then, although he was annoyed by the summons, the king did not tell his soldiers the truth about it, but on the ground that it was dark and he would therefore remit further slaughter, sounded a recall; and as he rode towards the endangered portion of his army, he heard by the way that the enemy had been utterly defeated and was in flight.


XXXIV. The battle having had this issue, the empire of the Persians was thought to be utterly dissolved, and Alexander, proclaimed king of Asia, made magnificent sacrifices to the gods and rewarded his friends with wealth, estates, and provinces. And being desirous of honour among the Greeks, he wrote them that all their tyrannies were abolished and they might live under their own laws; moreover, he wrote the Plataeans specially that he would rebuild their city, because their ancestors had furnished their


1Arrian makes no mention of a second appeal for aid from Parmenio.327