Plutarch’s Lives

ὥς που καὶ πάλαι λέγεται περὶ τὸν Καμβύσου
στρατόν, ἀναστήσας θῖνα μεγάλην καὶ κυματώσας
τὸ πεδίον μυριάδας ἀνθρώπων πέντε καταχῶσαι
7καὶ διαφθεῖραι. ταῦτα πάντα σχεδὸν πάντες
ἐλογίζοντο, χαλεπὸν δὲ ἦν Ἀλέξανδρον ἀποτρέψαι
πρὸς ὁτιοῦν ὡρμημένον. ἥ τε γὰρ τύχη ταῖς
ἐπιβολαῖς ὑπείκουσα τὴν γνώμην ἰσχυρὰν ἐποίει,
καὶ τὸ θυμοειδὲς ἄχρι τῶν πραγμάτων ὑπεξέφερε
τὴν φιλονεικίαν ἀήττητον, οὐ μόνον πολεμίους,
ἀλλὰ καὶ τόπους καὶ καιροὺς καταβιαζομένην.


XXVII. Ἐν γοῦν τῇ τότε πορείᾳ τὰ συντυχόντα
ταῖς ἀπορίαις παρὰ τοῦ θεοῦ βοηθήματα
τῶν ὑστέρων χρησμῶν ἐπιστεύθη μᾶλλον· τρόπον
δέ τινα καὶ τοῖς χρησμοῖς ἡ πίστις ἐκ τούτων
ὑπῆρξε. πρῶτον μὲν γὰρ ἐκ Διὸς ὕδωρ πολὺ
καὶ διαρκεῖς ὑετοὶ γενόμενοι τόν τε τῆς δίψης
φόβον ἔλυσαν, καὶ τὴν ξηρότητα κατασβέσαντες
τῆς ἄμμου, νοτερᾶς γενομένης καὶ πρὸς αὑτὴν
ξυμπεσούσης, εὔπνουν τὸν ἀέρα καὶ καθαρώτερον
2παρέσχον. ἔπειτα τῶν ὅρων, οἵπερ ἦσαν τοῖς
ὁδηγοῖς, συγχυθέντων καὶ πλάνης οὔσης καὶ
διασπασμοῦ τῶν βαδιζόντων διὰ τὴν ἄγνοιαν,
κόρακες ἐκφανέντες ὑπελάμβανον τὴν ἡγεμονίαν
τῆς πορείας, ἑπομένων μὲν ἔμπροσθεν πετόμενοι
καὶ σπεύδοντες, ὑστεροῦντας δὲ καὶ βραδύνοντας
3ἀναμένοντες· ὃ δὲ ἦν θαυμασιώτατον, ὡς Καλλισθένης
φησί, ταῖς φωναῖς ἀνακαλούμενοι τοὺς



302Alexander, xxvii.

as is said to have been the case with the army of Cambyses, long ago; the wind raised great billows of sand all over the plain and buried up fifty thousand men, to their utter destruction.1 Almost all of Alexander’s followers took all these things into consideration, but it was difficult to turn him aside from any course so ever when he had once set out upon it. For Fortune, by yielding to his onsets, was making his purpose obstinate, and the high spirit which he carried into his undertakings rendered his ambition finally invincible, so that it subdued not only enemies, but even times and places.


XXVII. At all events, during the journey which he made at this time, the assistance rendered him by Heaven in his perplexities met with more credence than the oracles which he afterwards received, nay, in a way, the oracles obtained credence in consequence of such assistance. For, to begin with, much rain from heaven and persistent showers removed all fear of thirst, quenched the dryness of the sand, so that it became moist and compact, and made the air purer and good to breathe. Again, when the marks for the guides became confused, and the travellers were separated and wandered about in ignorance of the route, ravens appeared and assumed direction of their march,2 flying swiftly on in front of them when they followed, and waiting for them when they marched slowly and lagged behind. Moreover, what was most astonishing of all, Callisthenes tells us that the birds by their cries called back those who straggled away in the night,


1Cf. Herod. iii. 26.2According to Ptolemy, son of Lagus, two serpents served Alexander’s army as guides to the oracle and back again. “But Aristobulus, whose account is generally admitted to be correct, says that two ravens flew in front of the army and acted as Alexander’s guides” (Arrian, Anab. iii. 3, 5 f.).303