Plutarch’s Lives

ἥδιον καθεύδουσιν, οὐδὲ ὁρῶσι τοῖς Περσῶν
βίοις τοὺς ἑαυτῶν παραβάλλοντες, ὅτι δουλικώτατον
μέν ἐστι τὸ τρυφᾶν, βασιλικώτατον
δὲ τὸ πονεῖν. “Καίτοι πῶς ἄν τις,” ἔφη, “δι᾿
ἑαυτοῦ θεραπεύσειεν ἵππον ἢ λόγχην ἀσκήσειεν
ἢ κράνος, ἀπειθικὼς τοῦ φιλτάτου σώματος ἅπτεσθαι
3τὰς χεῖρας;” “Οὐκ ἴστε,” εἶπεν, “ὅτι τοῦ
κρατεῖν πέρας ἡμῖν ἐστι τὸ μὴ ταὐτὰ ποιεῖν τοῖς
κεκρατημένοις;” ἐπέτεινεν οὖν ἔτι μᾶλλον αὐτὸς
ἑαυτὸν ἐν ταῖς στρατείαις καὶ τοῖς κυνηγεσίοις,
κακοπαθῶν καὶ παραβαλλόμενος, ὥστε καὶ Λάκωνα
πρεσβευτὴν παραγενόμενον αὐτῷ λέοντα
καταβάλλοντι μέγαν εἰπεῖν· “Καλῶς γε, Ἀλέξανδρε,
πρὸς τὸν λέοντα ἠγώνισαι περὶ τᾶς βασιλείας.”
4τοῦτο τὸ κυνήγιον Κρατερὸς εἰς Δελφοὺς
ἀνέθηκεν, εἰκόνας χαλκᾶς ποιησάμενος τοῦ λέοντος
καὶ τῶν κυνῶν καὶ τοῦ βασιλέως τῷ λέοντι
συνεστῶτος καὶ αὑτοῦ προσβοηθοῦντος, ὧν τὰ
μὲν Λύσιππος ἔπλασε, τὰ δὲ Λεωχάρης.


XLI. Ἀλέξανδρος μὲν οὖν ἑαυτὸν ἀσκῶν ἅμα
καὶ τοὺς ἄλλους παροξύνων πρὸς ἀρετὴν ἐκινδύνευεν·
οἱ δὲ φίλοι διὰ πλοῦτον καὶ ὄγκον ἤδη
τρυφᾶν βουλόμενοι καὶ σχολάζειν ἐβαρύνοντο τὰς
πλάνας καὶ τὰς στρατείας, καὶ κατὰ μικρὸν οὕτω
προῆλθον εἰς τὸ βλασφημεῖν καὶ κακῶς λέγειν
αὐτόν. ὁ δὲ καὶ πάνυ πρᾴως ἐν ἀρχῇ πρὸς
ταῦτα διέκειτο, φάσκων βασιλικὸν εἶναι τὸ
2κακῶς ἀκούειν εὖ ποιοῦντα. καίτοι τὰ μικρότατα
τῶν γενομένων τοῖς συνήθεσι παρ᾿ αὐτοῦ
σημεῖα μεγάλης ὑπῆρχεν εὐνοίας καὶ τιμῆς· ὧν
ὀλίγα παραθήσομαι.
344Alexander, xli.

by their toil, and did not see, from a comparison of their own lives with those of the Persians, that it is a very servile thing to be luxurious, but a very royal thing to toil. “And yet,” said he, “how can a man take care of his own horse or furbish up his spear and helmet, if he is unaccustomed to using his hands on his own dear person? Know ye not,” said he, “that the end and object of conquest is to avoid doing the same thing as the conquered?” Accordingly, he exerted himself yet more strenuously in military and hunting expeditions, suffering distress and risking his life, so that a Spartan ambassador who came up with him as he was bringing down a great lion, said: “Nobly, indeed, Alexander, hast thou struggled with the lion to see which should be king.” This hunting-scene Craterus dedicated at Delphi, with bronze figures of the lion, the dogs, the king engaged with the lion, and himself coming to his assistance; some of the figures were moulded by Lysippus, and some by Leochares.


XLI. Alexander, then, in exercising himself and at the same time inciting others to deeds of valour, was wont to court danger; but his friends, whose wealth and magnificence now gave them a desire to live in luxury and idleness, were impatient of his long wanderings and military expeditions, and gradually went so far as to abuse him and speak ill of him. He, however, was very mildly disposed at first toward this treatment of himself, and used to say that it was the lot of a king to confer favours and be ill-spoken
of therefor. And yet in the most trifling attentions which he paid his familiar friends there were marks of great good-will and esteem. I will instance a few of these.
345