Plutarch’s Lives

πρὸς τὸν Φιλώταν ἐπεσπάσατο τοὺς πάλαι μισοῦντας
αὐτόν, ἤδη φανερῶς λέγοντας ὡς ῥᾳθυμία
τοῦ βασιλέως εἴη Λίμνον οἰομένου, Χαλαιστραῖον
ἄνθρωπον, ἐπιχειρῆσαι τολμήματι τοσούτῳ καθ᾿
αὑτόν· ἀλλὰ τοῦτον μὲν ὑπηρέτην εἶναι, μᾶλλον
δὲ ὄργανον ἀπὸ μείζονος ἀρχῆς ἀφιέμενον, ἐν ἐκείνοις
δὲ τὴν ἐπιβουλὴν ζητητέον οἷς μάλιστα ταῦτα
6λανθάνειν συνέφερε. τοιούτοις λόγοις καὶ
ὑπονοίαις ἀναπετάσαντος τὰ ὦτα τοῦ βασιλέως
ἐπῆγον ἤδη μυρίας κατὰ τοῦ Φιλώτου διαβολάς.
ἐκ τούτου δὲ συλληφθεὶς ἀνεκρίνετο, τῶν ἑταίρων
ἐφεστώτων ταῖς βασάνοις, Ἀλεξάνδρου δὲ κατακούοντος
ἔξωθεν αὐλαίας παρατεταμένης· ὅτε δὴ
καί φασιν αὐτὸν εἰπεῖν, οἰκτρὰς καὶ ταπεινὰς
τοῦ Φιλώτου φωνὰς καὶ δεήσεις τοῖς περὶ τὸν
Ἡφαιστίωνα προσφέροντος· “Οὕτω δὴ μαλακὸς
ὤν, ὦ Φιλώτα, καὶ ἄνανδρος ἐπεχείρεις πράγμασι
7τηλικούτοις;” ἀποθανόντος δὲ τοῦ Φιλώτου καὶ
Παρμενίωνα πέμψας εὐθὺς εἰς Μηδίαν ἀνεῖλεν,
ἄνδρα πολλὰ μὲν Φιλίππῳ συγκατεργασάμενον,
μόνον δὲ ἢ μάλιστα τῶν πρεσβυτέρων φίλων
Ἀλέξανδρον εἰς Ἀσίαν ἐξορμήσαντα διαβῆναι,
τριῶν δὲ υἱῶν οὓς ἔσχεν, ἐπὶ τῆς στρατιᾶς δύο
μὲν ἐπιδόντα πρότερον ἀποθανόντας, τῷ δὲ τρίτῳ
συναναιρεθέντα.
8Ταῦτα πραχθέντα πολλοῖς τῶν φίλων φοβερὸν
ἐποίησε τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον, μάλιστα δὲ Ἀντιπάτρῳ·
καὶ πρὸς Αἰτωλοὺς ἔπεμψε κρύφα πίστεις
διδοὺς καὶ λαμβάνων. ἐφοβοῦντο γὰρ Ἀλέξανδρον
Αἰτωλοὶ διὰ τὴν Οἰνιαδῶν ἀνάστασιν, ἣν


366Alexander, xlix.

he felt bitter towards Philotas he drew to himself those who had long hated the man, and they now said openly that the king took things too easily when he supposed that Limnus, a man of Chalaestra, had set his hand to a deed of so great daring on his own account; nay, they said, he was only an assistant, or rather an instrument sent forth by a higher power, and enquiry into the plot should be made in those quarters where there was most interest in having it concealed. After the king had once given ear to such speeches and suspicions, the enemies of Philotas brought up countless accusations against him. Consequently he was arrested and put to the question, the companions of the king standing by at the torture, while Alexander himself listened behind a stretch of tapestry. Here, as we are told, on hearing Philotas beset Hephaestion with abject and pitiful cries and supplications, he said: “So faint-hearted as thou art, Philotas, and so unmanly, couldst thou have set hand to so great an undertaking?” After Philotas had been put to death, Alexander sent at once into Media and dispatched Paṙmenio also, a man whose achievements with Philip had been many, and who was the only one of Alexander’s older friends, or the principal one, to urge his crossing into Asia, and who, of the three sons that were his, had seen two killed on the expedition before this, and was now put to death along with the third.1
These actions made Alexander an object of fear to many of his friends, and particularly to Antipater, who sent secretly to the Aetolians and entered into an alliance with them. For the Aetolians also were in fear of Alexander, because they had destroyed the city of the Oeniadae, and because Alexander, on
1Cf. Arrian, Anab. iii. 26.367