Plutarch’s Lives

ἵπποις προσβάλοιεν, πολὺ κρατήσειν, εἰ δὲ κινοῖεν
τὴν φάλαγγα, φθήσεσθαι τοὺς πεζοὺς αὐτῷ699
5προσγενομένους· θάτερον δὲ συμβῆναι. τῶν γὰρ
ἱππέων χιλίους καὶ τῶν ἁρμάτων ἑξήκοντα συμπεσόντα
τρεψάμενος, τὰ μὲν ἅρματα λαβεῖν
ἅπαντα, τῶν δ᾿ ἱππέων ἀνελεῖν τετρακοσίους.
οὕτω δὴ συμφρονήσαντα τὸν Πῶρον ὡς αὐτὸς
εἴη διαβεβηκὼς Ἀλέξανδρος, ἐπιέναι μετὰ πάσης
τῆς δυνάμεως, πλὴν ὅσον ἐμποδὼν εἶναι τοῖς
διαβαίνουσι τῶν Μακεδόνων ἀπέλιπε. φοβηθεὶς
δὲ τὰ θηρία καὶ τὸ πλῆθος τῶν πολεμίων αὐτὸς
μὲν ἐνσεῖσαι κατὰ θάτερον κέρας, Κοῖνον δὲ τῷ
6δεξιῷ προσβαλεῖν κελεῦσαι. γενομένης δὲ τροπῆς
ἑκατέρωθεν ἀναχωρεῖν ἀεὶ πρὸς τὰ θηρία καὶ
συνειλεῖσθαι τοὺς ἐκβιαζομένους, ὅθεν ἤδη τὴν
μάχην ἀναμεμιγμένην εἶναι, καὶ μόλις ὀγδόης ὥρας
ἀπειπεῖν τοὺς πολεμίους. ταῦτα μὲν οὖν ὁ τῆς
μάχης ποιητὴς αὐτὸς ἐν ταῖς ἐπιστολαῖς εἴρηκεν.
Οἱ δὲ πλεῖστοι τῶν συγγραφέων ὁμολογοῦσι
τὸν Πῶρον ὑπεραίροντα τεσσάρων πηχῶν σπιθαμῇ
τὸ μῆκος ἱππότου μηδὲν ἀποδεῖν πρὸς τὸν
ἐλέφαντα συμμετρίᾳ διὰ τὸ μέγεθος καὶ τὸν ὄγκον
7τοῦ σώματος· καίτοι μέγιστος ἦν ὁ ἐλέφας·
σύνεσιν δὲ θαυμαστὴν ἐπεδείξατο καὶ κηδεμονίαν
τοῦ βασιλέως, ἐρρωμένου μὲν ἔτι θυμῷ τοὺς
προσμαχομένους ἀμυνόμενος καὶ ἀνακόπτων, ὡς
δὲ ᾔσθετο βελῶν πλήθει καὶ τραυμάτων κάμνοντα,
δείσας μὴ περιρρυῇ, τοῖς μὲν γόνασιν εἰς
γῆν ὑφῆκε πρᾴως ἑαυτόν, τῇ δὲ προνομαίᾳ λαμβάνων
396Alexander, lx.

their cavalry, he would be far superior to them, and in case they moved up their men-at-arms, his infantry would join him in good season. And one of these suppositions came to pass. For after routing a thousand of the enemy’s horsemen and sixty of their chariots which engaged him, he captured all the chariots, and slew four hundred of the horsemen. And now Porus, thus led to believe that Alexander himself had crossed the river, advanced upon him with all his forces, except the part he left behind to impede the crossing of the remaining Macedonians. But Alexander, fearing the elephants and the great numbers of the enemy, himself assaulted their left wing, and ordered Coenus to attack their right. Both wings having been routed, the vanquished troops retired in every case upon the elephants in the centre, and were there crowded together with them, and from this point on the battle was waged at close quarters, and it was not until the eighth hour that the enemy gave up. Such then, is the account of the battle which the victor himself has given in his letters.
Most historians agree that Porus was four cubits and a span1 high, and that the size and majesty of his body made his elephant seem as fitting a mount for him as a horse for a horseman. And yet his elephant was of the largest size; and it showed remarkable intelligence and solicitude for the king, bravely defending him and beating back his assailants while he was still in full vigour, and when it perceived that its master was worn out with a multitude of missiles and wounds, fearing lest he should fall off, it knelt softly on the ground, and with its proboscis


1Six feet and three inches.397