Plutarch’s Lives

θεῖόν ἐστιν· ἔτι δὲ μᾶλλον αὐτὸς περὶ τούτων681
φιλοσοφώτερον δοξάζειν καὶ λέγειν, ὡς πάντων
μὲν ὄντα κοινὸν ἀνθρώπων πατέρα τὸν θεόν, ἰδίους
δὲ ποιούμενον ἑαυτοῦ τοὺς ἀρίστους.


XXVIII. Καθόλου δὲ πρὸς μὲν τοὺς βαρβάρους
σοβαρὸς ἦν καὶ σφόδρα πεπεισμένῳ περὶ
τῆς ἐκ θεοῦ γενέσεως καὶ τεκνώσεως ὅμοιος, τοῖς
δὲ Ἕλλησι μετρίως καὶ ὑποφειδομένως ἑαυτὸν
ἐξεθείαζε· πλὴν περὶ Σάμου γράφων Ἀθηναίοις,
“Ἐγὼ μὲν οὐκ ἄν,” φησίν, “ὑμῖν ἐλευθέραν πόλιν
ἔδωκα καὶ ἔνδοξον· ἔχετε δὲ αὐτὴν λαβόντες
παρὰ τοῦ τότε κυρίου καὶ πατρὸς ἐμοῦ προσαγορευομένου,”
2λέγων τὸν Φίλιππον. ὕστερον δὲ
πληγῇ περιπεσὼν ὑπὸ τοξεύματος καὶ περιαλγὴς
γενόμενος, “Τοῦτο μέν,” εἶπεν, “ὦ φίλοι, τὸ ῥέον
αἷμα, καὶ οὐκ

ἰχώρ, οἷός πέρ τε ῥέει μακάρεσσι θεοῖσιν.”

ἐπεὶ δὲ μεγάλης ποτὲ βροντῆς γενομένης καὶ
πάντων ἐκπλαγέντων Ἀνάξαρχος ὁ σοφιστὴς
παρὼν ἔφη πρὸς αὐτόν, “Μή τι σὺ τοιοῦτον ὁ
τοῦ Διός;” γελάσας ἐκεῖνος, “Οὐ βούλομαι γάρ,”
εἶπε, “φοβερὸς εἶναι τοῖς φίλοις, ὥσπερ σύ με
κελεύεις ὁ καταφαυλίζων μου τὸ δεῖπνον, ὅτι ταῖς
τραπέζαις ἰχθύας ὁρᾷς. ἐπικειμένους, οὐ σατραπῶν
3κεφαλάς.” τῷ γὰρ ὄντι λέγεται τὸν Ἀνάξαρχον
ἰχθυδίων Ἡφαιστίωνι πεμφθέντων ὑπὸ
τοῦ βασιλέως τὸν προειρημένον ἐπιφθέγξασθαι
λόγον, οἷον ἐξευτελίζοντα καὶ κατειρωνευόμενον
306Alexander, xxviii.

which gets the mastery and rules is divine. Still more philosophical, however, was his own opinion and utterance on this head, namely that although God was indeed a common father of all mankind, still, He made peculiarly His own the noblest and best of them.


XXVIII. In general, he bore himself haughtily towards the Barbarians, and like one fully persuaded of his divine birth and parentage, but with the Greeks it was within limits and somewhat rarely that he assumed his own divinity. However, in writing to the Athenians concerning Samos, he said: “I cannot have given you that free and illustrious city; for ye received it from him who was then your master and was called my father,” meaning Philip. At a later time, however, when he had been hit by an arrow and was suffering great pain, he said: “This, my friends, that flows here, is blood, and not

‘Ichor, such as flows from the veins of the blessed
gods.’”1

Once, too, there came a great peal of thunder, and all were terrified at it; whereupon Anaxarchus the sophist who was present said to Alexander: “Couldst thou, the son of Zeus, thunder like that?” At this, Alexander laughed and said: “Nay, I do not wish to cause fear in my friends, as thou wouldst have me do, thou who despisest my suppers because, as thou sayest, thou seest the tables furnished with fish, and not with satraps’ heads.”2 For, in fact, we are told that Anaxarchus, on seeing a present of small fish which the king had sent to Hephaestion, had uttered the speech above mentioned, as though he were disparaging



1Iliad, v. 340.2Cf. Athenaeus, pp. 250 f.307