Plutarch’s Lives

πότον, ὥσπερ εἴρηται, μακρὸν ὑπὸ ἀδολεσχίας
4ἐξέτεινε. καὶ τἆλλα πάντων ἥδιστος ὢν βασιλέων
συνεῖναι καὶ χάριτος οὐδεμιᾶς ἀμοιρῶν,
τότε ταῖς μεγαλαυχίαις ἀηδὴς ἐγίνετο καὶ λίαν
στρατιωτικός, αὐτός τε πρὸς τὸ κομπῶδες ὑποφερόμενος
καὶ τοῖς κόλαξιν ἑαυτὸν ἀνεικὼς ἱππάσιμον,
ὑφ᾿ ὧν οἱ χαριέστεροι τῶν παρόντων
ἐπετρίβοντο, μήτε ἁμιλλᾶσθαι τοῖς κόλαξι μήτε
λείπεσθαι βουλόμενοι τῶν αὐτῶν ἐπαίνων. τὸ
μὲν γὰρ αἰσχρὸν ἐδόκει, τὸ δὲ κίνδυνον ἔφερε.
5μετὰ δὲ τὸν πότον λουσάμενος ἐκάθευδε πολλάκις
μέχρι μέσης ἡμέρας· ἔστι δ᾿ ὅτε καὶ διημέρευεν678
ἐν τῷ καθεύδειν.
Αὐτὸς μὲν οὖν καὶ ὄψων ἐγκρατὴς ἦν, ὥστε καὶ
τὰ σπανιώτατα πολλάκις τῶν ἀπὸ θαλάττης
αὐτῷ κομιζομένων ἀκροδρύων καὶ ἰχθύων ἑκάστῳ
διαπεμπόμενος τῶν ἑταίρων ἑαυτῷ μόνῳ μηδὲν
6καταλιπεῖν· τὸ μέντοι δεῖπνον ἦν ἀεὶ μεγαλοπρεπές,
καὶ τοῖς εὐτυχήμασι τῆς δαπάνης ἅμα
συναυξομένης τέλος εἰς μυρίας δραχμὰς προῆλθεν.
ἐνταῦθα δὲ ἔστη, καὶ τοσοῦτον ὡρίσθη τελεῖν
τοῖς ὑποδεχομένοις Ἀλέξανδρον.


XXIV. Μετὰ δὲ τὴν μάχην τὴν ἐν Ἰσσῷ πέμψας
εἰς Δαμασκὸν ἔλαβε τὰ χρήματα καὶ τὰς
ἀποσκευὰς καὶ τὰ τέκνα καὶ τὰς γυναῖκας τῶν
Περσῶν. καὶ πλεῖστα μὲν ὠφελήθησαν οἱ τῶν
Θεσσαλῶν ἱππεῖς· τούτους γὰρ ἄνδρας ἀγαθοὺς
διαφερόντως ἐν τῇ μάχῃ γενομένους ἔπεμψεν ἐπίτηδες
290Alexander, xxiv.

over the wine, as I have said, he would sit long, for conversation’s sake. And although in other ways he was of all princes most agreeable in his intercourse, and endowed with every grace, at this time his boastfulness
would make him unpleasant and very like a common soldier. Not only was he himself carried away into blustering, but he suffered himself to be ridden by his flatterers. These were a great annoyance to the finer spirits in the company, who desired neither to vie with the flatterers, nor yet to fall behind them in praising Alexander. The one course they thought disgraceful, the other had its perils. After the drinking was over, he would take a bath and sleep, frequently until midday; and sometimes he would actually spend the entire day in sleep.
In the matter of delicacies, too, he himself, at all events, was master of his appetite, so that often, when the rarest fruits or fish were brought to him from the sea-coast, he would distribute them to each of his companions until he was the only one for whom nothing remained. His suppers, however, were always magnificent, and the outlay upon them increased with his successes until it reached the sum of ten thousand drachmas. There it stood, and that was the prescribed limit of expenditure for those who entertained Alexander.


XXIV. After the battle at Issus,1 he sent to Damascus and seized the money and baggage of the Persians together with their wives and children. And most of all did the Thessalian horsemen enrich themselves, for they had shown themselves surpassingly brave in the battle, and Alexander sent them on this expedition purposely, wishing to have them enrich


1November, 333 b.c.291