Plutarch’s Lives

πολλὰ διωθούμενος, ἔν τε τῷ συνεῖναι βαρύτητι
καὶ σιωπῇ δοκῶν οὐκ ἐπαινεῖν οὐδὲ ἀρέσκεσθαι
τοῖς γινομένοις, ὥστε καὶ τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον εἰπεῖν
ἐπ᾿ αὐτῷ.

μισῶ σοφιστήν, ὅστις οὐδ᾿ αὑτῷ σοφός.

3Λέγεται δέ ποτε πολλῶν παρακεκλημένων ἐπὶ
τὸ δεῖπνον ἐπαινέσαι κελευσθεὶς ἐπὶ τοῦ ποτηρίου
Μακεδόνας ὁ Καλλισθένης οὕτως εὐροῆσαι
πρὸς τὴν ὑπόθεσιν ὥστε ἀνισταμένους κροτεῖν
καὶ βάλλειν τοὺς στεφάνους ἐπ᾿ αὐτόν· εἰπεῖν
οὖν τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον ὅτι, κατ᾿ Εὐριπίδην, τὸν
λαβόντα τῶν λόγων

καλὰς ἀφορμὰς οὐ μέγ᾿ ἔργον εὖ λέγειν·

4“Ἀλλ᾿ ἔνδειξαι,” φάναι, “τὴν αὑτοῦ δύναμιν
ἡμῖν κατηγορήσας Μακεδόνων, ἵνα καὶ βελτίους
γένωνται μαθόντες ἃ πλημμελοῦσιν.” οὕτω δὴ
τὸν ἄνδρα πρὸς τὴν παλινῳδίαν τραπόμενον
πολλὰ παρρησιάσασθαι κατὰ τῶν Μακεδόνων,
καὶ τὴν Ἑλληνικὴν στάσιν αἰτίαν ἀποφήναντα
τῆς γενομένης περὶ Φίλιππον αὐξήσεως καὶ δυνάμεως εἰπεῖν·

ἐν δὲ διχοστασίῃ καὶ ὁ πάγκακος ἔλλαχε τιμῆς·

5ἐφ᾿ ᾧ πικρὸν καὶ βαρὺ ἐγγενέσθαι μῖσος τοῖς
Μακεδόσι, καὶ τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον εἰπεῖν ὡς οὐ τῆς


378Alexander, liii.

part, and when he did go into company, by his gravity and silence making it appear that he disapproved or disliked what was going on, so that even Alexander said in allusion to him:—

“I hate a wise man even to himself unwise.”1

It is said, moreover, that once when a large company had been invited to the king’s supper, Callisthenes was bidden, when the cup came to him, to speak in praise of the Macedonians, and was so successful on the theme that the guests rose up to applaud him and threw their garlands at him; whereupon Alexander said that, in the language of Euripides, when a man has for his words

“A noble subject, it is easy to speak well;”2

“But show us the power of your eloquence,” said he, “by a denunciation of the Macedonians, that they may become even better by learning their faults.” And so Callisthenes began his palinode, and spoke long and boldly in denunciation of the Macedonians, and after showing that faction among the Greeks was the cause of the increase of Philip’s power, added:

“But in a time of sedition, the base man too is in
honour.”3

This gave the Macedonians a stern and bitter hatred of him, and Alexander declared that Callisthenes



1An iambic trimeter from an unknown play of Euripides (Nauck, Trag. Graec. Frag.2. p. 652).2Bacchae, 260 (Kirchhoff).3A proverb in hexameter verse, sometimes attributed to Callimachus. Cf. the Nicias, xi. 3; Morals, p. 479 a.379