Plutarch’s Lives

πέτραν ἁλώσιμον ἡμῖν εἶναι· τὸ γὰρ ἄρχον αὐτῆς
3οὐκ ὀχυρόν ἐστι.” ταύτην μὲν οὖν ἐκφοβήσας τὸν
Σισιμίθρην ἔλαβεν. ἑτέρᾳ δὲ ὁμοίως ἀποτόμῳ
προσβαλὼν τοὺς νεωτέρους τῶν Μακεδόνων
παρώρμα, καὶ Ἀλέξανδρόν τινα καλούμενον
προσαγορεύσας, “Ἀλλὰ σοί γε,” εἶπεν, “ἀνδραγαθεῖν
προσήκει καὶ διὰ τὴν ἐπωνυμίαν.” ἐπεὶ
δὲ λαμπρῶς ὁ νεανίας ἀγωνιζόμενος ἔπεσεν, οὐ
4μετρίως ἐδήχθη. τῇ δὲ καλουμένῃ Νύσῃ τῶν
Μακεδόνων ὀκνούντων προσάγειν (καὶ γὰρ ποταμὸς
ἦν πρὸς αὐτῇ βαθὺς) ἐπιστάς, “Τί γάρ,” εἶπεν,
“ὁ κάκιστος ἐγὼ νεῖν οὐκ ἔμαθον;” καὶ ἤδη ἔχων
τὴν ἀσπίδα περᾶν ἠθέλησεν. ἐπεὶ δὲ καταπαύσαντος
τὴν μάχην αὐτοῦ παρῆσαν ἀπὸ τῶν
πολιορκουμένων πόλεων πρέσβεις δεησόμενοι,
πρῶτον μὲν ὀφθεὶς ἀθεράπευτος ἐν τοῖς ὅπλοις
ἐξέπληξεν αὐτούς· ἔπειτα προσκεφαλαίου τινὸς
αὐτῷ κομισθέντος ἐκέλευσε λαβόντα καθίσαι τὸν
5πρεσβύτατον· Ἄκουφις ἐκαλεῖτο. θαυμάσας οὖν698
τὴν λαμπρότητα καὶ φιλανθρωπίαν ὁ Ἄκουφις
ἠρώτα τί βούλεται ποιοῦντας αὐτοὺς ἔχειν φίλους.
φήσαντος δὲ τοῦ Ἀλεξάνδρου, “Σὲ μὲν ἄρχοντα
καταστήσαντας αὑτῶν, πρὸς δὲ ἡμᾶς πέμψαντας
ἑκατὸν ἄνδρας τοὺς ἀρίστους,” γελάσας ὁ Ἄκουφις,
“Ἀλλὰ βέλτιον,” εἶπεν, “ἄρξω, βασιλεῦ,
τοὺς κακίστους πρὸς σὲ πέμψας μᾶλλον ἢ τοὺς
ἀρίστους.”


LIX. Ὁ δὲ Ταξίλης λέγεται μὲν τῆς Ἰνδικῆς
ἔχειν μοῖραν οὐκ ἀποδέουσαν Αἰγύπτου τὸ μέγεθος,
εὔβοτον δὲ καὶ καλλίκαρπον ἐν τοῖς μάλιστα,
390Alexander, lix.

can take the citadel, since he who commands it is a weak thing.” And indeed he did take the citadel by frightening Sisimithres. Again, after attacking another citadel equally precipitous, he was urging on the younger Macedonians, and addressing one who bore the name of Alexander, said: “It behooves thee, at least, to be a brave man, even for thy name’s sake.” And when the young man, fighting gloriously, fell, the king was pained beyond measure. And at another time, when his Macedonians hesitated to advance upon the citadel called Nysa because there was a deep river in front of it, Alexander, halting on the bank, cried: “Most miserable man that I am, why, pray, have I not learned to swim?” and at once, carrying his shield, he would have tried to cross. And when, after he had put a stop to the fighting, ambassadors came from the beleaguered cities to beg for terms, they were amazed, to begin with, to see him in full armour and without an attendant; and besides, when a cushion was brought him for his use, he ordered the eldest of the ambassadors, Acuphis by name, to take it for his seat. Acuphis, accordingly, astonished at his magnanimity and courtesy, asked what he wished them to do in order to be his friends. “Thy countrymen,” said Alexander, “must make thee their ruler, and send me a hundred of their best men.” At this Acuphis laughed, and said: “Nay, O King, I shall rule better if I send to thee the worst men rather than the best.”1


LIX. Taxiles, we are told, had a realm in India as large as Egypt, with good pasturage, too, and in the highest degree productive of beautiful fruits. He


1Cf. Arrian, Anab. v. 2, 1–3.391