Plutarch’s Lives

τοῖς ἵπποις τὸ ἀργύριον παραβαλεῖν. ὡς
δ᾿ οὐκ ἐγεύοντο, φήσας, “Τί οὖν ὄφελος ἡμῖν τῆς
σῆς παρασκευῆς;” καθεῖρξε τὸν Ἀβουλήτην.


LXIX. Ἐν δὲ Πέρσαις πρῶτον μὲν ἀπέδωκε τὸ
νόμισμα ταῖς γυναιξίν, ὥσπερ εἰώθεισαν οἱ βασιλεῖς,
ὁσάκις εἰς Πέρσας ἀφίκοιντο, διδόναι χρυσοῦν
ἑκάστῃ. καὶ διὰ τοῦτό φασιν ἐνίους μὴ
πολλάκις, Ὦχον δὲ μηδὲ ἅπαξ εἰς Πέρσας παραγενέσθαι,
διὰ μικρολογίαν ἀποξενώσαντα τῆς
2πατρίδος ἑαυτόν. ἔπειτα τὸν Κύρου τάφον εὑρὼν
διορωρυγμένον ἀπέκτεινε τὸν ἀδικήσαντα,
καίτοι Πελλαῖος ἦν οὐ τῶν ἀσημοτάτων ὁ πλημμελήσας,
ὄνομα Πολύμαχος. τὴν δὲ ἐπιγραφὴν
ἀναγνοὺς ἐκέλευσεν Ἑλληνικοῖς ὑποχαράξαι
γράμμασιν. εἶχε δὲ οὕτως· “Ὦ ἄνθρωπε, ὅστις
εἶ καὶ ὅθεν ἥκεις, ὅτι μὲν γὰρ ἥξεις, οἶδα, ἐγὼ
Κῦρος εἰμὶ ὁ Πέρσαις κτησάμενος τὴν ἀρχήν.
μὴ οὖν τῆς ὀλίγης μοι ταύτης γῆς φθονήσῃς ἣ
3τοὐμὸν σῶμα περικαλύπτει.” ταῦτα μὲν οὖν
ἐμπαθῆ σφόδρα τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον ἐποίησεν, ἐν νῷ
λαβόντα τὴν ἀδηλότητα καὶ μεταβολήν.
Ὁ δὲ Καλανὸς ἐνταῦθα χρόνον οὐ πολὺν ὑπὸ
κοιλίας ἐνοχληθεὶς ᾐτήσατο πυρὰν αὐτῷ γενέσθαι.
καὶ κομισθεὶς ἵππῳ πρὸς αὐτήν, ἐπευξάμενος
καὶ κατασπείσας ἑαυτοῦ καὶ τῶν τριχῶν
ἀπαρξάμενος, ἀναβαίνων ἐδεξιοῦτο τοὺς παρόντας
τῶν Μακεδόνων, καὶ παρεκάλει τὴν ἡμέραν ἐκείνην
416Alexander, lxix.

ordered the money to be thrown to his horses. And when they would not touch it, “Of what use to us, then,” he cried, “is the provision you have made?” and threw Abuletes into prison.


LXIX. In Persia, to begin with, he distributed the money among the women, just as their kings were accustomed, as often as they came into Persia, to give each one of them a gold piece. And for this reason, it is said, some of their kings did not come often into Persia, and Ochus not even once, being so penurious as to expatriate himself. In the second place, having discovered that the tomb of Cyrus had been rifled, he put to death the perpetrator of the deed, although the culprit was a prominent Macedonian native of Pella, by name Polymachus. After reading the inscription upon this tomb, he ordered it to be repeated below in Greek letters. It ran thus: “O man, whosoever thou art and whencesoever thou comest, for I know that thou wilt come, I am Cyrus, and I won for the Persians their empire. Do not, therefore, begrudge me this little earth which covers my body.” These words, then, deeply affected Alexander, who was reminded of the uncertainty and mutability of life.1
In Persia, too, Calanus, who had suffered for a little while from intestinal disorder, asked that a funeral pyre might be prepared for him.2 To this he came on horseback, and after offering prayers, sprinkling himself, and casting some of his hair upon the pyre, he ascended it, greeting the Macedonians who were present, and exhorting them to make that



1Cf. Arrian, Anab. vi. 29, 4–8.2The self-sacrifice of Calanus is narrated by Arrian (Anab. vii 3).417