Plutarch’s Lives

Ἀλέξανδρον ὑπερηγάπησαν, ὅτι σωφρονέστατος
περὶ ταῦτα γεγονὼς οὐδὲ ἧς μόνης ἡττήθη γυναικὸς
ἄνευ νόμου θιγεῖν ὑπέμεινεν.
5Ἐπεὶ δὲ καὶ τῶν φίλων ἑώρα τῶν μεγίστων
Ἡφαιστίωνα μὲν ἐπαινοῦντα καὶ συμμετακοσμούμενον
αὐτῷ, Κρατερὸν δὲ τοῖς πατρίοις ἐμμένοντα,
δι᾿ ἐκείνου μὲν ἐχρημάτιζε τοῖς βαρβάροις, διὰ
τούτου δὲ τοῖς Ἕλλησι καὶ τοῖς Μακεδόσι· καὶ
ὅλως τὸν μὲν ἐφίλει μάλιστα, τὸν δὲ ἐτίμα, νομίζων
καὶ λέγων ἀεὶ τὸν μὲν Ἡφαιστίωνα φιλαλέξανδρον
εἶναι, τὸν δὲ Κρατερὸν φιλοβασιλέα.
6διὸ καὶ πρὸς ἀλλήλους ὑπούλως ἔχοντες συνέκρουον
πολλάκις. ἅπαξ δὲ περὶ τὴν Ἰνδικὴν
καὶ εἰς χεῖρας ἦλθον σπασάμενοι τὰ ξίφη, καὶ
τῶν φίλων ἑκατέρῳ παραβοηθούντων προσελάσας
Ἀλέξανδρος ἐλοιδόρει τὸν Ἡφαιστίωνα φανερῶς,
ἔμπληκτον καλῶν καὶ μαινόμενον, εἰ μὴ συνίησιν
ὡς, ἐάν τις αὐτοῦ τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον ἀφέληται,692
μηδέν ἐστιν· ἰδίᾳ δὲ καὶ τοῦ Κρατεροῦ πικρῶς
7καθήψατο. καὶ συναγαγὼν αὐτοὺς καὶ διαλλάξας
ἐπώμοσε τὸν Ἄμμωνα καὶ τοὺς ἄλλους θεούς, ἦ
μὴν μάλιστα φιλεῖν ἀνθρώπων ἁπάντων ἐκείνους·
ἂν δὲ πάλιν αἴσθηται διαφερομένους, ἀποκτενεῖν
ἀμφοτέρους, ἢ τὸν ἀρξάμενον. ὅθεν ὕστερον οὐδὲ
παίζοντες εἰπεῖν τι οὐδὲ πρᾶξαι πρὸς ἀλλήλουςz
λέγονται.


XLVIII. Φιλώτας δὲ ὁ Παρμενίωνος ἀξίωμα
μὲν εἶχεν ἐν τοῖς Μακεδόσι μέγα· καὶ γὰρ ἀνδρεῖος
ἐδόκει καὶ καρτερικὸς εἶναι, φιλόδωρος δὲ
360Alexander, xlviii.

measure fond of Alexander, because, most temperate of all men that he was in these matters, he would not consent to approach even the only woman who ever mastered his affections, without the sanction of law.
Moreover, when he saw that among his chiefest friends Hephaestion approved his course and joined him in changing his mode of life, while Craterus clung fast to his native ways, he employed the former in his business with the Barbarians, the latter in that with the Greeks and Macedonians. And in general he showed most affection for Hephaestion, but most esteem for Craterus, thinking, and constantly saying, that Hephaestion was a friend of Alexander, but Craterus a friend of the king. For this reason, too, the men cherished a secret grudge against one another and often came into open collision. And once, on the Indian expedition, they actually drew their swords and closed with one another, and as the friends of each were coming to his aid, Alexander rode up and abused Hephaestion publicly, calling him a fool and a madman for not knowing that without Alexander’s favour he was nothing; and in private he also sharply reproved Craterus. Then he brought them together and reconciled them, taking an oath by Ammon and the rest of the gods that he loved them most of all men; but that if he heard of their quarrelling again, he would kill them both, or at least the one who began the quarrel. Wherefore after this they neither did nor said anything to harm one another, not even in jest.


XLVIII. Now, Philotas, the son of Parmenio, had a high position among the Macedonians; for he was held to be valiant and able to endure hardship, and,
361