Plutarch’s Lives
3τὸν Εὐφράτην διέτριβεν. ἠνώχλει δ᾿ αὐτὸν
σημεῖα πολλά. καὶ γὰρ λέοντα τῶν τρεφομένων
μέγιστον καὶ κάλλιστον ἥμερος ὄνος ἐπελθὼν
καὶ λακτίσας ἀνεῖλεν. ἀποδυσαμένου δὲ πρὸς
ἄλειμμα καὶ σφαῖραν αὐτοῦ παίζοντος οἱ νεανίσκοι
οἱ σφαιρίζοντες, ὡς ἔδει πάλιν λαβεῖν τὰ
ἱμάτια, καθορῶσιν ἄνθρωπον ἐν τῷ θρόνῳ καθεζόμενον
σιωπῇ, τὸ διάδημα καὶ τὴν στολὴν τὴν βασιλικὴν
4περικείμενον. οὗτος ἀνακρινόμενος ὅστις
εἴη, πολὺν χρόνον ἄναυδος ἦν· μόλις δὲ συμφρονήσας
Διονύσιος μὲν ἔφη καλεῖσθαι, Μεσσήνιος
δὲ εἶναι τὸ γένος· ἐκ δέ τινος αἰτίας καὶ κατηγορίας
ἐνταῦθα κομισθεὶς ἀπὸ θαλάσσης πολὺν
χρόνον γεγονέναι ἐν δεσμοῖς· ἄρτι δὲ αὐτῷ τὸν
Σάραπιν ἐπιστάντα τοὺς δεσμοὺς ἀνεῖναι καὶ
προαγαγεῖν δεῦρο, καὶ κελεῦσαι λαβόντα τὴν
στολὴν καὶ τὸ διάδημα καθίσαι καὶ σιωπᾶν.


LXXIV. Ταῦτα ἀκούσας ὁ Ἀλέξανδρος τὸν
μὲν ἄνθρωπον, ὥσπερ ἐκέλευον οἱ μάντεις, ἠφάνισεν·
αὐτὸς δὲ ἠθύμει καὶ δύσελπις ἦν πρὸς τὸ
θεῖον ἤδη καὶ πρὸς τοὺς φίλους ὕποπτος. μάλιστα
δὲ Ἀντίπατρον ἐφοβεῖτο καὶ τοὺς παῖδας,
ὧν Ἰόλας μὲν ἀρχιοινοχόος ἦν, ὁ δὲ Κάσανδρος
ἀφῖκτο μὲν νεωστί, θεασάμενος δὲ βαρβάρους
τινὰς προσκυνοῦντας, ἅτε δὴ τεθραμμένος Ἑλληνικῶς
καὶ τοιοῦτο πρότερον μηδὲν ἑωρακώς,
2ἐγέλασε προπετέστερον. ὁ δὲ Ἀλέξανδρος ὠργίσθη,
καὶ δραξάμενος αὐτοῦ τῶν τριχῶν σφόδρα
428Alexander, lxxiv.

living in his tent, or sailing about on the Euphrates. And he was troubled by many omens. For instance, the largest and handsomest lion in his menagerie was attacked by a tame ass and kicked to death. Again, he once took off his clothes for exercise and was playing at ball, and when it was time to dress again, the young men who were playing with him beheld a man seated on the king’s throne, in silence, wearing the royal diadem and robes. When the man was asked who he was, he was speechless for a long time; but at last he came to his senses and said that his name was Dionysius, and that he was a native of Messenia; in consequence of some charge brought against him, he said, he had been brought thither from the sea-board, and for a long time had been in chains; but just now the god Serapis had come to him and loosed his chains and brought him to this spot, bidding him put on the robe and diadem and sit on the throne and hold his peace.1


LXXIV. On hearing of this, Alexander put the man out of the way, as the seers directed; but he began to be low-spirited, and was distrustful now of the favour of Heaven and suspicious of his friends. He was particularly afraid of Antipater and of his sons, one of whom, Iolas, was his chief cupbearer; the other, Cassander, had only recently come to Babylon, and when he saw some Barbarians doing obeisance to Alexander, since he had been reared as a Greek and had never seen such a sight as this before, he laughed boisterously. But Alexander was enraged, and clutching him fiercely by


1Other predictions of Alexander’s death are given in Arrian (Anab. vii. 18, 22, and 24).429