Plutarch’s Lives

λαβών, ὑφ᾿ οὗ τὸ τῆς κερκίδος ὀστέον ἀποθραυσθὲν
ἐξέπεσε, λίθῳ δὲ πληγεὶς πάλιν εἰς τὸν
τράχηλον ὥστε καὶ ταῖς ὄψεσιν ἀχλὺν ὑποδραμεῖν691
4παραμείνασαν οὐκ ὀλίγον χρόνον, ὅμως
οὐκ ἐπαύετο χρώμενος ἑαυτῷ πρὸς τοὺς κινδύνους
ἀφειδῶς, ἀλλὰ καὶ τὸν Ὀρεξάρτην διαβὰς ποταμόν,
ὃν αὐτὸς ᾤετο Τάναϊν εἶναι, καὶ τοὺς Σκύθας
τρεψάμενος ἐδίωξεν ἐπὶ σταδίους ἑκατόν, ἐνοχλούμενος
ὑπὸ διαρροίας.


XLVI. Ἐνταῦθα δὲ πρὸς αὐτὸν ἀφικέσθαι τὴν
Ἀμαζόνα οἱ πολλοὶ λέγουσιν, ὧν καὶ Κλείταρχός
ἐστι καὶ Πολύκλειτος καὶ Ὀνησίκριτος καὶ
Ἀντιγένης καὶ Ἴστρος· Ἀριστόβουλος δὲ καὶ
Χάρης ὁ εἰσαγγελεὺς καὶ Πτολεμαῖος καὶ Ἀντικλείδης
καὶ Φίλων ὁ Θηβαῖος καὶ Φίλιππος ὁ
Θεαγγελεύς, πρὸς δὲ τούτοις Ἑκαταῖος ὁ Ἐρετριεὺς
καὶ Φίλιππος ὁ Χαλκιδεὺς καὶ Δοῦρις ὁ
2Σάμιος πλάσμα φασὶ γεγονέναι τοῦτο. καὶ
μαρτυρεῖν αὐτοῖς ἔοικεν Ἀλέξανδρος. Ἀντιπάτρῳ
γὰρ ἅπαντα γράφων ἀκριβῶς τὸν μὲν Σκύθην
αὐτῷ φησι διδόναι τὴν θυγατέρα πρὸς γάμον,
Ἀμαζόνος δὲ οὐ μνημονεύει. λέγεται δὲ πολλοῖς
χρόνοις Ὀνησίκριτος ὕστερον ἤδη βασιλεύοντι
Λυσιμάχῳ τῶν βιβλίων τὸ τέταρτον ἀναγινώσκειν,
ἐν ᾧ γέγραπται περὶ τῆς Ἀμαζόνος· τὸν
οὖν Λυσίμαχον ἀτρέμα μειδιάσαντα “Καὶ που,”
φάναι, “τότε ἤμην ἐγώ;” ταῦτα μὲν οὖν ἄν τις
οὔτε ἀπιστῶν ἧττον οὔτε πιστεύων μᾶλλον
Ἀλέξανδρον θαυμάσειε.


XLVII. Φοβούμενος δὲ τοὺς Μακεδόνας, μὴ εἰς
τὰ ὑπόλοιπα τῆς στρατείας ἀπαγορεύσωσι, τὸ
μὲν ἄλλο πλῆθος εἴασε κατὰ χώραν, τοὺς δὲ
356Alexander, xlvii.

that splinters of the larger bone came out; and at another time he was smitten in the neck with a stone so severely that his eye-sight was clouded and remained so for some time. Nevertheless, he did not cease exposing himself to dangers without stint, nay, he actually crossed the river Orexartes (which he himself supposed to be the Tanaïs), put the Scythians to rout, and pursued them for a hundred furlongs, although he was suffering all the while from a diarrhoea.


XLVI. Here the queen of the Amazons came to see him, as most writers say, among whom are Cleitarchus, Polycleitus, Onesicritus, Antigenes, and Ister; but Aristobulus, Chares the royal usher, Ptolemy, Anticleides, Philo the Theban, and Philip of Theangela, besides Hecataeus of Eretria, Philip the Chalcidian, and Duris of Samos, say that this is a fiction. And it would seem that Alexander’s testimony is in favour of their statement. For in a letter to Antipater which gives all the details minutely he says that the Scythian king offered him his daughter in marriage, but he makes no mention of the Amazon. And the story is told that many years afterwards Onesicritus was reading aloud to Lysimachus, who was now king, the fourth book of his history, in which was the tale of the Amazon, at which Lysimachus smiled gently and said: “And where was I at the time?” However, our belief or disbelief of this story will neither increase nor diminish our admiration for Alexander.


XLVII. Fearing that his Macedonians might tire of the rest of his expedition, he left the greater part of them in quarters, and while he had the best of
357