Plutarch’s Lives

διωρίσατο πρὸς τοὺς παρόντας ἐν ἐκείνῳ τῷ μηνὶ
2πάντως ἁλώσεσθαι τὴν πόλιν. γενομένου δὲ
χλευασμοῦ καὶ γέλωτος (ἦν γὰρ ἡ τελευταία τοῦ
μηνὸς ἡμέρα), διηπορημένον αὐτὸν ἰδὼν ὁ βασιλεὺς
καὶ συμφιλοτιμούμενος ἀεὶ τοῖς μαντεύμασιν
ἐκέλευε μηκέτι τριακάδα τὴν ἡμέραν ἐκείνην,
ἀλλὰ τρίτην φθίνοντος ἀριθμεῖν· καὶ τῇ σάλπιγγι
σημήνας ἀπεπειρᾶτο τῶν τειχῶν ἐρρωμενέστερον
ἤπερ ἐξ ἀρχῆς διενοήθη. γενομένης δὲ
λαμπρᾶς ἐπιβολῆς καὶ μηδὲ τῶν ἐπὶ στρατοπέδου
καρτερούντων, ἀλλὰ συντρεχόντων καὶ προσβοηθούντων,
ἀπεῖπον οἱ Τύριοι· καὶ τὴν πόλιν εἶλε
κατ᾿ ἐκείνην τὴν ἡμέραν.
3Μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα πολιορκοῦντι Γάζαν αὐτῷ, τῆς
Συρίας μεγίστην πόλιν, ἐμπίπτει βῶλος εἰς τὸν
ὦμον ἀφεθεὶς ἄνωθεν ὑπὸ ὄρνιθος. ὁ δὲ ὄρνις ἐφ᾿
ἓν τῶν μηχανημάτων καθίσας ἔλαθεν ἐνσχεθεὶς
τοῖς νευρίνοις κεκρυφάλοις, οἷς πρὸς τὰς ἐπιστροφὰς
4τῶν σχοινίων ἐχρῶντο. καὶ τὸ σημεῖον
ἀπέβη κατὰ τὴν Ἀριστάνδρου πρόρρησιν· ἐτρώθη
μὲν γὰρ Ἀλέξανδρος εἰς τὸν ὦμον, ἔλαβε δὲ τὴν
πόλιν. ἀποστέλλων δὲ πολλὰ τῶν λαφύρων
Ὀλυμπιάδι καὶ Κλεοπάτρᾳ καὶ τοῖς φίλοις, κατέπεμψε
καὶ Λεωνίδῃ τῷ παιδαγωγῷ τάλαντα
λιβανωτοῦ πεντακόσια καὶ σμύρνης ἑκατόν, ἀναμνησθεὶς
5παιδικῆς ἐλπίδος. ὁ γὰρ Λεωνίδης, ὡς
ἔοικεν, ἐν θυσίᾳ ποτὲ πρὸς τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον ἐπιδραξάμενον
ἀμφοτέραις ταῖς χερσὶ καὶ καθαγίσαντα
τοῦ θυμιάματος, “Ὅταν,” ἔφη, “τῆς
296Alexander, xxv.

to the bystanders that the city would certainly be captured during that month. His words produced laughter and jesting, since it was then the last day of the month, and the king, seeing that he was perplexed, and being always eager to support his prophecies, gave orders to reckon that day, not as the thirtieth of the month, but as the twenty-eighth; and then, after the trumpet had sounded the signal, he attacked the walls with greater vigour than he had at first intended. The assault became fierce, and even those troops which had been left in camp could not restrain themselves, but ran in throngs to help the assailants, and the Tyrians gave up the fight. So Alexander took the city on that day.
After this, as he was giving siege to Gaza,1 the principal city of Syria, a clod of earth, which had been dropped from on high by a bird, struck him on the shoulder. The bird alighted on one of the battering-engines, and was at once caught in the network of sinews which were used to give a twist to the ropes.2 And the omen was fulfilled as Aristander predicted; for though Alexander was wounded in the shoulder, he took the city. Moreover, as he was dispatching great quantities of the spoils home to Olympias and Cleopatra and his friends, he sent also to Leonidas his tutor five hundred talents’ weight of frankincense and a hundred of myrrh, in remembrance of the hope with which that teacher had inspired his boyhood. It would seem, namely, that Leonidas, as Alexander was one day sacrificing and taking incense with both hands to throw upon the altar-fire, said to him:—“Alexander,



1During September and October of 332 b.c.2Cf. Curtius, Hist. Alex. iv. 6, 11 f.297