Plutarch’s Lives
3δυνάμενος;” “Τούτῳ γοῦν,” ἔφη, “χρησαίμην ἂν
ἑτέρου βέλτιον.” “Ἄν δὲ μὴ χρήσῃ, τίνα δίκην
τῆς προπετείας ὑφέξεις;” “Ἐγώ, νὴ Δί᾿,” εἶπεν,
“ἀποτίσω τοῦ ἵππου τὴν τιμήν.” γενομένου δὲ
γέλωτος, εἶτα ὁρισμοῦ πρὸς ἀλλήλους εἰς τὸ
ἀργύριον, εὐθὺς προσδραμὼν τῷ ἵππῳ καὶ παραλαβὼν
τὴν ἡνίαν ἐπέστρεψε πρὸς τὸν ἥλιον, ὡς
ἔοικεν, ἐννοήσας ὅτι τὴν σκιὰν προπίπτουσαν
καὶ σαλευομένην ὁρῶν πρὸ αὑτοῦ διαταράττοιτο.
4μικρὰ δὲ οὕτω παρακαλπάσας καὶ καταψήσας,
ὡς ἑώρα πληρούμενον θυμοῦ καὶ πνεύματος, ἀπορρίψας
ἡσυχῆ τὴν χλαμύδα καὶ μετεωρίσας αὑτὸν
ἀσφαλῶς περιέβη. καὶ μικρὰ μὲν περιλαβὼν ταῖς
ἡνίαις τὸν χαλινὸν ἄνευ πληγῆς καὶ σπαραγμοῦ
προσανέστειλεν·1 ὡς δὲ ἑώρα τὸν ἵππον ἀφεικότα
τὴν ἀπειλήν, ὀργῶντα δὲ πρὸς τὸν δρόμον, ἐφεὶς
ἐδίωκεν ἤδη φωνῇ θρασυτέρᾳ καὶ ποδὸς κρούσει
5χρώμενος. τῶν δὲ περὶ τὸν Φίλιππον ἦν ἀγωνία
καὶ σιγὴ τὸ πρῶτον· ὡς δὲ κάμψας ἐπέστρεψεν
ὀρθῶς σοβαρὸς καὶ γεγηθώς, οἱ μὲν ἄλλοι πάντες
ἠλάλαξαν, ὁ δὲ πατὴρ καὶ δακρῦσαί τι λέγεται
πρὸς τὴν χαράν, καὶ καταβάντος αὐτοῦ τὴν κεφαλὴν
φιλήσας, “Ὦ παῖ,” φάναι, “ζήτει σεαυτῷ
βασιλείαν ἴσην· Μακεδονία γάρ σε οὐ χωρεῖ.”


VII. Καθορῶν δὲ τὴν φύσιν αὐτοῦ δυσκίνητον
μὲν οὖσαν ἐρίσαντος μὴ βιασθῆναι, ῥᾳδίως δὲ
ἀγομένην ὑπὸ λόγου πρὸς τὸ δέον, αὐτός τε πείθειν

1προσανέστειλεν Bekker has προσέστειλεν, with inferior MSS.238Alexander, vii.

“This horse, at any rate,” said Alexander, “I could manage better than others have.” “And if thou shouldst not, what penalty wilt thou undergo for thy rashness?” “Indeed,” said Alexander, “I will forfeit the price of the horse.” There was laughter at this, and then an agreement between father and son as to the forfeiture, and at once Alexander ran to the horse, took hold of his bridle-rein, and turned him towards the sun; for he had noticed, as it would seem, that the horse was greatly disturbed by the sight of his own shadow falling in front of him and dancing about. And after he had calmed the horse a little in this way, and had stroked him with his hand, when he saw that he was full of spirit and courage, he quietly cast aside his mantle and with a light spring safely bestrode him. Then, with a little pressure of the reins on the bit, and without striking him or tearing his mouth, he held him in hand;1 but when he saw that the horse was rid of the fear that had beset him, and was impatient for the course, he gave him his head, and at last urged him on with sterner tone and thrust of foot. Philip and his company were speechless with anxiety at first; but when Alexander made the turn in proper fashion and came back towards them proud and exultant, all the rest broke into loud cries, but his father, as we are told, actually shed tears of joy, and when Alexander had dismounted, kissed him, saying: “My son, seek thee out a kingdom equal to thyself; Macedonia has not room for thee.”


VII. And since Philip saw that his son’s nature was unyielding and that he resisted compulsion, but was easily led by reasoning into the path of duty,


1Amyot, “le remeit gentiment.”239