Plutarch’s Lives
4οὗτος γὰρ αὐτῷ πρότερον ἐντυχὼν
ἔφη τῶν ὀρῶν μάλιστα τὸν Θρᾴκιον Ἄθων διατύπωσιν
ἀνδρείκελον δέχεσθαι καὶ διαμόρφωσιν·
ἂν οὖν κελεύῃ, μονιμώτατον ἀγαλμάτων αὐτῷ
καὶ περιφανέστατον ἐξεργάσεσθαι τὸν Ἄθων, τῇ
μὲν ἀριστερᾷ χειρὶ περιλαμβάνοντα μυρίανδρον
πόλιν οἰκουμένην, τῇ δὲ δεξιᾷ σπένδοντα ποταμοῦ
ῥεῦμα δαψιλὲς εἰς τὴν θάλασσαν ἀπορρέοντος.
ταῦτα μὲν οὖν παρῃτήσατο, πολλῷ δὲ ἀτοπώτερα
καὶ δαπανηρότερα τούτων σοφιζόμενος τότε καὶ
συμμηχανώμενος τοῖς τεχνίταις διέτριβεν.


LXXIII. Εἰς δὲ Βαβυλῶνα προάγοντος αὐτοῦ
Νέαρχος (ἀφίκετο γὰρ αὖθις εἰσπλεύσας εἰς τὸν
Εὐφράτην διὰ τῆς μεγάλης θαλάσσης) ἔφη τινὰς
ἐντυχεῖν αὐτῷ Χαλδαίους, παραινοῦντας ἀπέχεσθαι
Βαβυλῶνος τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον. ὁ δὲ οὐκ
ἐφρόντισεν, ἀλλ᾿ ἐπορεύετο· καὶ πρὸς τοῖς τείχεσι
γενόμενος ὁρᾷ κόρακας πολλοὺς διαφερομένους
καὶ τύπτοντας ἀλλήλους, ὧν ἔνιοι κατέπεσον
2παρ᾿ αὐτόν. ἔπειτα μηνύσεως γενομένης κατὰ
Ἀπολλοδώρου τοῦ στρατηγοῦ τῆς Βαβυλῶνος ὡς
εἴη περὶ αὐτοῦ τεθυμένος, ἐκάλει Πυθαγόραν τὸν
μάντιν. οὐκ ἀρνουμένου δὲ τὴν πρᾶξιν ἠρώτησε
τῶν ἱερῶν τὸν τρόπον. φήσαντος δὲ ὅτι τὸ
ἧπαρ ἦν ἄλοβον, “Παπαί,” εἶπεν, “ἰσχυρὸν τὸ
σημεῖον·” καὶ τὸν Πυθαγόραν οὐδὲν ἠδίκησεν.
ἤχθετο δὲ μὴ πεισθεὶς τῷ Νεάρχῳ, καὶ τὰ πολλὰ
τῆς Βαβυλῶνος ἔξω κατασκηνῶν καὶ περιπλέων
426Alexander, lxxiii.

magnificence, boldness, and ostentation. This man, indeed, had said to him at a former interview that of all mountains the Thracian Athos could most readily be given the form and shape of a man; if, therefore, Alexander should so order, he would make out of Mount Athos a most enduring and most conspicuous statue of the king, which in its left hand should hold a city of ten thousand inhabitants, and with its right should pour forth a river running with generous current into the sea. This project, it is true, Alexander had declined; but now he was busy devising and contriving with his artists projects far more strange and expensive than this.


LXXIII. As he was on his way to enter Babylon, Nearchus (who had joined him again after sailing through the ocean into the Euphrates) told the king that certain Chaldaeans had met him and advised that Alexander should keep away from Babylon.1 Alexander paid no heed to this, but continued on his march; and when he was arrived at the walls, he saw many ravens flying about and clawing one another, and some of them fell dead at his feet. Again, being informed that Apollodorus the commandant of Babylon had sacrificed to learn Alexander’s fate, Alexander called Pythagoras the seer. Pythagoras did not deny the fact, whereupon Alexander asked him what was the character of the sacrifice. And when the seer told that the victim’s liver had no lobe, “Ah me!” said Alexander, “a forcible omen!” and did Pythagoras no harm. He was sorry, too, that he had not obeyed Nearchus, and passed most of his time outside of Babylon, either


1According to Arrian (Anab. vii. 16, 5), the Chaldaeans besought Alexander in person to suspend his march to Babylon. It was in the spring of 323 b.c.427