Plutarch’s Lives

αὐτῷ, πρὸς μὲν τὸ ἄριστον, νυκτοπορίαν, πρὸς δὲ
τὸ δεῖπνον, ὀλιγαριστίαν. “Ὁ δ᾿ αὐτὸς οὗτος
ἀνήρ,” ἔφη, “καὶ τῶν στρωμάτων ἐπιὼν τὰ ἀγγεῖα
καὶ τῶν ἱματίων ἔλυεν, ἐπισκοπῶν μή τί
μοι τρυφερὸν ἢ περισσὸν ἡ μήτηρ ἐντέθεικεν.”


XXIII. Ἦν δὲ καὶ πρὸς οἶνον ἧττον ἢ ἐδόκει
καταφερής. ἔδοξε δὲ διὰ τὸν χρόνον ὃν οὐ πίνων
μᾶλλον ἢ λαλῶν εἷλκεν ἐφ᾿ ἑκάστης κύλικος, ἀει
μακρόν τινα λόγον διατιθέμενος, καὶ ταῦτα πολλῆς
σχολῆς οὔσης. ἐπεὶ πρός γε τὰς πράξεις οὐκ
οἶνος ἐκεῖνον, οὐχ ὕπνος, οὐ παιδιά τις, οὐ γάμος,
οὐ θέα, καθάπερ ἄλλους στρατηγούς, ἐπέσχε.
2δηλοῖ δὲ ὁ βίος, ὃν βιώσας βραχὺν παντάπασι,
πλείστων καὶ μεγίστων πράξεων ἐνέπλησεν. ἐν
δὲ ταῖς σχολαῖς πρῶτον μὲν ἀναστὰς καὶ θύσας
τοῖς θεοῖς εὐθὺς ἠρίστα καθήμενος· ἔπειτα διημέρευε
κυνηγῶν ἢ δικάζων ἢ συντάττων τι τῶν
πολεμικῶν ἢ ἀναγινώσκων. εἰ δὲ ὁδὸν βαδίζοι
μὴ λίαν ἐπείγουσαν, ἐμάνθανεν ἅμα πορευόμενος
ἢ τοξεύειν ἢ ἐπιβαίνειν ἅρματος ἐλαυνομένου καὶ
3ἀποβαίνειν. πολλάκις δὲ παίζων καὶ ἀλώπεκας
ἐθήρευε καὶ ὄρνιθας, ὡς ἔστι λαβεῖν ἐκ τῶν ἐφημερίδων.
καταλύσας δὲ καὶ τρεπόμενος πρὸς
λουτρὸν ἢ ἄλειμμα, τοὺς ἐπὶ τῶν σιτοποιῶν καὶ
μαγείρων ἀνέκρινεν εἰ τὰ πρὸς τὸ δεῖπνον εὐτρεπῶς
ἔχουσι. καὶ δειπνεῖν μὲν ὀψὲ καὶ σκότους
ἤδη κατακλινόμενος ἤρχετο, θαυμαστὴ δὲ ἦν ἡ
ἐπιμέλεια καὶ περίβλεψις ἐπὶ τῆς τραπέζης, ὅπως
μηδὲν ἀνίσως μηδὲ ὀλιγώρως διανέμοιτο· τὸν δὲ
288Alexander, xxiii.

namely, a night march, and for his supper, a light breakfast. “And this same Leonidas,” he said, “used to come and open my chests of bedding and clothing, to see that my mother did not hide there for me some luxury or superfluity.”


XXIII. To the use of wine also he was less addicted than was generally believed. The belief arose from the time which he would spend over each cup, more in talking than in drinking, always holding some long discourse, and this too when he had abundant leisure. For in the stress of affairs he was not to be detained, as other commanders were, either by wine, or sleep, or any sport, or amour, or spectacle. This is proved by his life, which, though altogether brief, he filled to overflowing with the greatest exploits. In his times of leisure, however, after rising and sacrificing to the gods, he immediately took breakfast sitting; then, he would spend the day in hunting, or administering justice, or arranging his military affairs, or reading. If he were making a march which was not very urgent, he would practise, as he went along, either archery or mounting and dismounting from a chariot that was under way. Often, too, for diversion, he would hunt foxes or birds, as may be gathered from his journals. After he had taken quarters for the night, and while he was enjoying bath or anointing, he would enquire of his chief cooks and bakers whether the arrangements for his supper were duly made. When it was late and already dark, he would begin his supper, reclining on a couch, and marvellous was his care and circumspection at table, in order that everything might be served impartially and without stint; but
289