Plutarch’s Lives

καθάπερ ἐξ ἀχανοῦς προσήχει πελάγους,
6θαυμάσαντες τὸ πλῆθος καὶ πρὸς ἀλλήλους
διαλεχθέντες ὡς μέγα καὶ χαλεπὸν ἔργον εἴη
συμπεσόντας ἐκ προφανοῦς τοσοῦτον ὤσασθαι
πόλεμον, ἀπὸ τῶν ἱερῶν γενομένῳ τῷ βασιλεῖ
προσελθόντες ἔπειθον αὐτὸν ἐπιχειρῆσαι νύκτωρ
τοῖς πολεμίοις καὶ τῷ σκότῳ τὸ φοβερώτατον
7συγκαλύψαι τοῦ μέλλοντος ἀγῶνος. ὁ δὲ τὸ
μνημονευόμενον εἰπών, “Οὐ κλέπτω τὴν νίκην,”
ἐνίοις μὲν ἔδοξε μειρακιώδη καὶ κενὴν ἀπόκρισιν
πεποιῆσθαι, παίζων πρὸς τοσοῦτον κίνδυνον,
ἐνίοις δὲ καὶ τῷ παρόντι θαρρεῖν καὶ στοχάζεσθαι
τοῦ μέλλοντος ὀρθῶς, μὴ διδοὺς πρόφασιν ἡττηθέντι
Δαρείῳ πρὸς ἄλλην αὖθις ἀναθαρρῆσαι
πεῖραν, αἰτιωμένῳ τούτων νύκτα καὶ σκότος,
ὡς ὄρη καὶ στενὰ καὶ θάλασσαν τῶν προτέρων.
8οὐ γὰρ ὅπλων οὐδὲ σωμάτων ἀπορίᾳ παύσεσθαι
πολεμοῦντα Δαρεῖον ἀπὸ τηλικαύτης δυνάμεως
καὶ χώρας τοσαύτης, ἀλλ᾿ ὅταν ἀφῇ τὸ φρόνημα
καὶ τὴν ἐλπίδα, δι᾿ ἐμφανοῦς ἥττης κατὰ κράτος
ἐξελεγχθείς.


XXXII. Ἀπελθόντων δὲ τούτων κατακλιθεὶς
ὑπὸ σκηνὴν λέγεται τὸ λοιπὸν μέρος τῆς νυκτὸς
ὕπνῳ βαθεῖ κρατηθῆναι παρὰ τὸ εἰωθός, ὥστε
θαυμάζειν ἐπελθόντας ὄρθρου τοὺς ἡγεμόνας καὶ
παρ᾿ αὑτῶν ἐξενεγκεῖν παράγγελμα πρῶτον
ἀριστοποιεῖσθαι τοὺς στρατιώτας· ἔπειτα τοῦ
καιροῦ κατεπείγοντος εἰσελθόντα Παρμενίωνα
καὶ παραστάντα τῇ κλίνῃ δὶς ἢ τρὶς αὐτοῦ φθέγξασθαι
τοὔνομα· καὶ διεγερθέντος οὕτως ἐρωτᾶν
318Alexander, xxxii.

if from a vast ocean, were astonished at their multitude and argued with one another that it was a great and grievous task to repel such a tide of war by engaging in broad day-light. They therefore waited upon the king when he had finished his sacrifices, and tried to persuade him to attack the enemy by night, and so to cover up with darkness the most fearful aspect of the coming struggle. But he gave them the celebrated answer, “I will not steal my victory”; whereupon some thought that he had made a vainglorious reply, and was jesting in the presence of so great a peril. Others, however, thought that he had confidence in the present situation and estimated the future correctly, not offering Dareius in case of defeat an excuse to pluck up courage again for another attempt, by laying the blame this time upon darkness and night, as he had before upon mountains, defiles, and sea.1 For Dareius would not give up the war for lack of arms or men when he could draw from so great a host and so vast a territory, but only when he had lost courage and hope, under the conviction brought by a downright defeat in broad day-light.


XXXII. After the men were gone, Alexander lay down in his tent, and is said to have passed the rest of the night in a deeper sleep than usual, so that when his officers came to him in the early morning they were amazed, and on their own authority issued orders that the soldiers should first take breakfast. Then, since the occasion was urgent, Parmenio entered the tent, and standing by his couch called Alexander twice or thrice by name; and when he


1Cf. Arrian, Anab. iii. 10, where it is Parmenio who advises a night attack.319