Plutarch’s Lives

οὐ μὴν ἀλλὰ ταχέως ἀναληφθεὶς ὑπὸ τοῦ Φιλίππου
καὶ ῥαΐσας αὑτὸν ἐπέδειξε τοῖς Μακεδόσιν·
οὐ γὰρ ἐπαύοντο πρὶν ἰδεῖν τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον
ἀθυμοῦντες.


XX. Ἦν δέ τις ἐν τῷ Δαρείου στρατῷ πεφευγὼς
ἐκ Μακεδονίας ἀνὴρ Μακεδών, Ἀμύντας,
οὐκ ἄπειρος τῆς Ἀλεξάνδρου φύσεως. οὗτος
ὡρμημένον ἰδὼν Δαρεῖον εἴσω τῶν στενῶν βαδίζειν
ἐπ᾿ Ἀλέξανδρον, ἐδεῖτο κατὰ χώραν ὑπομένειν,
ἐν πλάτος ἔχουσι πεδίοις καὶ ἀναπεπταμένοις
πρὸς ἐλάττονας πλήθει τοσούτῳ διαμαχούμενον.
2ἀποκριναμένου δὲ Δαρείου δεδιέναι μὴ
φθάσωσιν αὐτὸν ἀποδράντες οἱ πολέμιοι καὶ
διαφυγὼν Ἀλέξανδρος, “Ἀλλὰ τούτου γε,” εἶπεν,
“ὦ βασιλεῦ, χάριν θάρρει· βαδιεῖται γὰρ ἐκεῖνος
ἐπὶ σέ, καὶ σχεδὸν ἤδη βαδίζει.” ταῦτα λέγων
Ἀμύντας οὐκ ἔπειθεν, ἀλλ᾿ ἀναστὰς ἐπορεύετο
Δαρεῖος εἰς Κιλικίαν, ἅμα δὲ Ἀλέξανδρος εἰς
3Συρίαν ἐπ᾿ ἐκεῖνον. ἐν δὲ τῇ νυκτὶ διαμαρτόντες
ἀλλήλων αὖθις ἀνέστρεφον, Ἀλέξανδρος μὲν
ἡδόμενός τε τῇ συντυχίᾳ καὶ σπεύδων ἀπαντῆσαι
περὶ τὰ στενά, Δαρεῖος δὲ τὴν προτέραν ἀναλαβεῖν
στρατοπεδείαν καὶ τῶν στενῶν ἐξελίξαι
τὴν δύναμιν. ἤδη γὰρ ἐγνώκει παρὰ τὸ συμφέρον
ἐμβεβληκὼς ἑαυτὸν εἰς χωρία θαλάττῃ καὶ ὄρεσι
καὶ ποταμῷ διὰ μέσου ῥέοντι τῷ Πινάρῳ δύσιππα,
καὶ διεσπασμένα πολλαχοῦ, καὶ πρὸς
τῆς ὀλιγότητος τῶν πολεμίων ἔχοντα τὴν θέσιν.
4Ἀλεξάνδρῳ δὲ τὸν μὲν τόπον ἡ τύχη παρέσχεν,
278Alexander, xx.

was speedily restored to his senses by Philip, and when he had recovered strength he showed himself to the Macedonians, who refused to be comforted until they had seen Alexander.


XX. Now, there was in the army of Dareius a certain Macedonian who had fled from his country, Amyntas by name, and he was well acquainted with the nature of Alexander. This man, when he saw that Dareius was eager to attack Alexander within the narrow passes of the mountains, begged him to remain where he was, that he might fight a decisive battle with his vast forces against inferior numbers in plains that were broad and spacious. And when Dareius replied that he was afraid the enemy would run away before he could get at them, and Alexander thus escape him, “Indeed,” said Amyntas, “on this point, O king, thou mayest be without fear; for he will march against thee, nay, at this very moment, probably, he is on the march.” Dareius would not listen to these words of Amyntas, but broke camp and marched into Cilicia, and at the same time Alexander marched into Syria against him. But having missed one another in the night, they both turned back again, Alexander rejoicing in his good fortune, and eager to meet his enemy in the passes, while Dareius was as eager to extricate his forces from the passes and regain his former camping-ground. For he already saw that he had done wrong to throw himself into places which were rendered unfit for cavalry by sea and mountains and a river running through the middle (the Pinarus), which were broken up in many parts, and favoured the small numbers of his enemy. And not only was the place for the battle a gift of Fortune to Alexander, but
279