Plutarch’s Lives

ἦσαν αὐτοῦ τροφεῖς καὶ παιδαγωγοὶ καὶ διδάσκαλοι
λεγόμενοι, πᾶσι δ᾿ ἐφειστήκει Λεωνίδας, ἀνὴρ
τό τε ἦθος αὐστηρὸς καὶ συγγενὴς Ὀλυμπιάδος,
αὐτὸς μὲν οὐ φεύγων τὸ τῆς παιδαγωγίας ὄνομα
καλὸν ἔργον ἐχούσης καὶ λαμπρόν, ὑπὸ δὲ τῶν
ἄλλων διὰ τὸ ἀξίωμα καὶ τὴν οἰκειότητα τροφεὺς
5Ἀλεξάνδρου καὶ καθηγητὴς καλούμενος. ὁ δὲ
τὸ σχῆμα τοῦ παιδαγωγοῦ καὶ τὴν προσηγορίαν
ὑποποιούμενος ἦν Λυσίμαχος, τῷ γένει Ἀκαρνάν,
ἄλλο μὲν οὐδὲν ἔχων ἀστεῖον, ὅτι δ᾿ ἑαυτὸν μὲν
ὠνόμαζε Φοίνικα, τὸν δὲ Ἀλέξανδρον Ἀχιλλέα,
Πηλέα δὲ τὸν Φίλιππον, ἠγαπᾶτο καὶ δευτέραν
εἶχε χώραν.


VI. Ἐπεὶ δὲ Φιλονείκου τοῦ Θεσσαλοῦ τὸν
Βουκεφάλαν ἀγαγόντος ὤνιον τῷ Φιλίππῳ τρισκαίδεκα
ταλάντων κατέβησαν εἰς τὸ πεδίον δοκιμάσοντες
τὸν ἵππον, ἐδόκει τε χαλεπὸς εἶναι καὶ
κομιδῆ δύσχρηστος, οὔτε ἀναβάτην προσιέμενος
οὔτε φωνὴν ὑπομένων τινὸς τῶν περὶ τὸν Φίλιππον,
ἀλλ᾿ ἁπάντων κατεξανιστάμενος, δυσχεραίνοντος
2δὲ τοῦ Φιλίππου καὶ κελεύοντος ἀπάγειν
ὡς παντάπασιν ἄγριον καὶ ἀκόλαστον, παρὼν
Ἀλέξανδρος εἶπεν “Οἷον ἵππον ἀπολλύουσι δι᾿
ἀπειρίαν καὶ μαλακίαν χρήσασθαι μὴ δυνάμενοι,”
τὸ μὲν οὖν πρῶτον ὁ Φίλιππος ἐσιώπησε· πολλάκις
δὲ αὐτοῦ παραφθεγγομένου καὶ περιπαθοῦντος,
“Ἐπιτιμᾷς σύ,” ἔφη, “πρεσβυτέροις ὥς τι
πλέον αὐτὸς εἰδὼς ἢ μᾶλλον ἵππῳ χρήσασθαι
236Alexander, vi.

as was natural, were appointed to be his nurturers, tutors, and teachers, but over them all stood Leonidas, a man of stern temperament and a kinsman of Olympias. Although he did not himself shun the title of tutor, since the office afforded an honourable and brilliant occupation, yet by other people, owing to his dignity and his relationship, he was called Alexander’s foster-father and preceptor. The man, however, who assumed the character and the title of tutor was Lysimachus, a native of Acarnania, who had no general refinement, but because he called himself Phoenix,1 Alexander Achilles, and Philip Peleus, was highly regarded and held a second place.


VI. Once upon a time Philoneicus the Thessalian brought Bucephalas, offering to sell him to Philip for thirteen talents,2 and they went down into the plain to try the horse, who appeared to be savage and altogether intractable, neither allowing any one to mount him, nor heeding the voice of any of Philip’s attendants, but rearing up against all of them. Then Philip was vexed and ordered the horse to be led away, believing him to be altogether wild and unbroken; but Alexander, who was near by, said: “What a horse they are losing, because, for lack of skill and courage, they cannot manage him!” At first, then, Philip held his peace; but as Alexander many times let fall such words and showed great distress, he said: “Dost thou find fault with thine elders in the belief that thou knowest more than they do or art better able to manage a horse?”



1The preceptor of Achilles.2The talent was worth about £235, or $1,200, with four or five times the purchasing power of modern money.237