Plutarch’s Lives

ἀρωματοφόρου κρατήσῃς, Ἀλέξανδρε, πλουσίως
οὕτως ἐπιθυμιάσεις· νῦν δὲ φειδομένως χρῶ τοῖς
παροῦσι.” τότε οὖν Ἀλέξανδρος ἔγραψε πρὸς
αὐτόν· “Ἀπεστάλκαμέν σοι λιβανωτὸν ἄφθονον
καὶ σμύρναν, ὅπως παύσῃ πρὸς τοὺς θεοὺς μικρολογούμενος.”


XXVI. Κιβωτίου δέ τινος αὐτῷ προσενεχθέντος,
οὗ πολυτελέστερον οὐδὲν ἐφάνη τοῖς τὰ
Δαρείου χρήματα καὶ τὰς ἀποσκευὰς παραλαμβάνουσιν,
ἠρώτα τοὺς φίλους ὅ τι δοκοίη μάλιστα
τῶν ἀξίων σπουδῆς εἰς αὐτὸ καταθέσθαι· πολλὰ
δὲ πολλῶν λεγόντων αὐτὸς ἔφη τὴν Ἰλιάδα
2φρουρήσειν ἐνταῦθα καταθέμενος. καὶ ταῦτα μὲν
οὐκ ὀλίγοι τῶν ἀξιοπίστων μεμαρτυρήκασιν. εἰ
δ᾿, ὅπερ Ἀλεξανδρεῖς λέγουσιν Ἡρακλείδῃ πιστεύοντες,
ἀληθές ἐστιν, οὔκουν ἀργὸς οὐδὲ ἀσύμβολος
αὐτῷ συστρατεύειν ἔοικεν Ὅμηρος. λέγουσι
γὰρ ὅτι τῆς Αἰγύπτου κρατήσας ἐβούλετο πόλιν
μεγάλην καὶ πολυάνθρωπον Ἑλληνίδα συνοικίσας
ἐπώνυμον ἑαυτοῦ καταλιπεῖν, καί τινα τόπον
γνώμῃ τῶν ἀρχιτεκτόνων ὅσον οὐδέπω διεμετρεῖτο
3καὶ περιέβαλλεν. εἶτα νύκτωρ κοιμώμενος ὄψιν
εἶδε θαυμαστήν· ἀνὴρ πολιὸς εὖ μάλα τὴν κόμην
καὶ γεραρὸς τὸ εἶδος ἔδοξεν αὐτῷ παραστὰς
λέγειν τὰ ἔπη τάδε·

Νῆσος ἔπειτά τις ἔστι πολυκλύστῳ ἐνὶ πόντῳ,
Αἰγύπτου προπάροιθε· Φάρον δέ ἑ κικλήσκουσιν.

εὐθὺς οὖν ἐξαναστὰς ἐβάδιζεν ἐπὶ τὴν Φάρον, ἣ
τότε μὲν ἔτι νῆσος ἦν, τοῦ Κανωβικοῦ μικρὸν
ἀνωτέρω στόματος, νῦν δὲ διὰ χώματος ἀνείληπται
298Alexander, xxvi.

when thou hast conquered the spice-bearing regions thou canst be thus lavish with thine incense; now, however, use sparingly what thou hast.” Accordingly, Alexander now wrote him: “I have sent thee myrrh and frankincense in abundance, that thou mayest stop dealing parsimoniously with the gods.”


XXVI. When a small coffer was brought to him, which those in charge of the baggage and wealth of Dareius thought the most precious thing there, he asked his friends what valuable object they thought would most fittingly be deposited in it. And when many answered and there were many opinions, Alexander himself said he was going to deposit the Iliad there for safe keeping.1 This is attested by many trustworthy authorities. And if what the Alexandrians tell us on the authority of Heracleides is true, then it would seem that Homer was no idle or unprofitable companion for him in his expedition. They say, namely, that after his conquest of Egypt he wished to found a large and populous Greek city which should bear his name, and by the advice of his architects was on the point of measuring off and enclosing a certain site for it. Then, in the night, as he lay asleep, he saw a wonderful vision. A man with very hoary locks and of a venerable aspect appeared to stand by his side and recite these verses:—

“Now, there is an island in the much-dashing sea,
In front of Egypt; Pharos is what men call it.”2

Accordingly, he rose up at once and went to Pharos, which at that time was still an island, a little above the Canobic mouth of the Nile, but now it has been



1Cf. chapter viii. 2.2Odyssey, iv. 354 f.299