Plutarch’s Lives

πρῶτος ἀποθανῇ τοιαῦτα κρίνων.” “Οὐκ ἄν γε,”
εἶπεν, “ὦ βασιλεῦ, εἰ μὴ σὺ ψεύδῃ φήσας πρῶτον
ἀποκτενεῖν τὸν ἀποκρινάμενον κάκιστα.”


LXV. Τούτους μὲν οὖν ἀφῆκε δωρησάμενος·
πρὸς δὲ τοὺς ἐν δόξῃ μάλιστα καὶ καθ᾿ αὑτοὺς ἐν
ἡσυχίᾳ ζῶντας ἔπεμψεν Ὀνησίκριτον, ἀφικέσθαι
δεόμενος πρὸς αὑτόν. ὁ δὲ Ὀνησίκριτος ἦν φιλόσοφος
τῶν Διογένει τῷ Κυνικῷ συνεσχολακότων.
2καί φησι τὸν μὲν Καλανὸν ὑβριστικῶς πάνυ καὶ
τραχέως κελεύειν ἀποδύντα τὸν χιτῶνα γυμνὸν
ἀκροᾶσθαι τῶν λόγων· ἄλλως δὲ οὐ διαλέξεσθαι
πρὸς αὐτόν, οὐδ᾿ εἰ παρὰ τοῦ Διὸς ἀφῖκται· τὸν
δὲ Δάνδαμιν πραότερον εἶναι, καὶ διακούσαντα
περὶ Σωκράτους καὶ Πυθαγόρου καὶ Διογένους
εἰπεῖν ὡς εὐφυεῖς μὲν αὐτῷ γεγονέναι δοκοῦσιν οἱ
ἄνδρες, λίαν δὲ τοὺς νόμους αἰσχυνόμενοι βεβιωκέναι.
3ἄλλοι δέ φασι τὸν Δάνδαμιν οὐδὲν εἰπεῖν
ἀλλ᾿ ἢ τοσοῦτον μόνον· “Τίνος χάριν ὁ Ἀλέξανδρος
ὁδὸν τοσαύτην δεῦρ᾿ ἦλθε;” τὸν μέντοι
Καλανὸν ἔπεισεν ὁ Ταξίλης ἐλθεῖν πρὸς Ἀλέξανδρον.
ἐκαλεῖτο δὲ Σφίνης· ἐπεὶ δὲ κατ᾿
Ἰνδικὴν γλῶτταν τῷ Καλὲ προσαγορεύων ἀντὶ
τοῦ Χαίρειν τοὺς ἐντυγχάνοντας ἠσπάζετο, Καλανὸς
ὑπὸ τῶν Ἑλλήνων ὠνομάσθη. τοῦτον δὲ
λέγεται καὶ τὸ παράδειγμα τῆς ἀρχῆς τῷ Ἀλεξάνδρῳ
4προθέσθαι. καταβαλὼν γὰρ ἐν μέσῳ
βύρσαν τινὰ ξηρὰν καὶ κατεσκληκυῖαν ἐπάτησε
τὸ ἄκρον· ἡ δὲ εἰς ἓν πιεσθεῖσα τοῖς ἄλλοις ἐπήρθη
μέρεσι. καὶ τοῦτο περιϊὼν ἐν κύκλῳ καὶ
πιέζων καθ᾿ ἕκαστον ἐδείκνυε γιγνόμενον, ἄχρι οὗ
τὸ μέσον ἐπιστὰς κατέσχε καὶ πάντα οὕτως ἠρέμησεν.
408Alexander, lxv.

die first for giving such a verdict.” “That cannot be, O King,” said the judge, “unless thou falsely saidst that thou wouldst put to death first him who answered worst.”


LXV. These philosophers, then, he dismissed with gifts; but to those who were in the highest repute and lived quietly by themselves he sent Onesicritus, asking them to pay him a visit. Now, Onesicritus was a philosopher of the school of Diogenes the Cynic. And he tells us that Calanus very harshly and insolently bade him strip off his tunic and listen naked to what he had to say, otherwise he would not converse with him, not even if he came from Zeus; but he says that Dandamis was gentler, and that after hearing fully about Socrates, Pythagoras, and Diogenes, he remarked that the men appeared to him to have been of good natural parts but to have passed their lives in too much awe of the laws. Others, however, say that the only words uttered by Dandamis were these: “Why did Alexander make such a long journey hither?” Calanus, nevertheless, was persuaded by Taxiles to pay a visit to Alexander. His real name was Sphines, but because he greeted those whom he met with “Cale,” the Indian word of salutation, the Greeks called him Calanus. It was Calanus, as we are told, who laid before Alexander the famous illustration of government. It was this. He threw down upon the ground a dry and shrivelled hide, and set his foot upon the outer edge of it; the hide was pressed down in one place, but rose up in others. He went all round the hide and showed that this was the result wherever he pressed the edge down, and then at last he stood in the middle of it, and lo! it was all held down firm and still.
409