Plutarch’s Lives


LXVIII. Ἐνταῦθα τῶν περὶ Νέαρχον ἀναβάντων
πρὸς αὐτὸν ἡσθεὶς καὶ διακούσας τὰ περὶ
τὸν πλοῦν, ὥρμησεν αὐτὸς πλεύσας κατὰ τὸν
Εὐφράτην στόλῳ μεγάλῳ, εἶτα περὶ τὴν Ἀραβίαν
καὶ τὴν Λιβύην παρακομισθεὶς διὰ στηλῶν Ἡρακλείων
ἐμβαλεῖν εἰς τὴν ἐντὸς θάλασσαν. καὶ
πλοῖα παντοδαπὰ περὶ Θάψακον ἐπήγνυτο, καὶ
συνήγοντο ναῦται καὶ κυβερνῆται πανταχόθεν.
2ἡ δὲ ἄνω στρατεία χαλεπὴ γενομένη καὶ τὸ περὶ
Μαλλοὺς τραῦμα καὶ ἡ φθορὰ πολλὴ λεχθεῖσα
τῆς δυνάμεως ἀπιστίᾳ τῆς σωτηρίας αὐτοῦ τά τε
ὑπήκοα πρὸς ἀποστάσεις ἐπῆρε καὶ τοῖς στρατηγοῖς
καὶ σατράπαις ἀδικίαν1 πολλὴν καὶ πλεονεξίαν
καὶ ὕβριν ἐνεποίησε· καὶ ὅλως διέδραμε
3σάλος ἁπάντων καὶ νεωτερισμός. ὅπου καὶ
πρὸς Ἀντίπατρον Ὀλυμπιὰς καὶ Κλεοπάτρα
στασιάσασαι διείλοντο τὴν ἀρχήν, Ὀλυμπιὰς
μὲν Ἤπειρον, Κλεοπάτρα δὲ Μακεδονίαν παραλαβοῦσα.
καὶ τοῦτο ἀκούσας Ἀλέξανδρος βέλτιον
ἔφη βεβουλεῦσθαι τὴν μητέρα· Μακεδόνας
γὰρ οὐκ ἂν ὑπομεῖναι βασιλευομένους ὑπὸ
γυναικός.
Διὰ ταῦτα Νέαρχον μὲν αὖθις ἐπὶ θάλασσαν
ἔπεμψεν, ἐμπλῆσαι πολέμων ἅπασαν ἐγνωκὼς
τὴν παραλίαν, αὐτὸς δὲ καταβαίνων ἐκόλαζε τοὺς703
4πονηροὺς τῶν στρατηγῶν. τῶν δὲ Ἀβουλήτου
παίδων ἕνα μὲν Ὀξυάρτην αὐτὸς ἀπέκτεινε
σαρίσῃ διελάσας, Ἀβουλήτου δὲ μηδὲν τῶν
ἀναγκαίων παρασκευάσαντος, ἀλλ᾿ ἢ τρισχίλια
τάλαντα νομίσματος αὐτῷ προσαγαγόντος, ἐκέλευσε

1ἀδικίαν Bekker reads ἀκηδίαν (indifference) with a Munich MS. (M.).414Alexander, lxviii.


LXVIII. Here Nearchus came up to meet him, and Alexander was so delighted to hear of his voyage that he eagerly desired to sail down the Euphrates himself with a large fleet,1 and then, after circumnavigating Arabia and Africa, to enter the Mediterranean by way of the pillars of Heracles. And vessels of every sort were built for him at Thapsacus, and sailors and pilots were assembled from all parts. But the increasing difficulties of his march back, his wound among the Malli, and the losses in his army, which were reported to be heavy, led men to doubt his safe return, inclined subject peoples to revolt, and bred great injustice, rapacity, and insolence in the generals and satraps whom he had appointed. In a word, restlessness and a desire for change spread everywhere. For even against Antipater, Olympias and Cleopatra had raised a faction, and had divided his realm between them, Olympias taking Epirus, and Cleopatra Macedonia. When he heard of this, Alexander said that his mother had made the better choice; for the Macedonians would not submit to be reigned over by a woman.
For these reasons he sent Nearchus back to the sea,2 determined to fill all the regions along the sea with wars, while he himself, marching down from Upper Asia, chastised those of his commanders who had done wrong. One of the sons of Abuletes, Oxyartes, he slew with his own hand, running him through with a spear; and when Abuletes failed to furnish him with the necessary provisions, but brought him instead three thousand talents in coin, Alexander



1It was after his return to Persepolis that this desire seized him (Arrian, Anab. vii. 1, 1).2Early in 324 b.c.415