Plutarch’s Lives

ἀφαιρεῖσθαι παραμυθίαν, τὸ δοκεῖν ὑπ᾿ ἀνδρὸς
ἡττῆσθαι κρείττονος ἢ κατὰ τὴν ἀνθρωπίνην φύσιν,
ἀλλὰ καὶ θαυμάζειν Ἀλέξανδρον ὡς πλείονα
ταῖς Περσῶν γυναιξὶ σωφροσύνην ἢ Πέρσαις
6ἀνδρείαν ἐπιδεδειγμένον. ἅμα δὲ ὅρκους τε φρικώδεις
τοῦ θαλαμηπόλου κινοῦντος ὑπὲρ τούτων,
καὶ περὶ τῆς ἄλλης ἐγκρατείας καὶ μεγαλοψυχίας
τῆς Ἀλεξάνδρου λέγοντος, ἐξελθὼν πρὸς τοὺς
ἑταίρους ὁ Δαρεῖος καὶ χεῖρας ἀνατείνας πρὸς τὸν
οὐρανὸν ἐπεύξατο· “Θεοὶ γενέθλιοι καὶ βασίλειοι,
μάλιστα μὲν ἐμοὶ διδοίητε τὴν Περσῶν τύχην εἰς
ὀρθὸν αὖθις σταθεῖσαν ἐφ᾿ οἷς ἐδεξάμην ἀγαθοῖς
ἀπολιπεῖν, ἵνα κρατήσας ἀμείψωμαι τὰς Ἀλεξάνδρου
χάριτας ὧν εἰς τὰ φίλτατα πταίσας ἔτυχον·
7εἰ δ᾿ ἄρα τις οὗτος εἱμαρτὸς ἥκει χρόνος, ὀφειλόμενος
νεμέσει καὶ μεταβολῇ, παύσασθαι τὰ Περσῶν,
μηδεὶς ἄλλος ἀνθρώπων καθίσειεν εἰς τὸν
Κύρου θρόνον πλὴν Ἀλεξάνδρου.” ταῦτα μὲν
οὕτω γενέσθαι τε καὶ λεχθῆναί φασιν οἱ πλεῖστοι
τῶν συγγραφέων.


XXXI. Ἀλέξανδρος δὲ τὴν ἐντὸς τοῦ Εὐφράτου
πᾶσαν ὑφ᾿ ἑαυτῷ ποιησάμενος ἤλαυνεν ἐπὶ
Δαρεῖον ἑκατὸν μυριάσι στρατοῦ καταβαίνοντα.
καί τις αὐτῷ φράζει τῶν ἑταίρων, ὡς δὴ γέλωτος
ἄξιον πρᾶγμα, τοὺς ἀκολούθους παίζοντας εἰς
δύο μέρη διῃρηκέναι σφᾶς αὐτούς, ὧν ἑκατέρου
στρατηγὸν εἶναι καὶ ἡγεμόνα, τὸν μὲν Ἀλέξανδρον,
τὸν δὲ Δαρεῖον ὑπ᾿ αὐτῶν προσαγορευόμενον·
2ἀρξαμένους δὲ βώλοις ἀκροβολίζεσθαι
πρὸς ἀλλήλους, εἶτα πυγμαῖς, τέλος ἐκκεκαῦσθαι
τῇ φιλονεικίᾳ καὶ μέχρι λίθων καὶ ξύλων, πολλούς
314Alexander, xxxi.

namely, the belief that he had been conquered by a man who was superior to human nature; nay, he should even admire Alexander for having shown greater self-restraint in dealing with Persian women than valour against Persian men. Then, while the eunuch was confirming his testimony with the most solemn oaths, and discoursing on the general self-mastery
and magnanimity of Alexander, Dareius went out to his companions, and lifting his hands towards heaven, prayed: “O ye gods of my race and kingdom, above all things else grant that I may leave the fortune of Persia reëstablished in the prosperity wherein I found it, in order that my victory may enable me to requite Alexander for the favours which I received at his hands when I had lost my dearest possessions; but if, then, a fated time has now come, due to divine jealousy and the vicissitudes of things, and the sway of the Persians must cease, grant that no other man may sit upon the throne of Cyrus but Alexander.” That these things were thus done and said is the testimony of most historians.1


XXXI. But to return to Alexander, when he had subdued all the country on this side of the Euphrates, he marched against Dareius,2 who was coming down to meet him with a million men. On this march one of his companions told him, as a matter worth laughing at, that the camp-followers, in sport, had divided themselves into two bands, and set a general and commander over each of them, one of whom they called Alexander, and the other Dareius; and that they had begun by pelting one another with clods of earth, then had fought with their fists, and finally, heated with the desire of battle, had taken



1Cf. Arrian, Anab. iv. 20.2In June or July of 331 b.c.315