Plutarch’s Lives

γονεῦσιν, οὐ τοιούτους παραλαβόντα. πάντας
οὖν ἐκέλευον ἀφιέναι καὶ πάντας ἀχρήστους
νομίζειν Μακεδόνας, ἔχοντα τοὺς νέους τούτους
πυρριχιστάς, σὺν οἷς ἐπιὼν κατακτήσεται τὴν
3οἰκουμένην. πρὸς ταῦτα χαλεπῶς ὁ Ἀλέξανδρος
ἔσχε, καὶ πολλὰ μὲν ἐλοιδόρησεν αὐτοὺς πρὸς
ὀργήν, ἀπελάσας δὲ τὰς φυλακὰς παρέδωκε
Πέρσαις καὶ κατέστησεν ἐκ τούτων δορυφόρους
καὶ ῥαβδοφόρους, ὑφ᾿ ὧν ὁρῶντες αὐτὸν παραπεμπόμενον,
αὑτοὺς δὲ ἀπειργομένους καὶ προπηλακιζομένους,
ἐταπεινοῦντο· καὶ διδόντες λόγον
εὕρισκον αὑτοὺς ὀλίγου δεῖν μανέντας ὑπὸ ζηλοτυπίας
4καὶ ὀργῆς. τέλος δὲ συμφρονήσαντες
ἐβάδιζον ἄνοπλοι καὶ μονοχίτωνες ἐπὶ τὴν σκηνήν,
μετὰ βοῆς καὶ κλαυθμοῦ παραδιδόντες
ἑαυτοὺς καὶ χρήσασθαι κελεύοντες ὡς κακοῖς καὶ
ἀχαρίστοις. ὁ δ᾿ οὐ προσίετο, καίπερ ἤδη
μαλασσόμενος. οἱ δ᾿ οὐκ ἀπέστησαν, ἀλλ᾿ ἡμέρας
δύο καὶ νύκτας οὕτω προσεστῶτες καὶ ὀλοφυρόμενοι
καὶ κοίρανον ἀνακαλοῦντες ἐκαρτέρησαν.
5τῇ δὲ τρίτῃ προελθὼν καὶ θεασάμενος οἰκτροὺς
καὶ τεταπεινωμένους ἐδάκρυε πολὺν χρόνον· εἶτα
μεμψάμενος μέτρια καὶ προσαγορεύσας φιλανθρώπως
ἀπέλυσε τοὺς ἀχρήστους δωρησάμενος
μεγαλοπρεπῶς, καὶ γράψας πρὸς Ἀντίπατρον
ὅπως ἐν πᾶσι τοῖς ἀγῶσι καὶ τοῖς θεάτροις προεδρίαν
ἔχοντες ἐστεφανωμένοι καθέζοιντο. τῶν δὲ
τεθνηκότων τοὺς παῖδας ὀρφανοὺς ὄντας ἐμμίσθους ἐποίησεν.
422Alexander, lxxi.

the men they were when he took them. Accordingly, they bade him send them all away and hold all his Macedonians of no account, since he had these young war-dancers, with whom he could go on and conquer the world.1 At these words of theirs Alexander was displeased, and heaped much abuse upon them in his anger, and drove them away, and committed his watches to Persians, and out of these constituted his body-guards and attendants. When the Macedonians saw him escorted by these, while they themselves were excluded from him and treated with contumely, they were humbled; and when they reasoned the matter out they found that they had been almost mad with jealousy and rage. So finally, after coming to their senses, they went to his tent, without their arms and wearing their tunics only, and with loud cries and lamentations put themselves at his mercy, bidding him deal with them as base and thankless men. But Alexander would not see them, although his heart was softening. And the men would not desist, but for two days and nights persisted in standing thus before his door, weeping and calling upon their master. So on the third day he came forth, and when he saw their piteous and humble plight, wept for some time; then, after chiding them gently and speaking kindly to them, he dismissed those who were past service with magnificent gifts, and wrote to Antipater that at all the public contests and in the theatres they should have the foremost seats and wear garlands. He also ordained that the orphan children of those who had lost their lives in his service should receive their father’s pay.2
1The account of the quarrel between Alexander and the Macedonians in Arrian (Anab. vii. 8–11) differs materially from that of Plutarch.2Cf. Arrian, Anab. vii. 12.423