Plutarch’s Lives

ἀλλὰ κήρυκα πέμψας ἠπείλησε πάντας
ἀποκτενεῖν μετὰ τέκνων καὶ γυναικῶν, εἰ τὸν
ἵππον αὐτῷ μὴ ἀναπέμψειαν. ἐπεὶ δὲ καὶ τὸν
ἵππον ἄγοντες ἧκον καὶ τὰς πόλεις ἐγχειρίζοντες,
ἐχρήσατο φιλανθρώπως πᾶσι καὶ τοῦ ἵππου
λύτρα τοῖς λαβοῦσιν ἔδωκεν.


XLV. Ἐντεῦθεν εἰς τὴν Παρθικὴν ἀναζεύξας
καὶ σχολάζων πρῶτον ἐνεδύσατο τὴν βαρβαρικὴν
στολήν, εἴτε βουλόμενος αὑτὸν συνοικειοῦν τοῖς
ἐπιχωρίοις νόμοις, ὡς μέγα πρὸς ἐξημέρωσιν
ἀνθρώπων τὸ σύνηθες καὶ ὁμόφυλον, εἴτ᾿ ἀπόπειρά
τις ὑφεῖτο τῆς προσκυνήσεως αὕτη τοῖς
Μακεδόσι, κατὰ μικρὸν ἀνασχέσθαι τὴν ἐκδιαίτησιν
2αὐτοῦ καὶ μεταβολὴν ἐθιζομένοις. οὐ μὴν
τήν γε Μηδικὴν ἐκείνην προσήκατο παντάπασι
βαρβαρικὴν καὶ ἀλλόκοτον οὖσαν, οὐδὲ ἀναξυρίδας
οὐδὲ κάνδυν οὐδὲ τιάραν ἔλαβεν, ἀλλὰ ἐν
μέσῳ τινὰ τῆς Περσικῆς καὶ τῆς Μηδικῆς μιξάμενος
εὖ πως, ἀτυφοτέραν μὲν ἐκείνης, ταύτης δὲ
σοβαρωτέραν οὖσαν. ἐχρῆτο δὲ τὸ μὲν πρῶτον
ἐντυγχάνων τοῖς βαρβάροις καὶ τοῖς ἑταίροις κατ᾿
οἶκον, εἶτα τοῖς πολλοῖς οὕτως ἐξελαύνων καὶ
3χρηματίζων ἑωρᾶτο. καὶ λυπηρὸν μὲν ἦν τοῖς
Μακεδόσι τὸ θέαμα, τὴν δὲ ἄλλην αὐτοῦ θαυμάζοντες
ἀρετὴν ᾤοντο δεῖν ἔνια τῶν πρὸς ἡδονὴν
αὐτῷ καὶ δόξαν ἐπιχωρεῖν· ὅς γε πρὸς ἅπασι τοῖς
ἄλλοις ἔναγχος τοξευμα μὲν εἰς τὴν κνήμην
354Alexander, xlv.

beyond measure, and sent a herald threatening to put them all to the sword, together with their wives and children, if they did not send him back his horse. But when they came with the horse and also put their cities into his hands, he treated them all kindly, and gave a ransom for his horse to those who had captured him.


XLV. From thence he marched into Parthia,1 where, during a respite from fighting, he first put on the barbaric dress, either from a desire to adapt himself to the native customs, believing that community of race and custom goes far towards softening the hearts of men; or else this was an attempt to introduce the obeisance2 among the Macedonians, by accustoming them little by little to put up with changes and alterations in his mode of life. However, he did not adopt the famous Median fashion of dress, which was altogether barbaric and strange, nor did he assume trousers, or sleeved vest, or tiara, but carefully devised a fashion which was midway between the Persian and the Median, more modest than the one and more stately than the other. At first he wore this only in intercourse with the Barbarians and with his companions at home, then people generally saw him riding forth or giving audience in this attire. The sight was offensive to the Macedonians, but they admired his other high qualities and thought they ought to yield to him in some things which made for his pleasure or his fame. For, in addition to all his other hardships, he had recently been shot by an arrow in the leg below the knee, so



1In the early autumn of 330 b.c.2Prostration on the ground before a great personage, a peculiarly Persian custom.355