Plutarch’s Lives

ἐπωνυμίαν ἔχουσαι, πολλὰ ταῖς Ἠδωνίσι καὶ
ταῖς περὶ τὸν Αἷμον Θρῄσσαις ὅμοια δρῶσιν, ἀφ᾿
ὧν δοκεῖ καὶ τὸ θρησκεύειν ὄνομα ταῖς κατακόροις
6γενέσθαι καὶ περιέργοις ἱερουργίαις, ἡ δὲ Ὀλυμπιὰς
μᾶλλον ἑτέρων ζηλώσασα τὰς κατοχὰς
καὶ τοὺς ἐνθουσιασμοὺς ἐξάγουσα βαρβαρικώτερον
ὄφεις μεγάλους χειροήθεις ἐφείλκετο τοῖς
θιάσοις, οἳ πολλάκις ἐκ τοῦ κιττοῦ καὶ τῶν
μυστικῶν λίκνων παραναδυόμενοι καὶ περιελιττόμενοι
τοῖς θύρσοις τῶν γυναικῶν καὶ τοῖς στεφάνοις
ἐξέπληττον τοὺς ἄνδρας.


III. Οὐ μὴν ἀλλὰ Φιλίππῳ μέν, μετὰ τὸ
φάσμα πέμψαντι Χαίρωνα τὸν Μεγαλοπολίτην
εἰς Δελφούς, χρησμὸν κομισθῆναι λέγουσι παρὰ
τοῦ θεοῦ κελεύοντος Ἄμμωνι θύειν καὶ σέβεσθαι
μάλιστα τοῦτον τὸν θεόν· ἀποβαλεῖν δὲ τῶν
ὄψεων αὐτὸν τὴν ἑτέραν, ἣν τῷ τῆς θύρας ἁρμῷ
προσβαλὼν κατώπτευσεν ἐν μορφῇ δράκοντος
2συνευναζόμενον τῇ γυναικὶ τὸν θεόν. ἡ δὲ Ὀλυμπιάς,
ὡς Ἐρατοσθένης φησί, προπέμπουσα τὸν
Ἀλέξανδρον ἐπὶ τὴν στρατείαν, καὶ φράσασα
μόνῳ τὸ περὶ τὴν τέκνωσιν ἀπόρρητον, ἐκέλευεν
ἄξια φρονεῖν τῆς γενέσεως. ἕτεροι δέ φασιν
αὐτὴν ἀφοσιοῦσθαι καὶ λέγειν· “Οὐ παύσεταί
με διαβάλλων Ἀλέξανδρος πρὸς τὴν Ἥραν;”
3Ἐγεννήθη δ᾿ οὖν Ἀλέξανδρος ἱσταμένου μηνὸς
Ἑκατομβαιῶνος, ὃν Μακεδόνες Λῶον καλοῦσιν,



228Alexander, iii.

ways the practices of the Edonian women and the Thracian women about Mount Haemus, from whom, as it would seem, the word “threskeuein”1 came to be applied to the celebration of extravagant and superstitious ceremonies. Now Olympias, who affected these divine possessions more zealously than other women, and carried out these divine inspirations in wilder fashion, used to provide the revelling companies with great tame serpents, which would often lift their heads from out the ivy and the mystic winnowing-baskets,2 or coil themselves about the wands and garlands of the women, thus terrifying the men.


III. However, after his vision, as we are told, Philip sent Chaeron of Megalopolis to Delphi, by whom an oracle was brought him from Apollo, who bade him sacrifice to Ammon and hold that god in greatest reverence, but told him he was to lose that one of his eyes which he had applied to the chink in the door when he espied the god, in the form of a serpent, sharing the couch of his wife. Moreover, Olympias, as Eratosthenes says, when she sent Alexander forth upon his great expedition, told him, and him alone, the secret of his begetting, and bade him have purposes worthy of his birth. Others, on the contrary, say that she repudiated the idea, and said: “Alexander must cease slandering me to Hera.”3
Be that as it may, Alexander was born early in the month Hecatombaeon,4 the Macedonian name for



1Plutarch apparently derives this verb from Θρῇσσαι (Thracian women).2Sacred to Dionysus, and carried on the heads of the celebrants.3The lawful spouse of Zeus Ammon.4356 b.c. The day of birth has probably been moved back two or three months for the sake of the coincidence mentioned below (§ 5). Hecatombaeon corresponds nearly to July.229