Plutarch’s Lives

καὶ δυσκαταπαύστους γεγονότας. ταῦτα683
ἀκούσας ἐκέλευσεν αὐτοὺς μονομαχῆσαι τοὺς
ἡγεμόνας· καὶ τὸν μὲν Ἀλέξανδρον αὐτὸς ὥπλισε,
τὸν δὲ Δαρεῖον Φιλώτας. ἐθεᾶτο δὲ ὁ στρατός,
ἐν οἰωνῷ τινι τοῦ μέλλοντος τιθέμενος τὸ γιγνόμενον.
ἰσχυρᾶς δὲ τῆς μάχης γενομένης ἐνίκησεν
ὁ καλούμενος Ἀλέξανδρος, καὶ δωρεὰν ἔλαβε
δώδεκα κώμας καὶ στολῇ Περσικῇ χρῆσθαι.
ταῦτα μὲν οὖν Ἐρατοσθένης ἱστόρηκε.
3Τὴν δὲ μεγάλην μάχην πρὸς Δαρεῖον οὐκ ἐν
Ἀρβήλοις, ὥσπερ οἱ πολλοὶ γράφουσιν, ἀλλὰ ἐν
Γαυγαμήλοις γενέσθαι συνέπεσε. σημαίνειν δέ
φασιν οἶκον καμήλου τὴν διάλεκτον, ἐπεὶ τῶν
πάλαι τις βασιλέων ἐκφυγὼν πολεμίους ἐπὶ
καμήλου δρομάδος ἐνταῦθα καθίδρυσεν αὐτήν,
ἀποτάξας τινὰς κώμας καὶ προσόδους εἰς τὴν
4ἐπιμέλειαν. ἡ μὲν οὖν σελήνη τοῦ Βοηδρομιῶνος
ἐξέλιπε περὶ τὴν τῶν μυστηρίων τῶν Ἀθήνησιν
ἀρχήν, ἑνδεκάτῃ δὲ ἀπὸ τῆς ἐκλείψεως νυκτὶ
τῶν στρατοπέδων ἐν ὄψει γεγονότων, Δαρεῖος μὲν
ἐν ὅπλοις συνεῖχε τὴν δύναμιν, ὑπὸ λαμπάδων
ἐπιπορευόμενος τὰς τάξεις, Ἀλέξανδρος δὲ τῶν
Μακεδόνων ἀναπαυομένων αὐτὸς πρὸ τῆς σκηνῆς
μετὰ τοῦ μάντεως Ἀριστάνδρου διέτριβεν,
ἱερουργίας τινὰς ἀπορρήτους ἱερουργούμενος καὶ
5τῷ Φόβῳ σφαγιαζόμενος. οἱ δὲ πρεσβύτεροι
τῶν ἑταίρων, καὶ μάλιστα Παρμενίων, ὡς τὸ μὲν
πεδίον τὸ μεταξὺ τοῦ Νιφάτου καὶ τῶν ὀρῶν
τῶν Γορδυαίων ἅπαν ἑωρᾶτο καταλαμπόμενον
τοῖς βαρβαρικοῖς φέγγεσιν, ἀτέκμαρτος δέ τις
φωνὴ συμμεμιγμένη καὶ θόρυβος ἐκ τοῦ στρατοπέδου
316Alexander, xxxi.

to stones and sticks, being now many and hard to quell. When he heard this, Alexander ordered the leaders themselves to fight in single combat; to the one called Alexander he himself gave armour, and to the one called Dareius, Philotas. The army were spectators of the combat, counting the issue as in some measure an omen of the future. After a strenuous battle, the one called Alexander was victorious, and received as a reward twelve villages and the right to wear Persian dress. This, at any rate, is what we are told by Eratosthenes.
Now, the great battle against Dareius was not fought at Arbela, as most writers state, but at Gaugamela.1
The word signifies, we are told, “camel’s house,” since one of the ancient kings of the country, after escaping from his enemies on a swift camel, gave the animal a home here, assigning certain villages and revenues for its maintenance. It so happened that in the month Boëdromion the moon suffered an eclipse,2 about the beginning of the Mysteries at Athens, and on the eleventh night after the eclipse, the armies being now in sight of one another, Dareius kept his forces under arms, and held a review of them by torch-light; but Alexander, while his Macedonians slept, himself passed the night in front of his tent with his seer Aristander, celebrating certain mysterious sacred rites and sacrificing to the god Fear. Meanwhile the older of his companions, and particularly Parmenio, when they saw the plain between the Niphates and the Gordyaean mountains all lighted up with the barbarian fires, while an indistinguishably mingled and tumultuous sound of voices arose from their camp as



1Cf. Arrian, Anab. iii. 8, 7.2September 20, 331 b.c.317