Plutarch’s Lives

εἶχεν, ὑπένδυμα τῶν Σικελικῶν ζωστόν, ἐπὶ δὲ
τούτῳ θώρακα διπλοῦν λινοῦν ἐκ τῶν ληφθέντων
ἐν Ἰσσῷ. τὸ δὲ κράνος ἦν μὲν σιδηροῦν, ἔστιλβε
δὲ ὥσπερ ἄργυρος καθαρός, ἔργον Θεοφίλου,
συνήρμοστο δὲ αὐτῷ περιτραχήλιον ὁμοίως σιδηροῦν,
6λιθοκόλλητον· μάχαιραν δὲ θαυμαστὴν
βαφῇ καὶ κουφότητι, δωρησαμένου τοῦ Κιτιέων
βασιλέως, εἶχεν, ἠσκημένος τὰ πολλὰ χρῆσθαι
μαχαίρᾳ παρὰ τὰς μάχας. ἐπιπόρπωμα δὲ ἐφόρει
τῇ μὲν ἐργασίᾳ σοβαρώτερον ἢ κατὰ τὸν ἄλλον
ὁπλισμόν· ἦν γὰρ ἔργον Ἑλικῶνος τοῦ παλαιοῦ,
τιμὴ δὲ τῆς Ῥοδίων πόλεως, ὑφ᾿ ἧς ἐδόθη δῶρον·
7ἐχρῆτο δὲ καὶ τούτῳ πρὸς τοὺς ἀγῶνας. ἄχρι
μὲν οὖν συντάττων τι τῆς φάλαγγος ἢ παρακελευόμενος
ἢ διδάσκων ἢ ἐφορῶν παρεξήλαυνεν,
ἄλλον ἵππον εἶχε, τοῦ Βουκεφάλα φειδόμενος ἤδη
παρήλικος ὄντος· χωροῦντι δὲ πρὸς ἔργον ἐκεῖνος
προσήγετο, καὶ μεταβὰς εὐθὺς ἦρχεν ἐφόδου.


XXXIII. Τότε δὲ τοῖς Θετταλοῖς πλεῖστα
διαλεχθεὶς καὶ τοῖς ἄλλοις Ἕλλησιν, ὡς ἐπέρρωσαν
αὐτὸν βοῶντες ἄγειν ἐπὶ τοὺς βαρβάρους, τὸ
ξυστὸν εἰς τὴν ἀριστερὰν μεταβαλὼν τῇ δεξιᾷ
παρεκάλει τοὺς θεούς, ὡς Καλλισθένης φησίν,
ἐπευχόμενος, εἴπερ ὄντως Διόθεν ἐστὶ γεγονώς,
2ἀμῦναι καὶ συνεπιρρῶσαι τοὺς Ἕλληνας. ὁ δὲ
μάντις Ἀρίστανδρος χλανίδα λευκὴν ἔχων καὶ
χρυσοῦν στέφανον ἐπεδείκνυτο παριππεύων ἀετὸν
322Alexander, xxxiii.

he came from his tent, namely, a vest of Sicilian make girt about him, and over this a breastplate of two-ply linen from the spoils taken at Issus. His helmet was of iron, but gleamed like polished silver, a work of Theophilus; and there was fitted to this a gorget, likewise of iron, set with precious stones. He had a sword, too, of astonishing temper and lightness, a gift from the king of the Citieans, and he had trained himself to use a sword for the most part in his battles. He wore a belt also, which was too elaborate for the rest of his armour; for it was a work of Helicon the ancient, and a mark of honour from the city of Rhodes, which had given it to him; this also he was wont to wear in his battles. As long, then, as he was riding about and marshalling some part of his phalanx, or exhorting or instructing or reviewing his men, he spared Bucephalas, who was now past his prime, and used another horse; but whenever he was going into action, Bucephalas would be led up, and he would mount him and at once begin the attack.


XXXIII. On this occasion, he made a very long speech to the Thessalians and the other Greeks,1 and when he saw that they encouraged him with shouts to lead them against the Barbarians, he shifted his lance into his left hand, and with his right appealed to the gods, as Callisthenes tells us, praying them, if he was really sprung from Zeus, to defend and strengthen the Greeks. Aristander the seer, too, wearing a white mantle and having a crown of gold upon his head, rode along the ranks pointing out to


1Sometimes the term “Hellenes” excludes, and sometimes it includes, the Macedonians. The context mast decide. Cf. xlvii. 5.323