Plutarch’s Lives

ἐκινδύνευσε διὰ τὸν παιδαγωγὸν Λυσίμαχον· ἐξηκολούθησε
γὰρ αὐτῷ λέγων τοῦ Φοίνικος οὐκ
εἶναι χείρων οὐδὲ πρεσβύτερος. ἐπεὶ δὲ πλησιάσας
τοῖς ὀρεινοῖς καὶ τοὺς ἵππους ἀπολιπὼν
πεζὸς ἐβάδιζεν, οἱ μὲν ἄλλοι πολὺ προῆλθον,
7αὐτὸς δὲ τὸν Λυσίμαχον, ἑσπέρας ἤδη καταλαμβανούσης
καὶ τῶν πολεμίων ἐγγὺς ὄντων, ἀπαγορεύοντα
καὶ βαρυνόμενον οὐχ ὑπομένων ἀπολιπεῖν,
ἀλλ᾿ ἀνακαλούμενος καὶ παρακομίζων,
ἔλαθε τοῦ στρατεύματος ἀποσπασθεὶς μετ᾿ ὀλίγων
καὶ σκότους ἅμα καὶ ῥίγους σφοδροῦ νυκτερεύων
8ἐν χωρίοις χαλεποῖς. εἶδεν οὖν πόρρω πυρὰ
πολλὰ καιόμενα σποράδην τῶν πολεμίων. θαρρῶν
δὲ τοῦ σώματος τῇ κουφότητι, καὶ τῷ πονεῖν
αὐτὸς ἀεὶ παραμυθούμενος τὴν ἀπορίαν τῶν Μακεδόνων,
προσέδραμε τοῖς ἔγγιστα πῦρ καίουσι· καὶ
περικαθημένους τῇ πυρᾷ δύο βαρβάρους πατάξας
τῷ ἐγχειριδίῳ καὶ δαλὸν ἁρπάσας ἧκε πρὸς τοὺς
ἑαυτοῦ κομίζων. ἐγκαύσαντες δὲ πῦρ πολὺ τοὺς
μὲν εὐθὺς ἐφόβησαν ὥστε φυγεῖν, τοὺς δ᾿ ἐπιόντας
ἐτρέψαντο, καὶ κατηυλίσθησαν ἀκινδύνως.
ταῦτα μὲν οὖν Χάρης ἱστόρηκεν.


XXV. Ἡ δὲ πολιορκία τοιοῦτον ἔσχε πέρας.
Ἀλεξάνδρου τὴν μὲν πολλὴν τῆς δυνάμεως ἀναπαύοντος
ἀπὸ πολλῶν ἀγώνων τῶν ἔμπροσθεν,
ὀλίγους δέ τινας, ὡς μὴ σχολάζοιεν οἱ πολέμιοι,679
τοῖς τείχεσι προσάγοντος, Ἀρίστανδρος ὁ μάντις
ἐσφαγιάζετο· καὶ τὰ σημεῖα κατιδὼν θρασύτερον
294Alexander, xxv.

this expedition he risked his life to save his tutor, Lysimachus, who insisted on following him, declaring himself to be neither older nor weaker than Phoenix.1 But when the force drew near the mountains, they abandoned their horses and proceeded on foot, and most of them got far on in advance. Alexander himself, however, would not consent to abandon the worn and weary Lysimachus, since evening was already coming on and the enemy were near, but sought to encourage him and carry him along. Before he was aware of it, therefore, he was separated from his army with a few followers, and had to spend a night of darkness and intense cold in a region that was rough and difficult. In this plight, he saw far off a number of scattered fires which the enemy were burning. So, since he was confident in his own agility, and was ever wont to cheer the Macedonians in their perplexities by sharing their toils, he ran to the nearest camp-fire. Two Barbarians who were sitting at the fire he despatched with his dagger, and snatching up a fire-brand, brought it to his own party. These kindled a great fire and at once frightened some of the enemy into flight, routed others who came up against them, and spent the night without further peril. Such, then, is the account we have from Chares.


XXV. The siege of the city had the following issue. While Alexander was giving the greater part of his forces a rest from the many struggles which they had undergone, and was leading up only a few men to attack the walls, in order that the enemy might have no respite, Aristander the seer made a sacrifice, and after taking the omens, declared very confidently


1Cf. chapter v. 5.295