Plutarch’s Lives

ἴσως ἀναγκαῖον ἦν, ὥσπερ ἐν πύλαις τῆς Ἀσίας,
περὶ τῆς εἰσόδου καὶ ἀρχῆς· τοῦ δὲ ποταμοῦ τὸ
βάθος καὶ τὴν ἀνωμαλίαν καὶ τραχύτητα τῶν
πέραν ὄχθων, πρὸς οὓς ἔδει γίνεσθαι τὴν ἀπόβασιν
μετὰ μάχης, τῶν πλείστων δεδιότων, ἐνίων
δὲ καὶ τὸ περὶ τὸν μῆνα νενομισμένον οἰομένων
2δεῖν φυλάξασθαι (Δαισίου γὰρ οὐκ εἰώθεισαν οἱ
βασιλεῖς τῶν Μακεδόνων ἐξάγειν τὴν στρατιάν),
τοῦτο μὲν ἐπηνωρθώσατο κελεύσας δεύτερον
Ἀρτεμίσιον ἄγειν, τοῦ δὲ Παρμενίωνος, ὡς ὀψὲ
τῆς ὥρας οὔσης, οὐκ ἐῶντος ἀποκινδυνεύειν, εἰπὼν
αἰσχύνεσθαι τὸν Ἑλλήσποντον εἰ φοβήσεται τὸν
Γρανικὸν διαβεβηκὼς ἐκεῖνον, ἐμβάλλει τῷ ῥεύματι
3σὺν ἴλαις ἱππέων τρισκαίδεκα. καὶ πρὸς
ἐναντία βέλη καὶ τόπους ἀπορρῶγας ὅπλοις
καταπεφραγμένους καὶ ἵπποις ἐλαύνων, καὶ διὰ
ῥεύματος παραφέροντος καὶ περικλύζοντος, ἔδοξε
μανικῶς καὶ πρὸς ἀπόνοιαν μᾶλλον ἢ γνώμῃ
στρατηγεῖν. οὐ μὴν ἀλλ᾿ ἐμφὺς τῇ διαβάσει καὶ
κρατήσας τῶν τόπων χαλεπῶς καὶ μόλις, ὑγρῶν
καὶ περισφαλῶν γενομένων διὰ τὸν πηλόν, εὐθὺς
ἠναγκάζετο φύρδην μάχεσθαι καὶ κατ᾿ ἄνδρα
συμπλέκεσθαι τοῖς ἐπιφερομένοις, πρὶν εἰς τάξιν
4τινὰ καταστῆναι τοὺς διαβαίνοντας. ἐνέκειντο
γὰρ κραυγῇ, καὶ τοὺς ἵππους παραβάλλοντες
τοῖς ἵπποις ἐχρῶντο δόρασι, καὶ ξίφεσι τῶν δοράτων
συντριβέντων. ὠσαμένων δὲ πολλῶν ἐπ᾿
αὐτὸν (ἦν δὲ τῇ πέλτῃ καὶ τοῦ κράνους τῇ χαίτῃ
διαπρεπής, ἧς ἑκατέρωθεν εἱστήκει πτερὸν λευκότητι
264Alexander, xvi.

necessary to fight, as it were at the gates of Asia, for entrance and dominion there. But most of the Macedonian officers were afraid of the depth of the river, and of the roughness and unevenness of the farther banks, up which they would have to climb while fighting. Some, too, thought they ought to observe carefully the customary practice in regard to the month (for in the month of Daesius the kings of Macedonia were not wont to take the field with an army). This objection Alexander removed by bidding them call the month a second Artemisius; and when Parmenio, on the ground that it was too late in the day, objected to their risking the passage, he declared that the Hellespont would blush for shame, if, after having crossed that strait, he should be afraid of the Granicus, and plunged into the stream with thirteen troops of horsemen. And since he was charging against hostile missiles and precipitous positions covered with infantry and cavalry, and through a stream that swept men off their feet and surged about them, he seemed to be acting like a frenzied and foolish commander rather than a wise one. However, he persisted in his attempt to cross, gained the opposite banks with difficulty and much ado, though they were moist and slippery with mud, and was at once compelled to fight pell-mell and engage his assailants man by man, before his troops who were crossing could form into any order. For the enemy pressed upon them with loud shouts, and matching horse with horse, plied their lances, and their swords when their lances were shattered. Many rushed upon Alexander, for he was conspicuous by his buckler and by his helmet’s crest, on either side of which was fixed a plume of wonderful size and
265