Plutarch’s Lives
Πευκέστᾳ μὲν ἔγραψε μεμφόμενος ὅτι δηχθεὶς
ὑπ᾿ ἄρκτου τοῖς μὲν ἄλλοις ἔγραψεν, αὐτῷ δὲ οὐκ
ἐδήλωσεν. “Ἀλλὰ νῦν γε,” φησί, “γράψον πῶς689
ἔχεις, καὶ μή τινές σε τῶν συγκυνηγετούντων
3ἐγκατέλιπον, ἵνα δίκην δῶσι.” τοῖς δὲ περὶ
Ἡφαιστίωνα διὰ πράξεις τινὰς ἀποῦσιν ἔγραψεν
ὅτι παιζόντων αὐτῶν πρὸς ἰχνεύμονα τῷ Περδίκκου
δορατίῳ περιπεσὼν Κρατερὸς τοὺς μηροὺς
ἐτρώθη. Πευκέστα δὲ σωθέντος ἔκ τινος ἀσθενείας
ἔγραψε πρὸς Ἀλέξιππον τὸν ἰατρὸν εὐχαριστῶν.
Κρατεροῦ δὲ νοσοῦντος ὄψιν ἰδὼν καθ᾿
ὕπνον αὐτός τέ τινας θυσίας ἔθυσεν ὑπὲρ αὐτοῦ
4κἀκεῖνον θῦσαι ἐκέλευσεν. ἔγραψε δὲ καὶ Παυσανίᾳ
τῷ ἰατρῷ βουλομένῳ τὸν Κρατερὸν ἐλλεβορίσαι,
τὰ μὲν ἀγωνιῶν, τὰ δὲ παραινῶν ὅπως
χρήσεται τῇ φαρμακείᾳ. τοὺς δὲ πρώτους τὴν
Ἁρπάλου φυγὴν καὶ ἀπόδρασιν ἀπαγγείλαντας
ἔδησεν, Ἐφιάλτην καὶ Κίσσον, ὡς καταψευδομένους
5τοῦ ἀνδρός. ἐπεὶ δὲ τοὺς ἀσθενοῦντας
αὐτοῦ καὶ γέροντας εἰς οἶκον ἀποστέλλοντος Εὐρύλοχος
Αἰγαῖος ἐνέγραψεν ἑαυτὸν εἰς τοὺς
νοσοῦντας, εἶτα φωραθεὶς ἔχων οὐδὲν κακὸν ὡμολόγησε
Τελεσίππας ἐρᾶν καὶ συνεπακολουθεῖν
ἐπὶ θάλασσαν ἀπιούσης ἐκείνης, ἠρώτησε τίνων
ἀνθρώπων ἐστὶ τὸ γύναιον. ἀκούσας δὲ ὅτι τῶν
ἐλευθέρων ἑταιρῶν, “Ἡμᾶς μέν,” εἶπεν, “ὦ Εὐρύλοχε,
συνερῶντας ἔχεις· ὅρα δὲ ὅπως πείθωμεν
ἢ λόγοις ἢ δώροις τὴν Τελεσίππαν, ἐπειδήπερ ἐξ
ἐλευθέρας ἐστί.”
346Alexander, xli.
He found fault with Peucestas by letter because, after being bitten by a bear, he wrote about it to the rest of his friends but did not tell him. “Now, however,” said he, “write me how you are, and tell me whether any of your fellow-huntsmen left you in the lurch, that I may punish them.” To Hephaestion, who was absent on some business, he wrote that while they were diverting themselves with hunting an ichneumon, Craterus encountered the lance of Perdiccas and was wounded in the thighs. After Peucestas had safely recovered from an illness, Alexander wrote to the physician, Alexippus, expressing his thanks. While Craterus was sick, Alexander had a vision in his sleep, whereupon he offered certain sacrifices himself for the recovery of his friend, and bade him also sacrifice. He wrote also to Pausanias, the physician, who wished to administer hellebore to Craterus, partly expressing distress, and partly advising him how to use the medicine. Those who first brought word to him that Harpalus had absconded, namely, Ephialtes and Cissus, he put in fetters, on the ground that they were falsely accusing the man. When he was sending home his aged and infirm soldiers, Eurylochus of Aegae got himself enrolled among the sick, and then, when it was discovered that he had nothing the matter with him, confessed that he was in love with Telesippa, and was bent on following along with her on her journey to the sea-board. Alexander asked of what parentage the girl was, and on hearing that she was a free-born courtezan, said: “I will help you, O Eurylochus, in your amour; but see to it that we try to persuade Telesippa either by arguments or by gifts, since she is free-born.”
347