Plutarch’s Lives

μᾶλλον ὑπέκκαυμα τῆς φλογὸς ὑπορρεῖ τὸ ὑγρὸν
ἐκ τῆς γῆς φύσιν λιπαρὰν καὶ πυριγόνον ἐχούσης.
7καὶ γάρ ἐστιν ἡ Βαβυλωνία σφόδρα πυρώδης,
ὥστε τὰς μὲν κριθὰς χαμόθεν ἐκπηδᾶν καὶ ἀποπάλλεσθαι
πολλάκις, οἷον ὑπὸ φλεγμονῆς τῶν
τόπων σφυγμοὺς ἐχόντων, τοὺς δὲ ἀνθρώπους ἐν
τοῖς καύμασιν ἐπ᾿ ἀσκῶν πεπληρωμένων ὕδατος
8καθεύδειν. Ἅρπαλος δὲ τῆς χώρας ἀπολειφθεὶς
ἐπιμελητὴς καὶ φιλοκαλῶν Ἑλληνικαῖς φυτείαις
διακοσμῆσαι τὰ βασίλεια καὶ τοὺς περιπάτους,
τῶν μὲν ἄλλων ἐκράτησε, τὸν δὲ κιττὸν οὐκ
ἔστεξεν ἡ γῆ μόνον, ἀλλ᾿ ἀεὶ διέφθειρεν οὐ φέροντα
τὴν κρᾶσιν· ἡ μὲν γὰρ πυρώδης, ὁ δὲ φιλόψυχρος.
τῶν μὲν οὖν τοιούτων παρεκβάσεων,
ἂν μέτρον ἔχωσιν, ἧττον ἴσως οἱ δύσκολοι κατηγορήσουσιν.


XXXVI. Ἀλέξανδρος δὲ Σούσων κυριεύσας
παρέλαβεν ἐν τοῖς βασιλείοις τετρακισμύρια
τάλαντα νομίσματος, τὴν δὲ ἄλλην κατασκευὴν
καὶ πολυτέλειαν ἀδιήγητον. ὅπου φασὶ καὶ
πορφύρας Ἑρμιονικῆς εὑρεθῆναι τάλαντα πεντακισχίλια,
συγκειμένης μὲν ἐξ ἐτῶν δέκα δεόντων
διακοσίων, πρόσφατον δὲ τὸ ἄνθος ἔτι καὶ νεαρὸν
2φυλαττούσης. αἴτιον δὲ τούτου φασὶν εἶναι τὸ
τὴν βαφὴν διὰ μέλιτος γίνεσθαι τῶν ἁλουργῶν,
δι᾿ ἐλαίου δὲ λευκοῦ τῶν λευκῶν· καὶ γὰρ τούτων
τὸν ἴσον χρόνον ἐχόντων τὴν λαμπρότητα καθαρὰν
καὶ στίλβουσαν ὁρᾶσθαι. Δείνων δέ φησι
καὶ ὕδωρ ἀπό τε τοῦ Νείλου καὶ τοῦ Ἴστρου
332Alexander, xxxvi.

the origin of1 . . . . or whether rather the liquid substance that feeds the flame flows out from a soil which is rich and productive of fire. For the soil of Babylonia is very fiery, so that grains of barley often leap out of the ground and bound away, as if its inflammation made the ground throb; and the inhabitants, during the hot season, sleep on skins filled with water. Harpalus, moreover, when he was left as overseer of the country and was eager to adorn the royal gardens and walks with Hellenic plants, succeeded with all except ivy; this the soil would not support, but always killed it. The plant could not endure the temper of the soil, for the soil was fiery, while the plant was fond of coolness. However, if such digressions are kept within bounds, perhaps my impatient readers will find less fault with them.


XXXVI. On making himself master of Susa, Alexander came into possession of forty thousand talents of coined money in the palace, and of untold furniture and wealth besides.2 Among this they say was found five thousand talents’ weight of purple from Hermione, which, although it had been stored there for a hundred and ninety years, still kept its colours fresh and lively. The reason for this, they say, is that honey was used in the purple dyes, and white olive oil in the white dyes; for these substances, after the like space of time, are seen to have a brilliancy that is pure and lustrous. Moreover, Deinon says that the Persian kings had water also brought from the Nile and the Danube and stored



1“This naphtha,” and the first “whether”-clause, have fallen out of the text.2Cf. Arrian, Anab. iii. 16, 7. A talent’s weight was something over fifty pounds.333