Plutarch’s Lives


LXXII. Ὡς δὲ ἧκεν εἰς Ἐκβάτανα τῆς Μηδίας
καὶ διῴκησε τὰ κατεπείγοντα, πάλιν ἦν ἐν θεάτροις
καὶ πανηγύρεσιν, ἅτε δὴ τρισχιλίων αὐτῷ
τεχνιτῶν ἀπὸ τῆς Ἑλλάδος ἀφιγμένων. ἔτυχε
δὲ περὶ τὰς ἡμέρας ἐκείνας Ἡφαιστίων πυρέσσων·
οἷα δὲ νέος καὶ στρατιωτικὸς οὐ φέρων
ἀκριβῆ δίαιταν, ἅμα τῷ τὸν ἰατρὸν Γλαῦκον
ἀπελθεῖν εἰς τὸ θέατρον περὶ ἄριστον γενόμενος
καὶ καταφαγὼν ἀλεκτρυόνα ἑφθὸν καὶ ψυκτῆρα
μέγαν ἐκπιὼν οἴνου κακῶς ἔσχε καὶ μικρὸν διαλιπὼν
2ἀπέθανε. τοῦτο οὐδενὶ λογισμῷ τὸ πάθος
Ἀλέξανδρος ἤνεγκεν, ἀλλ᾿ εὐθὺς μὲν ἵππους τε
κεῖραι πάντας ἐπὶ πένθει καὶ ἡμιόνους ἐκέλευσε
καὶ τῶν πέριξ πόλεων ἀφεῖλε τὰς ἐπάλξεις, τὸν
δὲ ἄθλιον ἰατρὸν ἀνεσταύρωσεν, αὐλοὺς δὲ κατέπαυσε
καὶ μουσικὴν πᾶσαν ἐν τῷ στρατοπέδῳ
πολὺν χρόνον, ἕως ἐξ Ἄμμωνος ἦλθε μαντεία
τιμᾶν Ἡφαιστίωνα καὶ θύειν ὡς ἥρωϊ παρακελεύουσα.
3τοῦ δὲ πένθους παρηγορίᾳ τῷ πολέμῳ
χρώμενος, ὥσπερ ἐπὶ θήραν καὶ κυνηγέσιον ἀνθρώπων
ἐξῆλθε καὶ τὸ Κοσσαίων ἔθνος κατεστρέφετο,
πάντας ἡβηδὸν ἀποσφάττων. τοῦτο δὲ
Ἡφαιστίωνος ἐναγισμὸς ἐκαλεῖτο. τύμβον δὲ705
καὶ ταφὴν αὐτοῦ καὶ τὸν περὶ ταῦτα κόσμον ἀπὸ
μυρίων ταλάντων ἐπιτελέσαι διανοούμενος, ὑπερβαλέσθαι
δὲ τῷ φιλοτέχνῳ καὶ περιττῷ τῆς
κατασκευῆς τὴν δαπάνην, ἐπόθησε μάλιστα τῶν
τεχνιτῶν Στασικράτην, μεγαλουργίαν τινὰ καὶ
τόλμαν καὶ κόμπον ἐν ταῖς καινοτομίαις ἐπαγγελλόμενον.
424Alexander, lxxii.


LXXII. When he came to Ecbatana in Media and had transacted the business that was urgent, he was once more much occupied with theatres and festivals, since three thousand artists had come to him from Greece. But during this time it chanced that Hephaestion had a fever; and since, young man and soldier that he was, he could not submit to a strict regimen, as soon as Glaucus, his physician, had gone off to the theatre, he sat down to breakfast, ate a boiled fowl, drank a huge cooler of wine, fell sick, and in a little while died. Alexander’s grief at this loss knew no bounds.1 He immediately ordered that the manes and tails of all horses and mules should be shorn in token of mourning, and took away the battlements of the cities round about; he also crucified the wretched physician, and put a stop to the sound of flutes and every kind of music in the camp for a long time, until an oracular response from Ammon came bidding him honour Hephaestion as a hero and sacrifice to him. Moreover, making war a solace for his grief, he went forth to hunt and track down men, as it were, and overwhelmed the nation of the Cossaeans, slaughtering them all from the youth upwards. This was called an offering to the shade of Hephaestion. Upon a tomb and obsequies for his friend, and upon their embellishments, he purposed to expend ten thousand talents, and wished that the ingenuity and novelty of the construction should surpass the expense. He therefore longed for Stasicrates above all other artists, because in his innovations there was always promise of great


1Arrian finds great diversity in the accounts of Alexander’s displays of grief at Hephaestion’s death (Anab. vii. 14).425