Plutarch’s Lives

πυθόμενος οὐκ Οἰνιαδῶν ἔφη παῖδας, ἀλλ᾿ αὑτὸν
ἐπιθήσειν δίκην Αἰτωλοῖς.


L. Οὐ πολλῷ δὲ ὕστερον συνηνέχθη καὶ τὰ
περὶ Κλεῖτον, οὕτω μὲν ἁπλῶς πυθομένοις τῶν
κατὰ Φιλώταν ἀγριώτερα· λόγῳ μέντοι συντιθέντες
ἅμα καὶ τὴν αἰτίαν καὶ τὸν καιρόν, οὐκ
ἀπὸ γνώμης, ἀλλὰ δυστυχίᾳ τινὶ ταῦτα εὑρίσκομεν
πεπραγμένα τοῦ βασιλέως, ὀργὴν καὶ μέθην
πρόφασιν τῷ Κλείτου δαίμονι παρασχόντος.
2ἐπράχθη δὲ οὕτως. ἧκόν τινες ὀπώραν Ἑλληνικὴν
ἀπὸ θαλάσσης τῷ βασιλεῖ κομίζοντες. ὁ δὲ
θαυμάσας τὴν ἀκμὴν καὶ τὸ κάλλος ἐκάλει τὸν
Κλεῖτον, ἐπιδεῖξαι καὶ μεταδοῦναι βουλόμενος. ὁ
δὲ θύων μὲν ἐτύγχανεν, ἀφεὶς δὲ τὴν θυσίαν ἐβάδιζε·
καὶ τρία τῶν κατεσπεισμένων προβάτων
3ἐπηκολούθησεν αὐτῷ. πυθόμενος δὲ ὁ βασιλεὺς
ἀνεκοινοῦτο τοῖς μάντεσιν Ἀριστάνδρῳ καὶ Κλεομάντει
τῷ Λάκωνι. φησάντων δὲ πονηρὸν εἶναι
τὸ σημεῖον, ἐκέλευσεν ἐκθύσασθαι κατὰ τάχος
ὑπὲρ τοῦ Κλείτου. καὶ γὰρ αὐτὸς ἡμέρᾳ τρίτῃ
κατὰ τοὺς ὕπνους ἰδεῖν ὄψιν ἄτοπον· δόξαι γὰρ
αὐτῷ τὸν Κλεῖτον μετὰ τῶν Παρμενίωνος υἱῶν ἐν
μέλασιν ἱματίοις καθέζεσθαι, τεθνηκότων ἁπάντων.
4οὐ μὴν ἔφθασεν ὁ Κλεῖτος ἐκθυσάμενος,
ἀλλ᾿ εὐθὺς ἐπὶ τὸ δεῖπνον ἧκε, τεθυκότος τοῦ
βασιλέως Διοσκούροις. πότου δὲ νεανικοῦ συρραγέντος
ᾔδετο ποιήματα Πρανίχου τινός, ὡς δέ
φασιν ἔνιοι, Πιερίωνος, εἰς τοὺς στρατηγοὺς πεποιημένα
368Alexander, l.

learning of it, had said that it would not be the sons of the Oeneadae, but he himself who would punish the Aetolians.


L. Not long afterwards came the affair of Cleitus,1 which those who simply learn the immediate circumstances will think more savage than that of Philotas; if we take into consideration, however, alike the cause and the time, we find that it did not happen of set purpose, but through some misfortune of the king, whose anger and intoxication furnished occasion for the evil genius of Cleitus. It happened on this wise. Some people came bringing Greek fruit to the king from the sea-board. He admired its perfection and beauty and called Cleitus, wishing to show it to him and share it with him. It chanced that Cleitus was sacrificing, but he gave up the sacrifice and came; and three of the sheep on which libations had already been poured came following after him. When the king learned of this circumstance, he imparted it to his soothsayers, Aristander and Cleomantis the Lacedaemonian. Then, on their telling him that the omen was bad, he ordered them to sacrifice in all haste for the safety of Cleitus. For he himself, two days before this, had seen a strange vision in his sleep; he thought he saw Cleitus sitting with the sons of Parmenio in black robes, and all were dead. However, Cleitus did not finish his sacrifice, but came at once to the supper of the king, who had sacrificed to the Dioscuri. After boisterous drinking was under way, verses were sung which had been composed by a certain Pranichus, or, as some say, Pierio, to shame and ridicule the


1During the campaign of 328 b.c., at Samarkand, in Sogdiana. Cf. Arrian, Anab. iv. 8 f.369