Plutarch’s Lives

ἐπειρᾶτο μᾶλλον ἢ προστάττειν, καὶ τοῖς
περὶ μουσικὴν καὶ τὰ ἐγκύκλια παιδευταῖς οὐ
πάνυ τι πιστεύων τὴν ἐπιστασίαν αὐτοῦ καὶ
κατάρτισιν, ὡς μείζονος οὖσαν πραγματείας καὶ
κατὰ τὸν Σοφοκλέα

πολλῶν χαλινῶν ἔργον οἰάκων θ᾿ ἅμα,

2μετεπέμψατο τῶν φιλοσόφων τὸν ἐνδοξότατον668
καὶ λογιώτατον Ἀριστοτέλην, καλὰ καὶ πρέποντα
διδασκάλια τελέσας αὐτῷ. τὴν γὰρ Σταγειριτῶν
πόλιν, ἐξ ἧς ἦν Ἀριστοτέλης, ἀνάστατον ὑπ᾿
αὐτοῦ γεγενημένην συνῴκισε πάλιν, καὶ τοὺς διαφυγόντας
ἢ δουλεύοντας τῶν πολιτῶν ἀποκατέστησε.
3Σχολὴν μὲν οὖν αὐτοῖς καὶ διατριβὴν τὸ περὶ
Μίεζαν νυμφαῖον ἀπέδειξεν, ὅπου μέχρι νῦν
Ἀριστοτέλους ἕδρας τε λιθίνας καὶ ὑποσκίους
περιπάτους δεικνύουσιν. ἔοικε δὲ Ἀλέξανδρος
οὐ μόνον τὸν ἠθικὸν καὶ πολιτικὸν παραλαβεῖν
λόγον, ἀλλὰ καὶ τῶν ἀπορρήτων καὶ βαθυτέρων
διδασκαλιῶν, ἃς οἱ ἄνδρες ἰδίως ἀκροαματικὰς
καὶ ἐποπτικὰς προσαγορεύοντες οὐκ ἐξέφερον εἰς
4πολλούς, μετασχεῖν. ἤδη γὰρ εἰς Ἀσίαν διαβεβηκώς,
καὶ πυθόμενος λόγους τινὰς ἐν βιβλίοις
περὶ τούτων ὑπὸ Ἀριστοτέλους ἐκδεδόσθαι, γράφει
πρὸς αὐτὸν ὑπὲρ φιλοσοφίας παρρησιαζόμενος
ἐπιστολήν, ἧς ἀντίγραφόν ἐστιν· “Ἀλέξανδρος
Ἀριστοτέλει εὖ πράττειν. οὐκ ὀρθῶς ἐποίησας
ἐκδοὺς τοὺς ἀκροαματικοὺς τῶν λόγων· τίνι γὰρ
240Alexander, vii.

he himself tried to persuade rather than to command him; and because he would not wholly entrust the direction and training of the boy to the ordinary teachers of poetry and the formal studies, feeling that it was a matter of too great importance, and, in the words of Sophocles,1

“A task for many bits and rudder-sweeps as well,”

he sent for the most famous and learned of philosophers, Aristotle, and paid him a noble and appropriate tuition-fee. The city of Stageira, that is, of which Aristotle was a native, and which he had himself destroyed, he peopled again, and restored to it those of its citizens who were in exile or slavery.
Well, then, as a place where master and pupil could labour and study, he assigned them the precinct of the nymphs near Mieza, where to this day the visitor is shown the stone seats and shady walks of Aristotle. It would appear, moreover, that Alexander not only received from his master his ethical and political doctrines, but also participated in those secret and more profound teachings which philosophers designate by the special terms “acroamatic” and “epoptic,”2 and do not impart to many. For after he had already crossed into Asia, and when he learned that certain treatises on these recondite matters had been published in books by Aristotle, he wrote him a letter on behalf of philosophy, and put it in plain language. And this is a copy of the letter. “Alexander, to Aristotle, greeting. Thou hast not done well to publish thy acroamatic



1Nauck, Trag. Graec. Frag.2 p. 315.2i.e., fit for oral teaching only, and for the initiated; “esoteric,” as opposed to “exoteric” doctrines.241