Plutarch’s Lives

προσονομαζομένου Φείδωνος εἰπόντος, “Ὦ βασιλεῦ,
μὴ φιλήσῃς· οὗτος γάρ σε μόνος οὐ προσεκύνησε,”
διακλῖναι τὸ φίλημα τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον,
τὸν δὲ Καλλισθένη μέγα φθεγξάμενον εἰπεῖν·
“Φιλήματι τοίνυν ἔλασσον ἔχων ἄπειμι.”


LV. Τοιαύτης ὑπογενομένης ἀλλοτριότητος
πρῶτον μὲν Ἡφαιστίων ἐπιστεύετο λέγων ὅτι
συνθέμενος πρὸς αὐτὸν ὁ Καλλισθένης προσκυνῆσαι
ψεύσαιτο τὴν ὁμολογίαν· ἔπειτα Λυσίμαχοι
καὶ Ἅγνωνες ἐπεφύοντο φάσκοντες περιϊέναι τὸν
σοφιστὴν ὡς ἐπὶ καταλύσει τυραννίδος μέγα
φρονοῦντα, καὶ συντρέχειν πρὸς αὐτὸν τὰ μειράκια
καὶ περιέπειν ὡς μόνον ἐλεύθερον ἐν τοσαύταις
2μυριάσι. διὸ καὶ τῶν περὶ Ἑρμόλαον ἐπιβουλευσάντων
τῷ Ἀλεξάνδρῳ καὶ φανερῶν γενομένων
ἔδοξαν ἀληθέσιν ὅμοια κατηγορεῖν οἱ
διαβάλλοντες, ὡς τῷ μὲν προβαλόντι πῶς ἂν
ἐνδοξότατος γένοιτο ἄνθρωπος, εἶπεν, “Ἄν ἀποκτείνῃ
τὸν ἐνδοξότατον,” τὸν δὲ Ἑρμόλαον ἐπὶ
τὴν πρᾶξιν παροξύνων ἐκέλευε μὴ δεδιέναι τὴν
χρυσῆν κλίνην, ἀλλὰ μνημονεύειν ὅτι καὶ νοσοῦντι
3καὶ τιτρωσκομένῳ πρόσεισιν ἀνθρώπῳ. καίτοι
τῶν περὶ Ἑρμόλαον οὐδεὶς οὐδὲ διὰ τῆς ἐσχάτης
ἀνάγκης τοῦ Καλλισθένους κατεῖπεν. ἀλλὰ καὶ
Ἀλέξανδρος αὐτὸς εὐθὺς Κρατερῷ γράφων καὶ
Ἀττάλῳ καὶ Ἀλκέτᾳ φησὶ τοὺς παῖδας βασανιζομένους
ὁμολογεῖν ὡς αὐτοὶ ταῦτα πράξειαν,
ἄλλος δὲ οὐδεὶς συνειδείη. ὕστερον δὲ γράφων
πρὸς Ἀντίπατρον καὶ τὸν Καλλισθένην συνεπαιτιασάμενος,



382Alexander, lv.

Demetrius, surnamed Pheido, cried: “O King, do not accept his kiss, for he alone has not done thee obeisance.” So Alexander declined the kiss, at
which Callisthenes exclaimed in a loud voice: “Well, then, I’ll go away the poorer by a kiss.”1


LV. The king having been thus alienated, in the first place, Hephaestion found credence for his story that Callisthenes had promised him to make obeisance to the king and then had been false to his agreement. Again, men like Lysimachus and Hagnon persisted in saying that the sophist went about with lofty thoughts as if bent on abolishing a tyranny, and that the young men flocked to him and followed him about as if he were the only freeman among so many tens of thousands. For this reason also, when the conspiracy of Hermolaüs and his associates2 against Alexander was discovered, it was thought that the accusations of his detractors had an air of probability. They said, namely, that when Hermolaüs put the question to him how he might become a most illustrious man, Callisthenes said: “By killing the most illustrious;” and that in inciting Hermolaüs to the deed he bade him have no fear of the golden couch, but remember that he was approaching a man who was subject to sickness and wounds. And yet not one of the accomplices of Hermolaüs, even in the last extremity, denounced Callisthenes. Nay, even Alexander himself, in the letters which he wrote at once to Craterus, Attalus, and Alcetas, says that the youths confessed under torture that they had made this attempt of themselves, and that no one else was privy to it. But in a letter written later to Antipater, wherein he accuses Callisthenes also of the crime, he says: “The
1Cf. Arrian, Anab. iv. 12.2The conspiracy of the pages (Arrian, Anab. iv. 13).383