Plutarch’s Lives

βαρεῖαν καὶ δυσκίνητον οὖσαν, ἅμ᾿ ἡμέρᾳ συνεσκευασμένων
τῶν ἁμαξῶν, πρώτας μὲν ὑπέπρησε697
τὰς αὑτοῦ καὶ τῶν ἑταίρων, μετὰ δὲ ταύτας
ἐκέλευσε καὶ ταῖς τῶν Μακεδόνων ἐνεῖναι πῦρ.
καὶ τοῦ πράγματος τὸ βούλευμα μεῖζον ἐφάνη
2καὶ δεινότερον ἢ τὸ ἔργον. ὀλίγους μὲν γὰρ
ἠνίασεν, οἱ δὲ πλεῖστοι βοῇ καὶ ἀλαλαγμῷ μετὰ
ἐνθουσιασμοῦ τὰ μὲν ἀναγκαῖα τοῖς δεομένοις
μεταδιδόντες, τὰ δὲ περιόντα τῆς χρείας αὐτοὶ
κατακαίοντες καὶ διαφθείροντες ὁρμῆς καὶ προθυμίας
ἐνεπίμπλασαν τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον. ἤδη δὲ
καὶ φοβερὸς ἦν καὶ ἀπαραίτητος κολαστὴς τῶν
πλημμελούντων. καὶ γὰρ Μένανδρόν τινα τῶν
ἑταίρων ἄρχοντα φρουρίου καταστήσας, ὡς οὐκ
ἐβούλετο μένειν, ἀπέκτεινε, καὶ τῶν ἀποστάντων
βαρβάρων Ὀρσοδάτην αὐτὸς κατετόξευσε.
3Προβάτου δὲ τεκόντος ἄρνα περὶ τῇ κεφαλῇ
σχῆμα καὶ χρῶμα τιάρας ἔχοντα καὶ διδύμους ἑκατέρωθεν
αὐτοῦ, βδελυχθεὶς τὸ σημεῖον ἐκαθάρθη
μὲν ὑπὸ τῶν Βαβυλωνίων, οὓς ἐξ ἔθους ἐπήγετο
πρὸς τὰ τοιαῦτα·διελέχθη δὲ πρὸς τοὺς φίλους ὡς
οὐ δι᾿ αὑτόν, ἀλλὰ δι᾿ ἐκείνους ταράττοιτο, μὴ τὸ
κράτος εἰς ἀγεννῆ καὶ ἄναλκιν ἄνθρωπον ἐκλιπόντος
αὐτοῦ περιστήσῃ τὸ δαιμόνιον. οὐ μὴν ἀλλὰ
βέλτιόν τι σημεῖον γενόμενον τὴν ἀθυμίαν ἔλυσεν.
4ὁ γὰρ ἐπὶ τῶν στρωματοφυλάκων τεταγμένος ἀνὴρ
Μακεδών, ὄνομα Πρόξενος, τῇ βασιλικῇ σκηνῇ
386Alexander, lvii.

and hard to move, at break of day, after the baggage-waggons had been loaded, he burned first those which belonged to himself and his companions, and then gave orders to set fire to those of the Macedonians. And the planning of the thing turned out to be a larger and more formidable matter than its execution. For it gave annoyance to a few only of the soldiers, while the most of them, with rapturous shouts and war-cries, shared their necessaries with those who were in need of them, and what was superfluous they burned and destroyed with their own hands, thus filling Alexander with zeal and eagerness. Besides, he was already greatly feared, and inexorable in the chastisement of a transgressor. For instance, when a certain Menander, one of his companions, who had been put in command of a garrison, refused to remain there, he put him to death; and Orsodates, a Barbarian who had revolted from him, he shot down with his own hand.
When a sheep yeaned a lamb which had upon its head what looked like a tiara in form and colour, with testicles on either side of it, Alexander was filled with loathing at the portent, and had himself purified by the Babylonians, whom he was accustomed to 
take along with him for such purposes; and in conversation with his friends he said that he was not disturbed for his own sake, but for theirs, fearing lest after his death Heaven might devolve his power upon an ignoble and impotent man. However, a better portent occurred and put an end to his dejection. The Macedonian, namely, who was set over those in charge of the royal equipage, Proxenus by name, as he was digging a place for the
387