Plutarch’s Lives

ἐπέβη τῆς νεὼς ἢ τὰ τῶν ἑταίρων πράγματα
σκεψάμενος ἀπονεῖμαι τῷ μὲν ἀγρόν, τῷ δὲ κώμην,
τῷ δὲ συνοικίας πρόσοδον ἢ λιμένος. ἤδη
δὲ κατανηλωμένων καὶ διαγεγραμμένων σχεδὸν
ἁπάντων τῶν βασιλικῶν ὁ Περδίκκας “Σεαυτῷ
δέ,” εἶπεν, “ὦ βασιλεῦ, τί καταλείπεις;” τοῦ δὲ
φήσαντος ὅτι τὰς ἐλπίδας, “Οὐκοῦν,” ἔφη, “καὶ
ἡμεῖς τούτων κοινωνήσομεν οἱ μετὰ σοῦ στρατευόμενοι.”
3παραιτησαμένου δὲ τοῦ Περδίκκου
τὴν διαγεγραμμένην κτῆσιν αὐτῷ, καὶ τῶν ἄλλων
φίλων ἔνιοι τὸ αὐτὸ ἐποίησαν. τοῖς δὲ λαμβάνουσι
καὶ δεομένοις προθύμως ἐχαρίζετο, καὶ
τὰ πλεῖστα τῶν ἐν Μακεδονίᾳ διανέμων οὕτως
κατηνάλωσε. τοιαύτῃ μὲν ὁρμῇ καὶ παρασκευῇ
διανοίας τὸν Ἑλλήσποντον διεπέρασεν.
4Ἀναβὰς δὲ εἰς Ἴλιον ἔθυσε τῇ Ἀθηνᾷ καὶ
τοῖς ἥρωσιν ἔσπεισε. τὴν δὲ Ἀχιλλέως στήλην
ἀλειψάμενος λίπα καὶ μετὰ τῶν ἑταίρων συναναδραμὼν
γυμνός, ὥσπερ ἔθος ἐστίν, ἐστεφάνωσε,
μακαρίσας αὐτὸν ὅτι καὶ ζῶν φίλου πιστοῦ καὶ
5τελευτήσας μεγάλου κήρυκος ἔτυχεν. ἐν δὲ τῷ
περιϊέναι καὶ θεᾶσθαι τὰ κατὰ τὴν πόλιν ἐρομένου
τινὸς αὐτὸν εἰ βούλεται τὴν Ἀλεξάνδρου
λύραν ἰδεῖν, ἐλάχιστα φροντίζειν ἐκείνης ἔφη, τὴν
δ᾿ Ἀχιλλέως ζητεῖν, ᾗ τὰ κλέα καὶ τὰς πράξεις
ὕμνει τῶν ἀγαθῶν ἀνδρῶν ἐκεῖνος.


XVI. Ἐν δὲ τούτῳ τῶν Δαρείου στρατηγῶν
μεγάλην δύναμιν ἠθροικότων καὶ παρατεταγμένων
ἐπὶ τῇ διαβάσει τοῦ Γρανικοῦ, μάχεσθαι μὲν
262Alexander, xvi.

he had enquired into the circumstances of his companions and allotted to one a farm, to another a village, and to another the revenue from some hamlet or harbour. And when at last nearly all of the crown property had been expended or allotted, Perdiccas said to him: “But for thyself, O king, what art thou leaving?” And when the king answered, “My hopes,” “In these, then,” said Perdiccas, “we also will share who make the expedition with thee.” Then he declined the possessions which had been allotted to him, and some of the other friends of Alexander did likewise. But upon those who wanted and would accept his favours Alexander bestowed them readily, and most of what he possessed in Macedonia was used up in these distributions. Such was the ardour and such the equipment with which he crossed the Hellespont.
Then, going up to Ilium, he sacrificed to Athena and poured libations to the heroes. Furthermore, the gravestone of Achilles he anointed with oil, ran a race by it with his companions, naked, as is the custom, and then crowned it with garlands, pronouncing the hero happy in having, while he lived, a faithful friend, and after death, a great herald of his fame. As he was going about and viewing the sights of the city, someone asked him if he wished to see the lyre of Paris. “For that lyre,” said Alexander, “I care very little; but I would gladly see that of Achilles, to which he used to sing the glorious deeds of brave men.”1


XVI. Meanwhile the generals of Dareius had assembled a large force and set it in array at the crossing of the river Granicus, so that it was practically


1See the Iliad, ix. 185–191.263