Plutarch’s Lives

ἀρίστους ἔχων ἐν Ὑρκανίᾳ μεθ᾿ ἑαυτοῦ, δισμυρίους
πεζοὺς καὶ τρισχιλίους ἱππεῖς, προσέβαλε,
λέγων ὡς νῦν μὲν αὐτοὺς ἐνύπνιον τῶν βαρβάρων
ὁρώντων, ἂν δὲ μόνον ταράξαντες τὴν Ἀσίαν
ἀπίωσιν, ἐπιθησομένων εὐθὺς ὥσπερ γυναιξίν.
2οὐ μὴν ἀλλ᾿ ἀπιέναι γε τοὺς βουλομένους ἐφῆκε,1
μαρτυράμενος ὅτι τὴν οἰκουμένην τοῖς Μακεδόσι
κτώμενος ἐγκαταλέλειπται μετὰ τῶν φίλων καὶ
τῶν ἐθελόντων στρατεύειν. ταῦτα σχεδὸν αὐτοῖς
ὀνόμασιν ἐν τῇ πρὸς Ἀντίπατρον ἐπιστολῇ
γέγραπται, καὶ ὅτι ταῦτα εἰπόντος αὐτοῦ πάντες
ἐξέκραγον ὅποι βούλεται τῆς οἰκουμένης ἄγειν.
δεξαμένων δὲ τούτων τὴν πεῖραν οὐκέτι ἦν
χαλεπὸν προαχθῆναι τὸ πλῆθος, ἀλλὰ ῥᾳδίως
ἐπηκολούθησεν.
3Οὕτω δὴ καὶ τὴν δίαιταν ἔτι μᾶλλον ὡμοίου τε
τοῖς ἐπιχωρίοις ἑαυτόν, ἐκεῖνά τε προσῆγε τοῖς
Μακεδονικοῖς ἔθεσιν, ἀνακράσει καὶ κοινωνίᾳ
μᾶλλον δι᾿ εὐνοίας καταστήσεσθαι τὰ πράγματα
νομίζων ἢ βίᾳ, μακρὰν ἀπαίροντος αὐτοῦ. διὸ
καὶ τρισμυρίους παῖδας ἐπιλεξάμενος ἐκέλευσε
γράμματά τε μανθάνειν Ἑλληνικὰ καὶ Μακεδονικοῖς
ὅπλοις ἐντρέφεσθαι, πολλοὺς ἐπιστάτας
4καταστήσας. καὶ τὰ περὶ Ῥωξάνην ἔρωτι μὲν
ἐπράχθη, καλὴν καὶ ὡραίαν ἔν τινι χόρῳ παρὰ
πότον ὀφθεῖσαν, ἔδοξε δὲ οὐκ ἀνάρμοστα τοῖς
ὑποκειμένοις εἶναι πράγμασιν. ἐθάρρησαν γὰρ
οἱ βάρβαροι τῇ κοινωνίᾳ τοῦ γάμου, καὶ τὸν

1ἐφῆκε Coraës’ correction of the ἔφη καὶ of the MSS., adopted by Sint.; Bekker reads ἀφιέναι . . . ἔφη.358Alexander, xlvii.

them with him in Hyrcania, twenty thousand foot and three thousand horse, he addressed them, saying that at present they were seen by the Barbarians as in a dream, but that if they should merely throw Asia into confusion and then leave it they would be attacked by them as if they were women. However, he said, he allowed those who wished it to go away, calling them to witness that while he was winning the inhabited world for the Macedonians he had been left behind with his friends and those who were willing to continue the expedition. This is almost word for word what he wrote in his letter to Antipater, and he adds that after he had thus spoken all his hearers cried out to him to lead them to whatever part of the world he wished. After these had met his test of their loyalty, it was no longer a hard matter for the main body to be led along too, nay, they readily followed after.
Under these circumstances, too, he adapted his own mode of life still more to the customs of the country, and tried to bring these into closer agreement with Macedonian customs, thinking that by a mixture and community of practice which produced good will, rather than by force, his authority would be kept secure while he was far away. For this reason, too, he chose out thirty thousand boys and gave orders that they should learn the Greek language and be trained to use Macedonian weapons, appointing many instructors for this work. His marriage to Roxana, whom he saw in her youthful beauty taking part in a dance at a banquet, was a love affair, and yet it was thought to harmonise well with the matters which he had in hand. For the Barbarians were encouraged by the partnership into which the marriage brought them, and they were beyond
359