Plutarch’s Lives

καὶ μεγέθει θαυμαστόν), ἀκοντισθεὶς μὲν
ὑπὸ τὴν ὑποπτυχίδα τοῦ θώρακος οὐκ ἐτρώθη,673
Ῥοισάκου δὲ καὶ Σπιθριδάτου τῶν στρατηγῶν
προσφερομένων ἅμα, τὸν μὲν ἐκκλίνας, Ῥοισάκῃ
δὲ προεμβαλὼν τεθωρακισμένῳ καὶ τὸ δόρυ κατακλάσας
5ἐπὶ τὸ ἐγχειρίδιον ὥρμησε. συμπεπτωκότων
δὲ αὐτῶν ὁ Σπιθριδάτης ὑποστήσας ἐκ
πλαγίων τὸν ἵππον καὶ μετὰ σπουδῆς συνεξαναστὰς
κοπίδι βαρβαρικῇ κατήνεγκε· καὶ τὸν μὲν
λόφον ἀπέρραξε μετὰ θατέρου πτεροῦ, τὸ δὲ κράνος
πρὸς τὴν πληγὴν ἀκριβῶς καὶ μόλις ἀντέσχεν,
ὥστε τῶν πρώτων ψαῦσαι τριχῶν τὴν πτέρυγα
τῆς κοπίδος. ἑτέραν δὲ τὸν Σπιθριδάτην
πάλιν ἐπαιρόμενον ἔφθασε Κλεῖτος ὁ μέλας τῷ
ξυστῷ διελάσας μέσον. ὁμοῦ δὲ καὶ Ῥοισάκης
ἔπεσεν ὑπὸ Ἀλεξάνδρου ξίφει πληγείς.
6Ἐν τούτῳ δὲ κινδύνου καὶ ἀγῶνος οὔσης τῆς
ἱππομαχίας ἥ τε φάλαγξ διέβαινε τῶν Μακεδόνων
καὶ συνῆγον αἱ πεζαὶ δυνάμεις. οὐ μὴν ὑπέστησαν
εὐρώστως οὐδὲ πολὺν χρόνον, ἀλλ᾿ ἔφυγον
τραπόμενοι, πλὴν τῶν μισθοφόρων Ἑλλήνων.
οὗτοι δὲ πρός τινι λόφῳ συστάντες ᾔτουν τὰ
7πιστὰ τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον. ὁ δὲ θυμῷ μᾶλλον ἢ
λογισμῷ πρῶτος ἐμβαλὼν τόν τε ἵππον ἀποβάλλει
ξίφει πληγέντα διὰ τῶν πλευρῶν (ἦν δὲ ἕτερος,
οὐχ ὁ Βουκεφάλας), καὶ τοὺς πλείστους τῶν
ἀποθανόντων καὶ τραυματισθέντων ἐκεῖ συνέβη
κινδυνεῦσαι καὶ πεσεῖν, πρὸς ἀνθρώπους ἀπεγνωκότας
καὶ μαχίμους συμπλεκομένους.
266Alexander, xvi.

whiteness. But although a javelin pierced the joint of his breastplate, he was not wounded; and when Rhoesaces and Spithridates, two Persian commanders, made at him together, he avoided the one, and smote Rhoesaces, who wore a breastplate, with his spear; and when this weapon snapped in two with the blow, he took to his sword. Then, while he was thus engaged with Rhoesaces, Spithridates rode up from one side, raised himself up on his horse, and with all his might came down with a barbarian battle-axe upon Alexander’s head. Alexander’s crest was broken off, together with one of its plumes, and his helmet could barely and with difficulty resist the blow, so that the edge of the battle-axe touched the topmost hair of his head. But while Spithridates was raising his arm again for another stroke, Cleitus, “Black Cleitus,” got the start of him and ran him through the body with his spear. At the same time Rhoesaces also fell, smitten by Alexander’s sword.
While Alexander’s cavalry were making such a dangerous and furious fight, the Macedonian phalanx crossed the river and the infantry forces on both sides engaged. The enemy, however, did not resist vigorously, nor for a long time, but fled in a rout, all except the Greek mercenaries. These made a stand at a certain eminence, and asked that Alexander should promise them quarter. But he, influenced by anger more than by reason, charged foremost upon them and lost his horse, which was smitten through the ribs with a sword (it was not Bucephalas, but another); and most of the Macedonians who were slain or wounded fought or fell there, since they came to close quarters with men who knew how to fight and were desperate.
267