Plutarch’s Lives

φιλοτιμίας, ἐπισπασθεὶς ὁ βασιλεὺς καὶ ἀναπηδήσας
4ἔχων στέφανον καὶ λαμπάδα προῆγεν. οἱ
δὲ ἑπόμενοι κώμῳ καὶ βοῇ περιΐσταντο τὰ βασίλεια,
καὶ τῶν ἄλλων Μακεδόνων οἱ πυνθανόμενοι
συνέτρεχον μετὰ λαμπάδων χαίροντες. ἤλπιζον
γὰρ ὅτι τοῖς οἴκοι προσέχοντός ἐστι τὸν νοῦν καὶ
μὴ μέλλοντος ἐν βαρβάροις οἰκεῖν τὸ πιμπράναι
τὰ βασίλεια καὶ διαφθείρειν. οἱ μὲν οὕτω ταῦτα
γενέσθαι φασίν, οἱ δὲ ἀπὸ γνώμης· ὅτι δ᾿ οὖν
μετενόησε ταχὺ καὶ κατασβέσαι προσέταξεν
ὁμολογεῖται.


XXXIX. Φύσει δὲ ὢν μεγαλοδωρότατος ἔτι
μᾶλλον ἐπέδωκεν εἰς τοῦτο τῶν πραγμάτων αὐξομένων·
καὶ προσῆν ἡ φιλοφροσύνη, μεθ᾿ ἧς
μόνης ὡς ἀληθῶς οἱ διδόντες χαρίζονται. μνησθήσομαι
δὲ ὀλίγων. Ἀρίστων ὁ τῶν Παιόνων
ἡγούμενος ἀποκτείνας πολέμιον ἄνδρα καὶ τὴν
κεφαλὴν ἐπιδειξάμενος αὐτῷ, “Τοῦτο,” εἶπεν,
“ὦ βασιλεῦ, παρ᾿ ἡμῖν ἐκπώματος χρυσοῦ τιμᾶται
2τὸ δῶρον.” ὁ δὲ Ἀλέξανδρος γελάσας,
“Κενοῦ γε,” εἶπεν, “ἐγὼ δέ σοι μεστὸν ἀκράτου
προπίομαι.” τῶν δὲ πολλῶν τις Μακεδόνων
ἤλαυνεν ἡμίονον βασιλικὸν χρυσίον κομίζοντα·
κάμνοντος δὲ τοῦ κτήνους αὐτὸς ἀράμενος ἐκόμιζε
τὸ φορτίον. ἰδὼν οὖν ὁ βασιλεὺς θλιβόμενον
αὐτὸν σφόδρα καὶ πυθόμενος τὸ πρᾶγμα, μέλλοντος
κατατίθεσθαι, “Μὴ κάμῃς,” εἶπεν, “ἀλλὰ
338Alexander, xxxix.

so that he yielded to their desires, and leaping to his feet, with a garland on his head and a torch in his hand, led them the way. The company followed with shouts and revelry and surrounded the palace, while the rest of the Macedonians who learned about it ran thither with torches and were full of joy. For they hoped that the burning and destruction of the palace was the act of one who had fixed his thoughts on home, and did not intend to dwell among Barbarians. This is the way the deed was done, according to some writers; but others say it was premeditated.1 However, it is agreed that Alexander speedily repented and gave orders to put out the fire.


XXXIX. Alexander was naturally munificent, and became still more so as his wealth increased. His gifts, too, were accompanied by a kindly spirit, with which alone, to tell the truth, a giver confers a favour. I will mention a few instances. Ariston, the captain of the Paeonians, having slain an enemy, brought his head and showed it to Alexander, saying: “In my country, O King, such a gift as this is rewarded with a golden beaker.” “Yes,” said Alexander with a laugh, “an empty one; but I will pledge thy health with one which is full of pure wine.” Again, a common Macedonian was driving a mule laden with some of the royal gold, and when the beast gave out, took the load on his own shoulders and tried to carry it. The king, then, seeing the man in great distress and learning the facts of the case, said, as the man was about to lay his burden down, “Don’t give out,


1So Arrian, Anab. iii. 18. 11 f., where there is none of Plutarch’s romance. For this, cf. Diodorus, xvii. 72; Curtius, v. 7, 1–7.339