Plutarch’s Lives

καὶ μόνον εἰς τὸν κῆπον ἀγαγοῦσα καὶ δείξασα
φρέαρ, ἐνταῦθα ἔφη τῆς πόλεως ἁλισκομένης671
καταβαλεῖν αὐτὴ τὰ τιμιώτατα τῶν χρημάτων.
ἐγκύπτοντος δὲ τοῦ Θρᾳκὸς καὶ κατασκεπτομένου
τὸν τόπον, ἔωσεν αὐτὸν ἐξόπισθεν γενομένη, καὶ
τῶν λίθων ἐπεμβαλοῦσα πολλοὺς ἀπέκτεινεν.
3ὡς δὲ ἀνήχθη πρὸς Ἀλέξανδρον ὑπὸ τῶν Θρᾳκῶν
δεδεμένη, πρῶτον μὲν ἀπὸ τῆς ὄψεως καὶ τῆς
βαδίσεως ἐφάνη τις ἀξιωματικὴ καὶ μεγαλόφρων,
ἀνεκπλήκτως καὶ ἀδεῶς ἑπομένη τοῖς ἄγουσιν·
ἔπειτα τοῦ βασιλέως ἐρωτήσαντος ἥτις εἴη γυναικῶν,
ἀπεκρίνατο Θεαγένους ἀδελφὴ γεγονέναι,
τοῦ παραταξαμένου πρὸς Φίλιππον ὑπὲρ τῆς τῶν
Ἑλλήνων ἐλευθερίας καὶ πεσόντος ἐν Χαιρωνείᾳ
στρατηγοῦντος. θαυμάσας οὖν ὁ Ἀλέξανδρος
αὐτῆς καὶ τὴν ἀπόκρισιν καὶ τὴν πρᾶξιν, ἐκέλευσεν
ἐλευθέραν ἀπιέναι μετὰ τῶν τέκνων.


XIII. Ἀθηναίοις δὲ διηλλάγη, καίπερ οὐ μετρίως
ἐνεγκοῦσι τὸ περὶ Θήβας δυστύχημα· καὶ
γὰρ τὴν τῶν μυστηρίων ἑορτὴν ἐν χερσὶν ἔχοντες
ὑπὸ πένθους ἀφῆκαν, καὶ τοῖς καταφυγοῦσιν ἐπὶ1
τὴν πόλιν ἁπάντων μετεδίδοσαν τῶν φιλανθρώπων.
2ἀλλ᾿ εἴτε μεστὸς ὢν ἤδη τὸν θυμόν, ὥσπερ
οἱ λέοντες, εἴτε ἐπιεικὲς ἔργον ὠμοτάτῳ καὶ σκυθρωποτάτῳ
παραβαλεῖν βουλόμενος, οὐ μόνον
ἀφῆκεν αἰτίας πάσης, ἀλλὰ καὶ προσέχειν ἐκέλευσε
τοῖς πράγμασι τὸν νοῦν τὴν πόλιν, ὡς, εἴ
τι συμβαίη περὶ αὐτόν, ἄρξουσαν τῆς Ἑλλάδος.
ὕστερον μέντοι πολλάκις αὐτὸν ἡ Θηβαίων ἀνιᾶσαι
συμφορὰ λέγεται καὶ πρᾳότερον οὐκ ὀλίγοις
3παρασχεῖν. ὅλως δὲ καὶ τὸ περὶ Κλεῖτον ἔργον

1καταφυγοῦσιν ἐπὶ Bekker corrects to φυγοῦσιν εἰς.256Alexander, xiii.

leading him by himself into the garden and showing him a well, told him that when the city was taken she had with her own hands cast in there her most valuable possessions. Then, as the Thracian was bending over and inspecting the place, she came behind him and pushed him in, cast many stones upon him, and killed him. And when the Thracians led her, with hands bound, to Alexander, she showed by her mien and gait that she was a person of great dignity and lofty spirit, so calmly and fearlessly did she follow her conductors; and when the king asked her who she was, she replied that she was a sister of Theagenes, who drew up the forces which fought Philip in behalf of the liberty of the Greeks, and fell in command at Chaeroneia. Amazed, therefore, at her reply and at what she had done, Alexander bade her depart in freedom with her children.


XIII. Furthermore, he was reconciled with the Athenians, although they showed exceeding sorrow at the misfortunes of Thebes; for although they had begun the festival of the mysteries, they gave it up in consequence of their grief,1 and upon the Thebans who sought refuge in their city they bestowed every kindness. But notwithstanding this, whether his rage was now sated, as a lion’s might be, or whether he wished to offset a deed of the most sullen savagery with one that was merciful, he not only remitted all his charges against the city, but even bade it give good heed to its affairs, since, if anything should happen to him, it would have the rule over Greece. In later times, moreover, as we are told, the calamity of the Thebans often gave him remorse, and made him milder towards many people. And certainly the


1According to Arrian (i. 10, 2), it was from panic fright.257