Plutarch’s Lives

ἐκεῖνον. ἔστι δὲ τῆς Λυκίας κρήνη περὶ τὴν
Ξανθίων πόλιν, ἧς τότε λέγουσιν αὐτομάτως
περιτραπείσης καὶ ὑπερβαλούσης ἐκ βυθοῦ δέλτον
ἐκπεσεῖν χαλκῆν τύπους ἔχουσαν ἀρχαίων
γραμμάτων, ἐν οἷς ἐδηλοῦτο παύσεσθαι1 τὴν
Περσῶν ἀρχὴν ὑπὸ Ἑλλήνων καταλυθεῖσαν.
3τούτοις ἐπαρθεὶς ἠπείγετο τὴν παραλίαν ἀνακαθήρασθαι
μέχρι τῆς Φοινίκης καὶ Κιλικίας. ἡ
δὲ τῆς Παμφυλίας παραδρομὴ πολλοῖς γέγονε
τῶν ἱστορικῶν ὑπόθεσις γραφικὴ πρὸς ἔκπληξιν
καὶ ὄγκον, ὡς θείᾳ τινὶ τύχῃ παραχωρήσασαν
Ἀλεξάνδρῳ τὴν θάλασσαν, ἄλλως ἀεὶ τραχεῖαν
ἐκ πελάγους προσφερομένην, σπανίως δέ ποτε
λεπτοὺς καὶ προσεχεῖς ὑπὸ τὰ κρημνώδη καὶ
παρερρωγότα τῆς ὀρεινῆς πάγους διακαλύπτουσαν.
4δηλοῖ δὲ καὶ Μένανδρος ἐν κωμῳδίᾳ
παίζων πρὸς τὸ παράδοξον·

ὡς Ἀλεξανδρῶδες ἤδη τοῦτο· κἂν ζητῶ τινα,
674αὐτόματος οὗτος παρέσται· κἂν διελθεῖν δηλαδὴ
διὰ θαλάσσης δέῃ τόπον τιν᾿, οὗτος ἔσται μοι
βατός.

αὐτὸς δὲ Ἀλέξανδρος ἐν ταῖς ἐπιστολαῖς οὐδὲν
τοιοῦτον τερατευσάμενος ὁδοποιῆσαί φησι τὴν



1παύσεσθαι Sintenis2, with C and Stephanus; παύσασθαι Sintenis1 and Bekker.270Alexander, xvii.

then to go up against that monarch. Now, there is in Lycia, near the city of Xanthus, a spring, which at this time, as we are told, was of its own motion upheaved from its depths, and overflowed, and cast forth a bronze tablet bearing the prints of ancient letters, in which it was made known that the empire of the Persians would one day be destroyed by the Greeks and come to an end. Encouraged by this prophecy, Alexander hastened to clear up the sea-coast as far as Cilicia and Phoenicia. His rapid passage along the coasts of Pamphylia has afforded many historians material for bombastic and terrifying description. They imply that by some great and heaven-sent good fortune the sea retired to make way for Alexander, although at other times it always came rolling in with violence from the main, and scarcely ever revealed to sight the small rocks which lie close up under the precipitous and riven sides of the mountain.1 And Menander, in one of his comedies,2 evidently refers jestingly to this marvel:—

“How Alexander-like, indeed, this is; and if I seek
some one,
Spontaneous he’ll present himself; and if I clearly
must
Pass through some place by sea, this will lie open
to my steps.”

Alexander himself, however, made no such prodigy out of it in his letters, but says that he marched by



1According to Arrian (Anab. i. 26, I f.), there is no route along this beach except when the north wind blows. “But at that time, after strong south winds, the north winds blew, and rendered his passage easy and quick, not without the divine intervention, as both he and his followers interpreted.”2Kock, Com. Att. Frag. iii. p. 240.271