Plutarch’s Lives

χειμῶνος ὥρα) τέσσαρας μῆνας αὐτόθι διήγαγε.
4λέγεται δὲ καθίσαντος αὐτοῦ τὸ πρῶτον ὑπὸ τὸν687
χρυσοῦν οὐρανίσκον ἐν τῷ βασιλικῷ θρόνῳ τὸν
Κορίνθιον Δημάρατον εὔνουν ὄντα ἄνδρα καὶ
πατρῷον φίλον Ἀλεξάνδρου πρεσβυτικῶς ἐπιδακρῦσαι,
καὶ εἰπεῖν ὡς μεγάλης ἡδονῆς στεροῖντο
τῶν Ἑλλήνων οἱ τεθνηκότες πρὶν ἰδεῖν Ἀλέξανδρον
ἐν τῷ Δαρείου θρόνῳ καθήμενον.


XXXVIII. Ἐκ τούτου μέλλων ἐξελαύνειν ἐπὶ
Δαρεῖον ἔτυχε μὲν εἰς μέθην τινὰ καὶ παιδιὰν
τοῖς ἑταίροις ἑαυτὸν δεδωκώς, ὥστε καὶ γύναια
συμπίνειν ἐπὶ κῶμον ἥκοντα πρὸς τοὺς ἐραστάς.
ἐν δὲ τούτοις εὐδοκιμοῦσα μάλιστα Θαῒς ἡ Πτολεμαίου
τοῦ βασιλεύσαντος ὕστερον ἑταίρα, γένος
Ἀττική, τὰ μὲν ἐμμελῶς ἐπαινοῦσα, τὰ δὲ παίζουσα
πρὸς τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον, ἅμα τῇ μέθῃ λόγον
εἰπεῖν προήχθη τῷ μὲν τῆς πατρίδος ἤθει πρέποντα,
2μείζονα δὲ ἢ κατ᾿ αὐτήν. ἔφη γὰρ ὧν
πεπόνηκε πεπλανημένη τὴν Ἀσίαν ἀπολαμβάνειν
χάριν ἐκείνης τῆς ἡμέρας ἐντρυφῶσα τοῖς ὑπερηφάνοις
Περσῶν βασιλείοις· ἔτι δ᾿ ἂν ἥδιον ὑποπρῆσαι
κωμάσασα τὸν Ξέρξου τοῦ κατακαύσαντος
τὰς Ἀθήνας οἶκον, αὐτὴ τὸ πῦρ ἅψασα
τοῦ βασιλέως ὁρῶντος, ὡς ἂν λόγος ἔχῃ πρὸς
ἀνθρώπους ὅτι τῶν ναυμάχων καὶ πεζομάχων
ἐκείνων στρατηγῶν τὰ μετὰ Ἀλεξάνδρου γύναια
μείζονα δίκην ἐπέθηκε Πέρσαις ὑπὲρ τῆς Ἑλλάδος.
3ἅμα δὲ τῷ λόγῳ τούτῳ κρότου καὶ θορύβου
γενομένου καὶ παρακελεύσεως τῶν ἑταίρων καὶ
336Alexander, xxxviii.

time), he spent four months in that place. And it is said that when he took his seat for the first time under the golden canopy on the royal throne, Demaratus
the Corinthian, a well-meaning man and a friend of Alexander’s, as he had been of Alexander’s father, burst into tears, as old men will, and declared that those Hellenes were deprived of great pleasure who had died before seeing Alexander seated on the throne of Dareius.


XXXVIII. After this, as he was about to march forth against Dareius, it chanced that he consented to take part in a merry drinking bout of his companions, at which women also came to meet their lovers and shared in their wine and revelry. The most famous among these women was Thaïs, an Athenian, the mistress of Ptolemy, who was afterwards king. She, partly in graceful praise of Alexander, and partly to make sport for him, as the drinking went on, was moved to utter a speech which befitted the character of her native country, but was too lofty for one of her kind. She said, namely, that for all her hardships in wandering over Asia she was being requited that day by thus revelling luxuriously in the splendid palace of the Persians; but it would be a still greater pleasure to go in revel rout and set fire to the house of the Xerxes who burned Athens, she herself kindling the fire under the eyes of Alexander, in order that a tradition might prevail among men that the women in the train of Alexander inflicted a greater punishment upon the Persians in behalf of Hellas than all her famous commanders by sea and land. As soon as she had thus spoken, tumultuous applause arose, and the companions of the king eagerly urged him on,
337