Plutarch’s Lives

τραγῳδῶν καὶ αὐλητῶν καὶ κιθαρῳδῶν, ἀλλὰ καὶ
ῥαψῳδῶν, θήρας τε παντοδαπῆς καὶ ῥαβδομαχίας,
οὔτε πυγμῆς οὔτε παγκρατίου μετά τινος
σπουδῆς ἔθηκεν ἆθλον.


V. Τοὺς δὲ παρὰ τοῦ Περσῶν βασιλέως πρέσβεις
ἥκοντας ἀποδημοῦντος Φιλίππου ξενίζων
καὶ γενόμενος συνήθης οὕτως ἐχειρώσατο τῇ φιλοφροσύνῃ
καὶ τῷ μηδὲν ἐρώτημα παιδικὸν ἐρωτῆσαι
μηδὲ μικρόν, ἀλλ᾿ ὁδῶν τε μήκη καὶ πορείας
τῆς ἄνω τρόπον ἐκπυνθάνεσθαι, καὶ περὶ αὐτοῦ
τοῦ βασιλέως, ὁποῖος εἴη πρὸς τοὺς πολέμους,
καὶ τίς ἡ Περσῶν ἀλκὴ καὶ δύναμις, ὥστε θαυμάζειν
ἐκείνους καὶ τὴν λεγομένην Φιλίππου δεινότητα
μηδὲν ἡγεῖσθαι πρὸς τὴν τοῦ παιδὸς ὁρμὴν
2καὶ μεγαλοπραγμοσύνην. ὁσάκις γοῦν ἀπαγγελθείη
Φίλιππος ἢ πόλιν ἔνδοξον ᾑρηκὼς ἢ μάχην
τινὰ περιβόητον νενικηκώς, οὐ πάνυ φαιδρὸς ἦν
ἀκούων, ἀλλὰ πρὸς τοὺς ἡλικιώτας ἔλεγεν· “Ὦ
παῖδες, πάντα προλήψεται ὁ πατήρ· ἐμοὶ δὲ οὐδὲν
ἀπολείψει μεθ᾿ ὑμῶν ἔργον ἀποδείξασθαι μέγα
3καὶ λαμπρόν.” οὐ γὰρ ἡδονὴν ζηλῶν οὐδὲ πλοῦτον,667
ἀλλ᾿ ἀρετὴν καὶ δόξαν, ἐνόμιζεν, ὅσῳ πλείονα
λήψεται παρὰ τοῦ πατρός, ἐλάττονα κατορθώσειν
δι᾿ ἑαυτοῦ. διὸ τοῖς πράγμασιν αὐξομένοις καταναλίσκεσθαι
τὰς πράξεις εἰς ἐκεῖνον ἡγούμενος,
ἐβούλετο μὴ χρήματα μηδὲ τρυφὰς καὶ ἀπολαύσεις,
ἀλλ᾿ ἀγῶνας καὶ πολέμους καὶ φιλοτιμίας
ἔχουσαν ἀρχὴν παραλαβεῖν.
4Πολλοὶ μὲν οὖν περὶ τὴν ἐπιμέλειαν, ὡς εἰκός,
234Alexander, v.

for tragic poets and players on the flute and players on the lyre, but also for rhapsodists, as well as for hunting of every sort and for fighting with staves, he took no interest in offering prizes either for boxing or for the pancratium.


V. He once entertained the envoys from the Persian king who came during Philip’s absence, and associated with them freely. He won upon them by his friendliness, and by asking no childish or trivial questions, but by enquiring about the length of the roads and the character of the journey into the interior, about the king himself, what sort of a warrior he was, and what the prowess and might of the Persians. The envoys were therefore astonished and regarded the much-talked-of ability of Philip as nothing compared with his son’s eager disposition to do great things. At all events, as often as tidings were brought that Philip had either taken a famous city or been victorious in some celebrated battle, Alexander was not very glad to hear them, but would say to his comrades: “Boys, my father will anticipate everything; and for me he will leave no great or brilliant achievement to be displayed to the world with your aid.” For since he did not covet pleasure, nor even wealth, but excellence and fame, he considered that the more he should receive from his father the fewer would be the successes won by himself. Therefore, considering that increase in prosperity meant the squandering upon his father of opportunities for achievement, he preferred to receive from him a realm which afforded, not wealth nor luxury and enjoyment, but struggles and wars and ambitions.
In the work of caring for him, then, many persons,
235